Source: https://bwcimplementation.org/sites/default/files/resource/chap58-40.pdf (OCR; inspect source PDF for exact typography)

PDF PAGE 4
LAWS OF DOMINICA.

4 Chap. 58:40 Plant Protection and Quarantine

CHAPTER 58:40
PLANT PROTECTION AND QUARANTINE ACT

10 of 1986. AN ACT to provide for the protection of the agricultural resources
of Dominica from dangerous plants, pests and diseases.

Commencement, [27th March 1986]

Short title. 1. This Act may be cited as the —
PLANT PROTECTION AND QUARANTINE ACT.

Imerpretation. 2. In this Act —

“carrier” refers to aircraft, vessels, vehicles or any other means of
transport,

“fruits and vegetables” include all edible portions of food plants in the
raw or unprocessed state;

“Minister” means the Minister responsible for Agriculture;

“notifiable plant pest” means any plant pests of substantial economic
importance for which measures must be taken for its eradica-
tion, control or to prevent its further spread;

“occupier” in relation to any land or building means the person in actual
occupation or, where there is no such person, the owner of the
land or building;

“owner” refers to the person whois for the time being entitled to receive

the rent of any land or who, were the land let to a tenant, would
be entitled to receive the rent.

“planting material” includes trees, shrubs, vines, cuttings, grafts, scions,
buds, bulbs, roots, seeds, and any other plant part capable of
propagation;

“plant pest” means any living stage of any insect, mite, nematode, slug,
snail, protozoa or other invertebrate or vertebrate animal,
bacterium, fungus, parasitic plant or reproductive part thereof,
viruses, mycoplasma, or any organism similar or allied with
any of the foregoing capable of causing damage to any plant or
plant product;


PDF PAGE 5
LAWS OF DOMINICA

Plant Protection and Quarantine Chap. 58:40

“plant product” means any substance, material or article or of vegetable
origin, including pollen, eitherprocessed or unprocessed, which
is capable of harbouring or transporting plant pests;

“Plant Protection and Quarantine Service” means the Plant Protection
and Quarantine Service established under section 25;

“receptacle” includes any package, box, container, covering, wrapper
or anything whatsoever in which plants are, or have been
imported, kept or conveyed, or which can serve to transport
plant pests;

“soil” means the loose surface material of the earth in which plants
grow, which consists mainly of disintegrated rock with an
admixture of organic matter and soluble salts.

3. Subject to this Act, no person shall import or offer forentry into

Dominica any planting material, fruits, vegetables, plant products, f

plant pests, soil or any other non-plant articles (hereinafter referred to
as “restricted articles”) unless he first obtains a permit in accordance
with this Act.

4. (1) Applications for permits shall be made to the Minister in the
manner prescribed,

(2) Where the Minister decides to grant a permit, he shall do so
in accordance with this Act and on such terms and conditions as he
considers apMpropriate.

(3) Without prejudice to any otherterms and conditions subject
to which a permit may be granted, it shall be a condition of each permit
that —

(a) each importation of a restricted article is accompanied
by aphytosanitary certificate issued by the appropriate
government department or agency in the country;

(b) the certificate referred to in paragraph (a) shall be
similar to that adopted from time to time by the Inter-
national Plant Protection Convention of 1951 or an
amended model; and

(c) planting material shall, where the Ministry of Agricul-
ture considers it necessary, be grown locally by or
under the supervision of the Ministry and if found

Permit required

articles.

Applications for
and restrictions
on grant of
permits.

LR.O. 1/1991




PDF PAGE 10
LAWS OF DOMINICA

10 Chap. 58:40 Plant Protection and Quarantine

Plant Protection and Quarantine Service is to prevent the entry into
Dominica of plant pests, which are likely to affect adversely any sector
of the local agricultural industry and to generally protect the agricultural
resources of Dominica.

Power of Punt 26. (1) The Plant Protection and Quarantine Service shall have
Quarantine power to do all that is necessary or incidental to the effective carrying
Service. out of the provisions of this Act and any Orders or Regulations made

thereunder,

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), any
Plant Protection and Quarantine Officer designated in writing by the
Minister under section 25 to administer and enforce the provisions of
this Act, who is furnished with suitable identification, shall have the
power —

(a) if he has cause to believe that any person, receptacle or
carrier coming into or moving within Dominica pos-
sesses, contains or carries any restricted articles that
constitute a risk to the agriculture of Dominica the entry
ormovement of whichis prohibited or restricted by this
Act or Orders issued pursuant thereto, to stop and
without warrant, search and examine such persons,
receptacles or carriers and seize, detain, treat, destroy or
otherwise dispose of such restricted articles brought
intoormoving within Dominicain violation of this Act;
and

(b) if he has cause to believe that a notificable plant pest
may be present on any land, to enter on such land and
without warrant to carry out survey and detection pro-
grammes as well as to treat, destroy and remove any
restricted articles, he being required, however, toinform
the occupier, if present at the time, of the intention to
enter, search, examine, treat, destroy or remove.

Penalties. 27, Any person who —

(a) contravenes any provision of this Act or the Regulations
made thereunder;

(b) alters, forges, counterfeits, defacesor destroys any document
or certificate provided for in this Act; or




Source: https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/dmi4119.pdf

[SubsidiaryI                       PlantProtection (ImportaJitNIS) Regulations

Prohibition of         3. No animal or vegetable organism or otheragent, not known to
importation of
plants.           begenerally distributedintheState.whichis oris believed tobeinimical
                  to the growth of plantsshallbe imported into the State, and no plantor
                  other article or thingwhichis or is likelyto be infectedorinfestedwith
                  any organism or other agent shall. when imported, be delivered to or
                  takenpossession of by theconsignee or ownerthereofuntilit has been
                  declared free from such infection or infestation by a plant protection
                  officer.
Entry of plants        4. Anyplant,anysoil,dung.livinginsect,non-marine invertebrate
into the State.
                  animal or anyaccompanying containerorwrapping material broughtto
                  the State,exceptthearticles or thingsspecifiedin regulation 8 andtheir
                  containers or wrapping materials, shallonlyentertheStatethrough the
                  port of Roseau whichshallbe the only port authorised for the entry of
                  such material. All suchmaterials or thingsshallbe declared as suchto
                  the Treasurer or his officers at the port of entry or at the post office in
                  Roseau and shall be examined by a plant protection officer before
                  delivery to the owneror consignee.
Examination of        5. It shallbe thedutyof all officers of theCustoms Department to
plants.
                  requirea plant protection officer to examine any package entering the
                  State which contains or is suspected to contain any of the articles or
                  things specified in regulation 4.
Fumigation of          6. (1) If. after examination of any plant or other thing to which
plants.
                  regulation 4 applies, a plantprotection officerconsiders that any such
                  plant or thing is likelyto infectany plantwithany animal or vegetable
                  organism or other agent which is or is believed to be inimical to the
                  growthof plants.he maysubject anysuchplantorthingto treatment as
                  a precautionary measure against the introduction of any animal or
                  vegetable organism orotheragentasaforesaid andmaycausesuchplant
                  or thing to be fumigated or otherwise disinfected or to be destroyed
                  completely or to the extentconsidered necessary and in his presence.
                  Allcases andpackages in whichsuchplantorthinghasbeencontained
                  shall likewise be disinfected or destroyed.
                          (2) Nocompensation shallbe payable in respect of thedestruc-
                  tion of.ordamage to, anyplantor thing(including packages) as a result
                  of the exercise of the powers conferred by this regulation.
Treatment of           7. Aplantprotectionofficermayorderanyplantorthing, to which
plants.
                  regulation 4 applies. to be held,until an examination canbe madeor to
                  be forwarded to thePlantQuarantine Stationforexamination, treatment
                  or detention.

                              LAWS OF DOMINICA


                       Plant Protection and Quarantine             Chap. 58:40             19
                      PlanJProtection (lmportalimrs) Regulations                  [Subsidiary1


    8. The under-mentioned articles shall be exempted from the Ex~mpted
provisions of regulation 4:                                    articles.

       (a)    seedsof vegetables or ornamental plantsfrom commercial
              seedsmen in the United Kingdom, Eire, Canada and the
              UnitedStatesof America;
       (b) dry, hulledrice;
       (c)    nuts;
       (d)    dried,canned, candied, or otherprocessed frnits and veg-
              etables;
        (e) roasted coffee;
        if) commercial yeast;
        (g)   plant products which, having been cooked, parboiled or
              otherwise processed, are freefrom anyanimal or vegetable
              organism.

     9. The importation, detention and treatment of anyof the articles Charges for
or things specified in regulation 4 shall be entirely at the risk of the 'to..ge of plants.
importerandallchargesforstorage,cartage and labourincidental tothe
inspection and the cost of treatment, otherthan the services of a plant
protection officer, shallbe borneby the importer.

   10. Notwithstanding any prohibition or restriction contained in Importation of
these Regulations , the Chief Technical Officer shall have power to State.
                                                                       plants for use m
importinto the Stateany plant or thing for the use of the Agricultural
Department

   11. Any articles imported in contravention of these Regulations Forfeiture of
shallbeforfeittoGovernment andshallbedisposed ofasthechiefplant imported articles.
protection officermay direct.

                                    Explanation

        In orderto preventtheintroduction into the Stateof organisms
likely to be injurious to agricultural, horticultural or sylvicultural
plants,it is provided that all plant material and certain other articles
likelyto carrysuchorganisms shallbethoroughly examined by a plant
protection officerbefore they are admitted to the State. It is however
provided that, whenever necessary, infected or suspected material may
                                                                                 L.R.O.1Il991

                                              LAWS OF DOMINICA


20                   Chap. 58:40       PlantProtection and Quarantine
[SubsidiaryI                         Plant Protection (ImportaliofLS) RegulatiofLS


                     be disinfected or destroyed according to the requirements of the case.
                     But certainspecified articles, the importation of whichis regarded as
