STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
SUPPLEMENT No. 38                                             24th December, 2021

                STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS SUPPLEMENT
         to The Uganda Gazette No. 92 Volume CXIV, dated 24th December, 2021
                Printed by UPPC, Entebbe, by Order of the Government.



     S T A T U T O R Y                  I N S T R U M E N T S


                                  2021 No. 68.

         THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS
              (CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS, 2021

                   ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

Regulation
                              Part I—Preliminary

    1.   Title
    2.   Application of Regulations
    3.   Interpretation

                           Part II—Certification Process

   4.    Application for permit to use certification mark
   5.    Payment of certification fees
   6.    Laboratory testing fees
   7.    Audit
   8.    Onsite report and recommendation report
   9.    Corrective action following audit
  10.    Evaluation and audit report
  11.    Exemption from audit
  12.    Commodity sampling and sample testing
                                       1517
Regulation

  13.   Certification review
  14.   Grant of permit to use certification mark
  15.   Terms for use of permit
  16.   Refusal to grant permit
  17.   Permit not transferable
  18.   Circumstances requiring new permit
  19.   Liability of permit holder
  20.   Surveillance audits
  21.   Renewal of permit
  22.   Register of certified commodities
  23.   Application of certification mark
  24.   Withdrawal, suspension and revocation of permit

                         Part III—Miscellaneous

  25.   Appeals
  26.   Revocation of S.I. 327-1 and S.I. No.12 of 2018
  27.   Saving of permits and continuance of applications

SCHEDULES

SCHEDULE 1 — CURRENCY POINT
SCHEDULE 2 — FORMS
SCHEDULE 3 — PERMIT FEES FOR CERTIFICATION MARK
SCHEDULE 4 — CERTIFICATION MARK




                                 1518
       S T A T U T O R Y           I N S T R U M E N T S

                              2021 No. 68.


      The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Certification)
                       Regulations, 2021.

     (Under sections 16, 18 and 43 of the Uganda National Bureau of
                        Standards Act, Cap. 327)

IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred upon the Minister responsible
for commerce by section 43 of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards
Act, and in consultation with the National Standards Council, these
Regulations are made this 16th day of December, 2021.

                          Part I—Preliminary

1.   Title
These Regulations may be cited as the Uganda National Bureau of
Standards (Certification) Regulations, 2021.

2.      Application Regulations
        (1) These Regulations apply to—

        (a)   manufacturers of commodities in respect of which
              compulsory standard specifications have been declared;
              and

        (b)   manufacturers of commodities in respect of which
              standard specifications have been declared, but which are
              not compulsory.

      (2) For the avoidance of doubt, these Regulations apply to
goods in respect of which tax stamps are required to be affixed under
the Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014.

                                  1519
3.    Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—

     “Act” means the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act,
          Cap. 327;
     “applicant” means a client applying for a permit to use the
           certification mark;
     “audit” means a systematic, independent and documented
           process for obtaining objective evidence and evaluating
           it objectively to determine the extent to which the audit
           criteria are fulfilled;
     “audit plan” means the description of activities and arrangements
           for an audit;

     “audit team” means one or more persons conducting an audit,
           supported, if required, by a technical expert;

     “auditor” means a person who conducts an audit under the Act
           and these Regulations;
     “authorised officer” means a person appointed by the council
          or the director, with the approval of the council, for the
          efficient performance of the functions of the bureau under
          the Act;

     “bureau” means the Uganda National Bureau of Standards
          established under section 2 of the Act;

     “certification” means a system that has its own rules of
            procedure and management for carrying out certification
            of conformity;

     “certification agreement” means an undertaking by an applicant
            to comply with certification requirements;
     “certification mark” means a standards mark and a distinctive
            mark;
                              1520
“certification requirements” means specified requirements,
       including product requirements, which are fulfilled by
       the applicant as a condition of establishing or maintaining
       certification;

“certification scheme” means a certification system related
       to specified commodities, to which the same specified
       requirements, specific rules and procedures apply;
“commodity” means any article, product or thing which is or
    will ultimately be the subject of trade or use;
“compulsory standard specification” means a standard
    specification declared under section 18 of the Act;
“conformity” means the fulfilment of specified requirements;

“conformity assessment” means a demonstration that specified
     requirements relating to a product process, system, person
     or body are fulfilled;

“council” means the National Standards Council established
     under section 4 of the Act;
“currency point” has the value assigned to it in Schedule 1 to
      these Regulations;

“digital conformity mark” means a device-readable or app-
      readable mark or code affixed or imprinted on a unit of
      commodity of the category specified in Part II of Schedule
      3 to these Regulations, embedding conformity-related data
      pertaining to the unit of commodity on which it is affixed
      or imprinted;

“director” means the director of the bureau appointed under
      section 11 of the Act;
“lead auditor” means a member of the audit team who is
     appointed as the leader of the audit team;
                           1521
“manufacture” means to make, produce, process, treat, assemble,
    alter, modify, adapt or convert;

“manufacturer” means any natural or legal person engaged in the
    making, production, processing, treatment, assembling,
    altering, modifying, adapting, converting or any other
    operation in relation to a commodity;

“non-conformity” means the failure to fulfil prescribed
     requirements;

“permit” means a permit issued under the Act and these
     Regulations;

“product requirement” means a requirement that relates directly
     to a product, specified in standards or in other normative
     documents identified by the certification scheme;  

“standard” means a document, established by consensus and
      approved by a body, that provides for common and
      repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for
      activities or their results, aimed at the achievement of the
      optimum degree of order in a given context and which is
      based on the consolidated results of science, technology
      and experience, and aimed at the promotion of optimum
      community benefits;

“surveillance audit” means a periodic evaluation of a quality
     control system or commodity of a permit holder to
     determine conformity with a relevant standard and with
     the terms and conditions of the permit;

“technical expert” means a person who provides specific
      knowledge or expertise to an audit team;

“testing laboratory” means a laboratory which measures,
       examines, calibrates or otherwise determines the
       characteristics or performance of commodities;
                             1522
      “unit” means a markable package and includes a bottle,
            sachet container or other similar item used for packing
            commodities.

                   Part II—Certification Process

4.    Application for permit to use certification mark
      (1) A person who intends to manufacture any commodity in
respect of which a standard specification is declared under section
15 of the Act shall apply to the council or to a person acting under
the authority of the council for a permit to use the standards mark as
declared under section 16 of the Act or a distinctive mark as declared
under section 18(1) (b) of the Act.

     (2) An application for grant or renewal of a permit shall be in
Form 1 set out in Schedule 2 to these Regulations.

      (3) A separate application shall be made for each commodity
and for each manufacturing facility or site.

     (4) For the purposes of subregulation (3), a company
making applications for several commodities shall differentiate each
commodity for which certification is being sought by type, trademark,
brand, variant or other characteristic.

      (5) An authorised officer may require an applicant to submit
additional information or to make alterations to the application as may
be required.

      (6) Where an application for a permit to use a certification
mark meets the prescribed requirements, the applicant shall pay the
fees specified in Schedule 3 to these Regulations in the manner set out
in regulation 5.

       (7) An application for a permit shall be valid for a period of
nine months after which, if a permit has not been granted, the applicant
shall submit a new application.
                                 1523
5.    Payment of certification fees
      (1) The fees referred to in regulation 4 shall be paid in the
following manner—

      (a)   in respect of the category set out in Part I of Schedule 3
            to these Regulations, pay the fees in full at the time of
            application; and

      (b)   in respect of the category set out in Part II, of Schedule 3
            to these Regulations, pay the fees for the number of units
            of the commodity to be produced by the applicant at the
            time of application.

     (2) The applicant may, in respect of the categories set out in
Schedule 3 to these Regulations, pay fees for additional units of the
commodities, while the permit is still valid.

6.    Laboratory testing fees
The applicant shall pay laboratory testing fees as may be billed by
the bureau for tests carried out as part of the certification process in
respect of two samples of each commodity.

7.   Audit
     (1) The bureau shall conduct an audit for each application
submitted under these Regulations as part of the certification process.
      (2) The audit shall be conducted by an audit team headed by a
lead auditor.

     (3) The audit team may be supported by technical experts
from within or outside the bureau or by authorised officers.    

       (4) The bureau shall inform the applicant of the team constituted
for the audit and the date on which the audit shall be conducted.

      (5) The lead auditor shall prepare an audit plan and share it with
the audit team and the applicant, at least seven days before the audit.

                                 1524
       (6) The lead auditor shall ensure that the commodity and
manufacturing facility are evaluated to ascertain conformity to the
certification requirements.

      (7) The lead auditor may assign a member of the audit team
to evaluate particular aspects of the application.
      (8) The applicant shall allow unhindered access by the audit
team to the manufacturing facility and any other support facility
of the commodity specified in the application, including access to
relevant documentation related to production, quality and quantities
of commodities to be certified.

8.     Onsite report and recommendation report
The audit team shall, on completion of the audit, prepare and present to
the director an onsite and recommendation report to the applicant in the
format specified in Form 2 set out in Schedule 2 to these Regulations.

9.    Corrective action following audit
      (1) Where any non-conformity is identified during the audit,
the lead auditor shall issue a corrective action report to the applicant
who shall acknowledge receipt of the report.

      (2) The applicant shall undertake the corrective action
indicated in the report within the agreed time and shall thereafter
complete and submit the corrective action report to the bureau.

10.   Evaluation and audit report
      (1) The lead auditor shall complete an evaluation and audit
report detailing the audit findings, commodity testing results, status of
any non-conformances raised and recommendations.
      (2) The evaluation and audit report shall be shared with
the applicant and shall be subjected to review in accordance with
regulation 13 to inform the certification decision.
      (3) The evaluation and audit report shall be in Form 3 set out
in Schedule 2 to these Regulations.
                                 1525
11.   Exemption from audit
      (1) Notwithstanding any provision of these Regulations, an
applicant shall not be required to undergo an audit—
      (a)   where extension of certification scope is sought for
            commodities related to those for which the applicant holds
            a valid certification and production is undertaken in the
            same premises and on the same production line; or
      (b)   where an applicant holds a valid systems certification from
            the bureau that is relevant to the safety and quality of the
            commodity under consideration for certification.

       (2) Where an applicant is exempted from an audit under
subregulation (1), the lead auditor shall review the information
submitted, including verification of raw materials, quality plans,
labelling or marking and shall obtain and submit commodity samples
for testing to inform the certification decision.

      (3) For the avoidance of doubt, where an applicant exempted
from an audit under subregulation (1) seeks an extension of certification
scope for unrelated commodities, an audit shall be conducted.

12.   Commodity sampling and sample testing
      (1) Where samples are required for commodity evaluation,
the applicant shall provide all reasonable facilities and assistance to
the audit team or to an authorised officer to collect and take samples of
the commodity in the presence of the applicant or a person authorised
by the applicant.

       (2) Commodity sampling, evaluation or testing may be done
at the applicant’s manufacturing facility, warehouse or other storage
facility, market or other location where the sample is available.

      (3) Commodity sampling, evaluation and testing may be
carried out by an auditor or authorised person using field testing
equipment, in the presence of the applicant or a person authorised by
the applicant.
                                1526
     (4) The cost of obtaining, transporting and testing of samples
and any other expense incurred in connection with the commodity
evaluation shall be borne by the applicant.

       (5) Commodity testing shall be undertaken by the bureau or
in a testing laboratory recognised by the bureau under the laboratory
recognition scheme.

      (6) Where the bureau does not have capacity for testing a
commodity, the samples may be tested at the applicant’s facility using
the applicant’s testing equipment by or under the supervision of the
bureau and the testing shall be carried out using the relevant standard
test methods for the commodity.

      (7) The requirements against which the commodities are
to be evaluated shall be those contained in the specified standards,
product certification scheme and other documents as determined by
the bureau.

     (8) The bureau shall communicate to the applicant the results
of commodity testing carried out under this regulation.

13.   Certification review
      (1) The audit team or an authorised officer shall prepare a
detailed audit report of the findings of the audit and test results.

      (2) The audit report shall be reviewed by an authorised person
who was not a member of the audit team conducting the audit or
commodity testing, who shall recommend to the council or to a person
acting under the authority of the council, whether to grant or not to
grant the permit.

14.   Grant of permit to use certification mark
      (1) The council or person acting under the authority of the
council may grant a permit subject to such conditions as the council or
that person may think fit to impose.

                                 1527
       (2) A permit shall be issued for each commodity for which
certification has been applied for and granted.

         (3)   A permit shall be valid for twelve months from the date of
issue.

      (4) For the purposes of this regulation, every brand or variant
of a commodity shall be considered a commodity.

15.      Terms for use of permit
         (1) A permit holder shall—

         (a)   establish and maintain, to the satisfaction of the bureau,
               a system of controls, including inspection and testing of
               commodities;

         (b)   ensure that the commodity in respect of which a permit
               has been granted conforms to the standard requirements at
               all times; and

         (c)   in case of suspension, withdrawal or cancellation of
               a permit, discontinue its use and immediately stop the
               manufacture, distribution or sale of the commodity
               and withdraw all promotional and advertising material
               containing any reference to that permit and the certification
               mark.

     (2) A permit holder shall, in addition to the requirements of
subregulation (1)—

         (a)   ensure that any record maintained in relation to the
               manufacturing process is made available for evaluation
               and review by an auditor or authorised officer and shall,
               at the request of the auditor or authorised officer, allow
               the removal of the record to the premises of the bureau for
               further scrutiny; and

                                    1528
      (b)   allow an auditor or authorised officer access to the
            premises where the commodity specified in the permit
            is manufactured or held for the purpose of evaluating
            materials, production processes, finished commodities,
            quality assurance facilities and records.

      (3) A permit holder in respect of a commodity of the category
specified in Part II of Schedule 3 to these Regulations shall affix or
imprint on every unit of the commodity a digital conformity mark
before releasing the commodity from the factory or production site.

16.  Refusal to grant permit
     (1) The council or a person acting under the authority of the
council may refuse to grant a permit where—

      (a)   the commodity in respect of which an application has been
            made does not conform to the standard specifications;

      (b)   other certification requirements under these Regulations
            have not been complied with;

      (c)   the commodity in respect of which an application has been
            made is banned by the Minister under section 24C of the
            Act.
      (2) The council or a person acting under the authority of the
council, shall state the reasons for refusal in writing and notify the
applicant of the refusal within fifteen working days after the decision.

17. Permit not transferable
A permit issued under these Regulations is not transferable.

18.   Circumstances requiring new permit
      (1) A permit holder shall apply for a new permit—

      (a)   in the case of relocation of the manufacturing facility;
                                 1529
      (b)   where there is a change in the legal status of the company,
            including a change in the names or ownership of the
            company; or

      (c)   where there  has been any modification in the commodity
            or manufacturing process that affects the inherent
            properties of the commodity.

      (2) Where there is any change of location under subregulation
(1) (a) or a modification under subregulation (1)(c), the permit holder
shall notify the bureau within twenty-one working days after the
change.

19. Liability of permit holder
A permit holder shall be responsible for the quality and safety of the
commodity in respect of which the permit is granted and shall be liable
for any damage or injury arising from the normal use of the commodity.

20.   Surveillance audits
      (1) The bureau may conduct surveillance audits or commodity
sampling and testing at the manufacturing facility, warehouse or other
storage facility, market or other location where the commodities are
available, to ensure that systems and procedures already evaluated are
being maintained.

      (2) The bureau shall determine the frequency and extent of
audits and may conduct surveillance audits without notice.

      (3) The permit holder shall allow unhindered access by an
audit team to the manufacturing facility, related ancillary services,
including access to relevant documentation related to production and
quality and quantities of certified commodities.

      (4) A surveillance audit may also be conducted where there
are complaints, modifications to a commodity, production process or
key personnel in an organisation to assess the impact of the changes on
the quality and safety of the commodities.
                                 1530
21.    Renewal of permit
       (1) A permit holder shall apply to the council or to a person
acting under the authority of the council for renewal of the permit, at
least three months before the expiry of the permit.

      (2) An application for renewal of a permit, shall be processed
in the same manner as the initial application.

      (3) The council may renew a permit without undertaking an
audit in the following circumstances—
      (a)   where the permit holder has demonstrated conformance to
            the requirements within the certification year as verified
            through surveillance audits or sampling and testing; or
      (b)   where the permit holder holds a valid systems certification
            from the bureau that is relevant to the safety and quality of
            the commodity under consideration for certification.

22.  Register of certified commodities
     (1) The bureau shall maintain an up to date register of permit
holders which shall include—
      (a)   identification of the permit holder;
      (b)   identification of the commodity;
      (c)   the standard specification to which the commodity has
            been certified;
      (d)   the permit expiry date;
      (e)   the permit number; and
      (f)   any other information required by the bureau.

      (2) The bureau shall publish the register maintained under
subregulation (1) on its website or in a newspaper of national
circulation.

                                 1531
     (3) The bureau shall update the register whenever a permit is
renewed, suspended, withdrawn or cancelled.

23.   Application of certification mark
      (1) The certification mark set out in Schedule 4 to these
Regulations shall only be applied to commodities in respect of which
there is a valid permit.

     (2) The certification mark shall not be applied to commodities
manufactured in a facility other than a facility in respect of which an
address is specified in the permit.
       (3) The bureau may issue guidelines for the application of the
certification mark on commodities.

24.   Withdrawal, suspension and revocation of permit
      (1) The council may, at any time, withdraw, suspend or revoke
a permit for a specified period if it is satisfied that—

      (a)   the commodity marked with the certification mark does
            not conform to the standard specifications;
      (b)   the permit holder has not complied with the conditions of
            the permit;
      (c)   the permit holder has not provided reasonable facilities to
            the audit team;
      (d)   there is misrepresentation of the commodity;

      (e)   there are deceptive advertisements in respect of the
            commodity;
      (f)   the manufacturer obtained the permit unlawfully, including
            through bribery or fraud;
      (g)   the permit holder has been convicted of an offence under
            the Act; and
      (h)   the permit holder has contravened any of the provisions of
            these Regulations.
                                 1532
      (2) The council shall, before making a decision to withdraw,
suspend or revoke a permit, serve the permit holder with a written
notice stating the grounds of the intended action.

      (3) The permit holder shall, within fourteen days after receipt
of the notice, provide a written explanation to the council stating why
the permit should not be withdrawn, suspended or revoked.

      (4) The council shall, where an explanation is submitted by
the permit holder, consider the explanation and give the permit holder
an opportunity to be heard as soon as possible.

      (5)   The council may—

      (a)   where no explanation is submitted by the permit holder
            within the fourteen days referred to in subregulation (3);
            or

      (b)  where, in the opinion of the council the explanation
           submitted is unsatisfactory,
withdraw, suspend or revoke the permit.

      (6) Where the council withdraws, suspends, or revokes a
permit under subregulation (5), it shall, immediately, in writing,
inform the permit holder of the withdrawal, suspension or revocation.

      (7) Where a permit has been withdrawn, suspended or revoked
or has not been renewed on the expiry of the period of its validity, the
permit holder shall immediately discontinue the use of the permit and
stop the manufacture, sale, export or distribution of the commodity in
respect of which the permit relates.

      (8) The council, may, where the permit holder has fulfilled all
the conditions for which the suspension or withdrawal was made, lift
the suspension or withdrawal.


                                 1533
     (9) The council or person acting under the authority of the
council may cancel or terminate a permit, upon the request of the
permit holder, where—

      (a)   the production of the commodity has been terminated by
            the manufacturer or other lawful authority; or

      (b)   the manufacturer applies for cancellation of the permit.

                      Part III—Miscellaneous

25.   Appeals
      (1) A person aggrieved by—
      (a)   the refusal to issue a permit;

      (b)   the attachment of any condition to a permit;

      (c)   the variation of any conditions in a permit;
      (d)   the withdrawal, suspension, revocation or cancellation of
            a permit; or
      (e)   a decision of the director to suspend production of a
            commodity or close premises under section 24A of the
            Act,
may, within fourteen days of his or her being informed of that action,
appeal in writing to the Minister through the director.

      (2) The director shall, within fourteen days of being informed
of the action, forward the appeal to the Minister with any comments as
he or she may think fit.

26. Revocation of S.I. 327-1 and S.I. 12 of 2018
The following Regulations are revoked—

      (a)   the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Certification)
            Regulations; and   
                                1534
      (b)   the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Use of
            Distinctive Mark) Regulations, 2018.

27.  Saving of permits and continuance of applications
     (1) Any permit issued under the Regulations revoked
under regulation 26, and which is valid, immediately before the
commencement of these Regulations shall have effect from the
commencement of these Regulations, as if granted under these
Regulations until it expires.

     (2) Every application made under the Regulations revoked
under regulation 26 and which is wholly or partly dealt with by the
bureau on the commencement of these Regulations is to be continued
and dealt with in all respects as if it had been made under these
Regulations.




                               1535
                              SCHEDULE 1

                                                               Regulation 3
                          CURRENCY POINT

A currency point is equivalent to twenty thousand shillings.




                                   1536
                                  SCHEDULE 2

                                       FORMS

                                                                         Regulation 4(2)
                                      FORM 1

                                                                    Document No: CERT/
                  UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS               PC/F02
                          CERTIFICATION SCHEME                      Effective Date:
                                                                    20/07/2018
                                                                    Issue No:
Document Title:          APPLICATION FORM FOR PERMIT                03             Rev. 01
                           A.    APPLICANT’S INFORMATION
Company Name
Tax Identification Number (TIN)
                                           Please attach Certificate of Registration of
Business Registration
                                           Business
                                                          Manufacturing facility address
Company Address           Office address
                                                          (if different)

District
Physical address
Postal address
Email address
Tel. contact(s)
Personnel details
                          Chief Executive                 Quality Control In-charge
Name
Designation/Title
Mobile number
Email address
Number of employees       Males                 Females          Total
Business owner (Tick)     Male                  Female           Disabled?
Age of business owner     Below 25              25-35            Above 35
Production capacity       Installed capacity:             Actual capacity:
Projected       annual
                          No. of commodity units:         SKU:
production
                                                          Value of exports (USD) per
Annual turnover:
                                                          year:

                                           1537
                               B: PRODUCT INFORMATION

                                           Commodity
The applicant is required to declare       name
proof of ownership of the trademark
                                           Brand name
/brand name or provide a letter
                                           (s)
of consent from the owner of the
trademark/ brand name.                     Commodity
                                           standard
I hereby declare that all information given in this application form is correct to the best of
my knowledge.
                        Signature

A u t h o r i z e d     Name
                                                                        Applicant’s stamp
representative   of
                        Designation
the applicant
                        Date




                                           1538
                                      FORM 2
                                                                        Regulation 8

                    UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF                Document No: CERT/
                           STANDARDS                         PC/F08
                                                             Effective Date:
                       CERTIFICATION SCHEME                  1/09/2016
Document Title:     ON-SITE AND RECOMMENDATION               Issue No:
                                                                            Rev. 00
REPORT                                                           02
                                                                        File No.
Date of visit
                                                               Permit   CERT/PC/
Company name &                                                 No.
physical address                                                        ………….


Auditors

Nature of assessment

Commodity(s)

Previous corrective actions where applicable

Cleared / Not cleared. Comments

Outcome of the visit/audit

Audit findings
No. of major non-
                                       No. of minor non-conformances
conformances
Recommendation

Signed                                 Signed
                                       Management
Lead auditor
                                       representative




                                         1539
                                                                        Regulation 10 (3)
                                        FORM 3

                       UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF
                              STANDARDS                          Document No: CERT/
                                                                 PC/F05
                            CERTIFICATION SCHEME

                      Effective Date: 05/01/2019

Document Title:       EVALUATION/ AUDIT REPORT FOR
                                                    Issue No:
                               PRODUCT   CERTIFICA-           Rev. 00
                                                    04
                               TION
   General Information
                                                 Date of assessment:
   Company Name                                                        Application No.

   Company Address
                                                                       PC/2019/……
   Persons met                                           (Attach attendance list CERT/F06)
   Audit team                                    Lead auditor:
                      Auditor(s):
   Name of commodity(ies) & brand(s)
   Standard number and title
   Confirm whether the company has a copy
   of the relevant standard(s)
   Is the product the same as that declared in
   the application?
   Is th eproduction facility the same as that
   declared in the application?

   Audit objectives

   For automatic renewals (Scheme B), pro-
   vide justification


                                                            Findings—Provide evidence of
                                                   Y   N
                                                            conformity or non-conformity
   Verification of Purchased Inputs/Raw
   Materials
   Are the raw materials the same as those
   declared in the application? If not, state
   additional raw materials and/or additives
   not declared in the application

                                          1540
Are the raw materials confirmed the same
as those declared in the product label (as
applicable)?
What records are maintained for incoming
raw materials? (As a minimum, the list of
raw materials, source and quantities)
Is the storage of raw materials suitable
and adequate?
Production and Manufacturing Process
Control
Was the company in production on the
day of the audit?
Briefly outline the key production process
steps
Outline the production process controls
(steps where monitoring is done, what is
checked and the limits)
What records are maintained for the
production process controls?
Measuring Equipment and Testing
Facilities
What measuring and testing equipment is
being used?
Is test and measuring equipment used
calibrated or verified?


                                                Y   N   Findings—Provide evidence of
                                                        conformity or non-conformity
Product Assessment
Specify the key parameters being tested
for the finished product
What records are kept in relation to
finished product assessment?
Specify whether test results from in-
house analysis of products conform to
national standards
Summarise results within past one year
in table (Attach copies of test certificates)
Are the non-conforming products clearly
identified and segregated? Specify
how the non-conforming products are
handled?

                                         1541
Is the finished products storage suitable
and adequate?
Product Presentation
Product packaging
Describe the nature of packaging. Is
product packaging appropriate for the
intended use e.g., food grade material for
food products, and proper storage and
handling?
Are the quantities declared the same as
those verified on-site?
Do the product labels and marks comply
with the requirements of the relevant
standards? (Attach filled labelling
checklist). If non-conforming, verify
stock and specify quantity.


                                               Y   N   Findings—Provide evidence of
                                                       conformity or non-conformity
Product Facilities and GMPs
Housekeeping
Are the floors, walls and ceiling maintained
clean? What cleaning chemicals are
used for cleaning the premises? Is the
equipment suitable and maintained
clean? What cleaning chemicals are used
for cleaning the equipment? Is there an
established routine for cleaning both the
equipment and premises?
Personal Hygiene
Are valid medical certificates maintained
for personnel accessing production
line, (where applicable)? Are personnel
routinely inspected for hygiene? Is
appropriate protective wear provided and
being used? Are toilet facilities provided
and maintained clean? Are hand washing
facilities provided?
Pest Prevention and control
Specify how pest prevention and control
is handled.




                                        1542
     Waste and waste disposal
     Specify how solid and liquid waste
     management is done?


1       Summary of Independent Test Results
        (Provide a summary of results within past one year)
    Product & brand    Submission     Certification
                                                      Pass/Fail    Testing Lab
         name             Date         Number



Were samples obtained for independent testing? Indicate sample numbers.
Specify samples that were not picked, reason and follow up actions.

2       Non-Conformances Raised (where applicable)
        Confirm whether non-conformances arising out of the previous audit
        were satisfactorily closed.
        (Specify number of non-conformances raised, complete the table be-
        low and attach CAR forms)

                                                        Adequacy of corrective
      Non-conformity            Corrective action
                                                              actions



3       Audit Conclusion

4       Recommendation
        Is product(s) recommended for certification? If no, specify reasons.

5         Authentication:
      Audit Team                    Name                    Signature
Lead Auditor
Auditor




                                      1543
                               SCHEDULE 3
                                                                         Regulation 5

          PERMIT FEES FOR CERTIFICATION MARK

                                      PART I
                     Category of           Amount
     Type of Fee                                              Fees billed
                     Enterprises           (UGX)

                     Micro and small       Shs. 500,000
                     enterprises           per year           Per permit issued to a
                                                              commodity/product and
                                                              per brand

                                                              *This fees are exclusive
     Certification                                            of calibration and pre-
                     Medium and            1,000,000 per      package       verification
1.   fees            large enterprises     year               costs, and such other
                                                              incidental costs as may
                                                              be associated with the
                                                              certification process.
                                         PART II
                     Category of
                     Commodities
                                           Amount
                     for Digital                              Fees billed
                                           (UGX)
                     Conformity
     Type of Fee     Mark
2.                                                            Fees computed on
     Certification   1.Cosmetics                              the basis of annual
                                            Shs.18 per unit
     fees            2. Electricals                           production per unit
                                           of commodity
                     3. Construction                          *This fee is inclusive of
                        materials                             conformity assessment
                                                              and calibration fees.




                                         1544
    SCHEDULE 4

                     Regulation 23

CERTIFICATION MARK




       1545
Cross References

Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014, Act 14 of 2014




                                       HON. FRANCIS MWEBESA
                       Minister of Trade, Industries and Cooperatives

                                 1546
1547
1548
