Full primary URLs and SHA256 hashes in independent-peer-review.json.

SI112/2022, regulations4–13

      “used motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle that has previously
           been registered in Uganda or elsewhere.

           Part II—Inspection and Clearance of Imports

4.   Commodities to conform to compulsory standard
     specifications
     (1) A person shall not import into Uganda any commodity for
which compulsory standard specifications have been declared by the
bureau, where the commodity does not meet the requirements of the
compulsory standard specifications.

      (2) Subject to section 14A of the Act, a person shall not release
or facilitate the release of any imported commodity into Uganda, where
the commodity does not meet the requirements of the compulsory
standard specifications.

5.     Commodities to be accompanied by certificate of conformity
       or certificate of road worthiness
       (1) The commodities specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to these
Regulations shall, prior to being imported into Uganda, be subjected
to Pre-export Verification of Conformity to Standards in the country of
origin or export, upon the payment of the fees prescribed in Schedule
2 to these Regulations.
                                6119

      (2) The commodities specified in Part 2 of Schedule 1 to these
Regulations are exempted from Pre-export Verification of Conformity
to Standards.

       (3) A certificate of conformity or a certificate of road worthiness
shall accompany the commodities referred to in subregulation (1).

     (4) A certificate of road worthiness shall be valid for twelve
months from the date of issue for each customs entry.

      (5)   Notwithstanding subregulation (1)—

      (a)   where the commodities specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to
            these Regulations qualify to be classified as commodities
            specified in Part 2 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations, the
            commodities shall be exempt from Pre-export Verification
            of Conformity to Standards;

      (b)   where the commodities specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1
            to these Regulations have been profiled as low risk, the
            commodities may be exempt from Pre-export Verification
            of Conformity to Standards; and

      (c)   where the commodities specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1
            to these Regulations are imported by an importer profiled
            as low risk and registered as an Authorised Economic
            Operator (AEO), the commodities may be exempt from
            Pre-export Verification of Conformity to Standards
            (PVOC).

6.    Assessment of imported commodities
The bureau shall, at a port of entry into Uganda or at entry into the
single customs territory, carry out conformity assessment of the
commodities specified in subregulation (1), to assess the compliance
of the commodities to the compulsory standard specifications, whether
the commodities are for trade or for personal use.
                                  6120

7.    Commodities not accompanied by certificate of conformity
      or certificate of road worthiness
      (1) Notwithstanding regulation 5, where the commodities
specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations are not
accompanied by a certificate of conformity or a certificate of road
worthiness, the commodities shall be subjected to destination
inspection.

      (2) For purposes of subregulation (1), the importer shall pay the
inspection fees and the charges prescribed in paragraph 2 of Schedule
2 to these Regulations, as applicable, a surcharge of fifteen per cent
of the Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF) value of the commodities
subjected to inspection clearance and any other fee prescribed in
Schedule 2, as may be applicable.

      (3) Where the commodities referred to in subregulation (1)
comply with the compulsory standard specifications, the standards
inspector shall issue an import clearance certificate in respect of the
commodities.
      (4) Where the commodities referred to in subregulation
(1) do not conform to the requirements of the compulsory standard
specifications, the bureau shall issue a notice to the importer to take
corrective action or to destroy or re-export the commodities, depending
on the risk of the commodities to the environment and in accordance
with regulation 15.

8.    Application for import clearance certificate
      (1) An importer of commodities specified in Schedule 1 to
these Regulations shall apply to the bureau for clearance and issuance
of an import clearance certificate by submitting an accurate customs
declaration through the electronic single window, prior to or upon the
arrival of the commodities at a port of entry into Uganda or at entry to
the single customs territory.

      (2)   The application in subregulation (1) shall be accompanied
by—
                                 6121

      (a)   the bill of lading or airway bill;
      (b)   the packing list;
      (c)   the invoice;
      (d)   the customs declaration;
      (e)   the customs transit document;
      (f)   the certificate of conformity or certificate of road
            worthiness, where applicable;
      (g)   a valid product certification permit for commodities
            that originate from a Partner State of the East African
            Community, or commodities to which regulation 14
            applies;
      (h)   an export certificate, in the case of motor vehicles;
      (i)   an exemption letter from the bureau in accordance with
            regulation 5 (5), where applicable;
      (j)   the passport bio data page and other supporting
            documentation for returning residents, where applicable;
            and
      (k)   a diplomatic note endorsed by the Ministry responsible for
            foreign affairs, in the case of persons seeking exemption
            for diplomatic cargo.

      (3) Where commodities are accompanied by a certificate of
conformity or a certificate of road worthiness, the standards inspector
shall verify the commodities to confirm that the commodities match
the declaration in the application and in the certificate of conformity or
the certificate of road worthiness.
9.     Issuance of import clearance certificate
A standards inspector shall issue an import clearance certificate where
the commodities, after verification, are found to conform with the
certificate of conformity or certificate of road worthiness, respectively.
                                   6122

10.   Destination inspection
      (1) The following commodities are subject to destination
inspection—
      (a) commodities in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations,
           which arrive at the port of entry or at entry to the single
           customs territory without a certificate of conformity or a
           certificate of road worthiness;
      (b)   commodities in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations
            which arrive at the port of entry or at entry to the single
            customs territory with a certificate of conformity or a
            certificate of road worthiness but in respect of which, upon
            verification, the standards inspector—
            (i)    has reason to believe that the commodities do
                   not conform with the certificate of conformity or
                   certificate of road worthiness, respectively; or
            (ii)   finds reason to doubt the compliance of the
                   commodities with the relevant compulsory standard
                   specifications;
      (c)   commodities in Part 3 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations
            which have a valid product certification permit and
            commodities to which regulation 14 applies, where the
            standards inspector has reason to doubt the quality of
            those commodities;
      (d)   commodities under regulation 5(5)(b) and 5(5)(c); and
      (e)   commodities which are re-exported from a Partner State of
            the East African Community and which are accompanied
            by a valid certificate of conformity.


     (2) A standards inspector shall, in order to determine
conformity with the compulsory standard specifications, inspect the
commodities subject to destination inspection.

                                 6123

      (3) An standards inspector may take a sample of the
commodities subject to destination inspection for laboratory analysis,
to determine conformity with the relevant compulsory standards
specifications.

      (4) An importer of commodities to which this regulation applies
shall pay a destination inspection fee and, where the commodities are
subject to sampling and laboratory analysis, the   relevant test charges,
as required in paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 to these Regulations and any
other fees required under regulation 7(2).

      (5) The importer of commodities subject to destination
inspection shall be responsible for the cost of storage and any other
incidental charges incurred during destination inspection.

     (6) An standards inspector shall, where the commodities
conform to the relevant compulsory standard specifications, issue an
import clearance certificate.

       (7) Where the standards inspector determines that commodities
which are subjected to destination inspection do not conform to the
relevant compulsory standard specifications, the standards inspector
shall notify the importer through issuance of a seizure notice copied to
the relevant authorities and, where the goods are still under customs
control, notify the Uganda Revenue Authority, and may—

      (a)   refuse entry of the commodities into Uganda;

      (b)   issue a notice to the importer to take corrective action or to
            destroy or re-export the commodities; or

      (c)   refuse to release the commodities, where the commodities
            are in a customs bonded warehouse or a storage facility
            under seal of the bureau.


                                  6124

11.    Standards inspector to verify shelf life of commodities prior
       to issuance of import clearance certificate
       (1) Where commodities have a definite shelf life, the standards
inspector shall, before issuing an import clearance certificate, determine
that the commodities have a defined and marked shelf life of at least—
      (a)   75% of the shelf life from the date of manufacture, in the
            case of food products at the port of entry or, in the case of
            food products with a shelf-life of more than 18 months, at
            least 12 months at the port of entry; and

      (b)   50% of the shelf life from the date of manufacture, for all
            other commodities.

     (2) In the case of cosmetics, the “best before” or “period after
opening” (PAO) shall apply for purposes of verification.

12.   Standards inspector not to release commodities without
      import clearance certificate
A standards inspector shall not release commodities from a port of
entry into Uganda or entry into the single customs territory, other than
to a customs bonded warehouse or to a storage facility under seal of
the bureau, unless the importer of the commodities has been issued
with an import clearance certificate.

13.   Commodities to conform with standards and bear distinctive
      mark
      (1) A person shall not import, distribute, sale or have in his or
her possession or control for sale or distribution, any commodity for
which compulsory standard specifications have been declared, unless
the commodity conforms to the compulsory standard specifications.
      (2) A person shall not distribute, sale or control for distribution
or sale, any imported commodity for which compulsory standard
specifications have been declared and which is specified in Part II of
Schedule 3 to the Uganda National Bureau Standards (Certification)
Regulations, 2021, unless the commodity bears a digital conformity
mark.
                                6125

      (3) An importer of a commodity for which compulsory standard
specifications have been declared and which is specified in Part II of

SI112/2022 Schedules1–2

     (2) The bureau shall review the request submitted under
subregulation (1) and may grant or reject it.

     (3) The importer shall pay the verification fees specified in
paragraph 7 of Schedule 2 to these Regulations.

20. Revocation of S.I. No. 69 of 2021
The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Inspection and Clearance
of Import) Regulations, 2021 are revoked.




                                6130

                             SCHEDULES

                             SCHEDULE 1

                                         Regulations 5(1), 7(1), 8(1) and 10

                                     PART 1

       CATEGORIES OF COMMODITIES SUBJECT TO PRE-
       EXPORT VERIFICATION OF CONFORMITY TO
       STANDARDS.

1.    Group I      Toys.
2. Group II        Electricals and electronics; including solar panels and
		                 systems.
3.    Group III    Automotive products and inputs.
4.    Group IV     Chemical commodities.
5.    Group V      Mechanical materials and gas appliances; including
                   construction materials and items.
6.    Group VI     Textiles, leather, plastic and rubber.
7.    Group VII    Furniture; including wood and metal articles.
8.    Group VIII   Paper and stationery.
9.    Group IX     Protective safety equipment.
10.   Group X      Food and food products.
11.   Group XI     Used commodities; including used motor vehicles.




                                  6131

                                      PART 2
                                                            Regulation 5 (2)

COMMODITIES EXEMPT FROM PRE-EXPORT VERIFICATION
         OF CONFORMITY TO STANDARDS

1.    A consignment whose Free on Board (FOB) value does not exceed
      US$ 2000, except for used motor vehicles.
2.    Consignments of commodities profiled as low risk.
3.    Consignments of imports by importers profiled as low risk and
      registered as Authorised Economic Operators (AEO).
4.    Government project specific commodities whose procurement has
      an inbuilt or demonstrated quality assurance system that guarantees
      conformity to national standards.
5.    Raw materials and direct inputs used in the manufacturing process,
      including packaging material imported for use in a manufacturing
      process and not for sale.
6.    Diplomatic cargo.
7.    Personal effects of returning residents and expatriates.
8.    Commodities manufactured in or originating from a Partner State of
      the East African Community.
9.    Industrial machinery and accessories; including spare parts for a
      manufacturing process and not for re-sale.
10.   Farm machinery, agro processing equipment and spare parts not for
      resale.
11.   Mining equipment and spares not for resale.
12.   Branded or engraved hospitality and tourism industry equipment;
      excluding vehicles.
13.   Classified military, police, prisons and State House cargo.
14.   Religious books and literature such as Bibles, Qurans and other related
      printed matter.
                                   6132

                                       PART 3

                                                          Regulation 10 (1) (c)

 COMMODITIES EXEMPT FROM DESTINATION INSPECTION

1.   Commodities whose Cost Insurance and Freight (CIF) value does not
     exceed   US$   1300 with   the   exception   of   food,   baby products,
     sanitary pads, cosmetics,  tungsten  filament  bulbs,  electric cables,   
     compact   fluorescent   lamps,   portable   socket outlets or extension
     sockets, flat irons, electric kettles, solar    lanterns, energy    saving   
     bulbs,   solar   battery chargers,  solar  panels,  electric  plugs,  water  
     heaters, electric  sockets,  electric  switches,  electric  blenders, shovels,
     garden hoes, pick axes, machetes and cement.

2.   Raw materials and direct inputs in a manufacturing process; including
     packaging material imported for use in a manufacturing process and
     not for sale.

3.   Industrial machinery and accessories; including spare parts brought in
     for a manufacturing process and not for re-sale.

4.   Farm machinery, agro processing equipment, and spare parts not for
     resale.

5.   Diplomatic cargo accompanied by a diplomatic note and which is
     clearly for personal or office use.

6.   Personal   effects of returning residents and expatriates.

7.   Commodities manufactured in a Partner State of the East African
     Community with a valid certification permit and bearing a notified
     product certification mark.

8.   Classified military, police, prisons and State House cargo.

9.   Religious books and literature such as Bibles, Qurans and other related
     printed matter.

                                    6133

                                SCHEDULE 2

                                      Regulations 5(1), 7(2), 10(4), 16(7),
                                                   17(5), 18(3) and 19(3)

     FEES AND CHARGES FOR IMPORT INSPECTION AND
                    CLEARENCE

1.   The inspection fees and charges shall be based on the Free On Board
     (FOB) value of the import shipment as follows—

     (a)   fees for unregistered commodities: 0.500% of Free on Board
           (FOB) value but in any case not less than USD 235 and not
           more that USD 3,000;

     (b)   fees for registered commodities: 0.45% of Free on Board (FOB)
           value but in any case not less than USD 235 and not more that
           USD 3,000;

     (c)   Fees for licensed commodities: 0.25% of Free on Board (FOB)
           value but in any case not less than USD 235 and not more that

SI68/2021 Schedule3
2       Non-Conformances Raised (where applicable)
        Confirm whether non-conformances arising out of the previous audit
        were satisfactorily closed.
        (Specify number of non-conformances raised, complete the table be-
        low and attach CAR forms)

                                                        Adequacy of corrective
      Non-conformity            Corrective action
                                                              actions



3       Audit Conclusion

4       Recommendation
        Is product(s) recommended for certification? If no, specify reasons.

5         Authentication:
      Audit Team                    Name                    Signature
Lead Auditor
Auditor




                                      1543

                               SCHEDULE 3
                                                                         Regulation 5

          PERMIT FEES FOR CERTIFICATION MARK

                                      PART I
                     Category of           Amount
     Type of Fee                                              Fees billed
                     Enterprises           (UGX)

                     Micro and small       Shs. 500,000
                     enterprises           per year           Per permit issued to a
                                                              commodity/product and
                                                              per brand

                                                              *This fees are exclusive

SI108/2022 section13
13. Amendment of Schedule 3 to principal Regulations
The principal Regulations are amended in Part II of Schedule 3 by substituting
for the words “Shs. 18 per unit of commodity”, the words “Shs. 21 per unit
of commodity”.




                                   6059
       HON. FRANCIS MWEBESA,
        Minister of Trade, Industries
                  and Cooperatives.



6060
6061
6062
