STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS
SUPPLEMENT No. 43                                           21st October, 2022

              STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS SUPPLEMENT
     to The Uganda Gazette No. 64, Volume CXV, dated 21st October, 2022
             Printed by UPPC, Entebbe, by Order of the Government.


  S T A T U T O R Y                   I N S T R U M E N T S

                               2022 No. 112

THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (INSPECTION
     AND CLEARANCE OF IMPORTS) REGULATIONS, 2022

                  ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

                            Part I—Preliminary
Regulation

    1.   Title
    2.   Application of Regulations
    3.   Interpretation


                 Part II—Inspection and Clearance of Imports


    4.   Commodities to conform to compulsory standard specifications
    5.   Commodities to be accompanied by certificate of conformity or
         certificate of road worthiness
    6.   Assessment of imported commodities
    7.   Commodities not accompanied by certificate of conformity or
         certificate of road worthiness
    8.   Application for import clearance certificate
    9.   Issuance of import clearance certificate
                                    6113
Regulation

  10.   Destination inspection
  11.   Standards inspector to verify shelf life of commodities prior to issue
        of import clearance certificate
  12.   Standards inspector not to release commodities without import
        clearance certificate
  13.   Commodities to conform with standards and bear distinctive mark
  14.   Commodities manufactured within EAC Partner States
  15.   Notice to undertake corrective action, destroy or re-export
        commodities
  16.   Release under seal
  17.   Re-work of commodities
  18.   Factory inspection
  19.   Verification of commodities at owner’s premises
  20.   Revocation of S.I. No. 69 of 2021

SCHEDULES

SCHEDULE 1
PART 1 — CATEGORIES OF COMMODITIES SUBJECT TO
         PRE-EXPORT VERIFICATION OF CONFORMITY TO
         STANDARDS
PART 2 — COMMODITIES     EXEMPT  FROM    PRE-EXPORT
         VERIFICATION OF CONFORMITY TO STANDARDS
PART 3 — COMMODITIES EXEMPT FROM DESTINATION
         INSPECTION

SCHEDULE 2 —FEES AND CHARGES FOR IMPORT INSPECTION
            AND CLEARANCE




                                   6114
  S T A T U T O R Y               I N S T R U M E N T S

                            2022 No. 112.

   The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Inspection and
           Clearance of Imports) Regulations, 2022

   (Under section 43 of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act,
                               Cap. 327)

IN EXECISE of the powers conferred upon the Minister by section 43
of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act, and in consultation
with the National Standards Council, these Regulations are made this
20th day of September, 2022.

                        Part I—Preliminary
1.   Title
These Regulations may be cited as the Uganda National Bureau of
Standards (Inspection and Clearance of Imports) Regulations, 2022.

2.   Application of Regulations
These Regulations apply to all commodities imported into Uganda for
which the Minister has declared compulsory standard specifications
under section 18 of the Act.

3.    Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—

     “Act” means the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act,
          Cap. 327;

     “Authorised Economic Operator (AEO)” means a person
          involved in the international movement of goods for any
          function approved by or on behalf of a national customs
          body as compliant with the World Customs Organisation
          or equivalent supply chain security standards;
                               6115
“bureau” means the Uganda National Bureau of Standards
     established by section 2 of the Act;

“certificate of conformity” means a document issued by a
       third party contracted or recognised by the bureau,
       demonstrating that adequate assurance is provided by the
       importer that their commodities are in conformity with
       compulsory standard specifications;

“certificate of road worthiness” means a document issued by
       a third party contracted or recognised by the bureau,
       demonstrating that adequate assurance is provided by
       the importer that the motor vehicle, is in conformity with
       compulsory standard specifications;

“commodity” means any article, product or thing, which is or
    will ultimately be the subject of trade or use;

“competent authority” means bodies that are mandated by law
    in the respective Partner States to regulate, certify, licence
    or conduct registration pertaining to the sector that they
    regulate;

“compulsory standard specifications” means standard
    specifications declared as such under section 18 (1) (a) of
    the Act;

“conformity” means the fulfilment of specified requirements;

“conformity assessment” means a demonstration that specified
     requirements relating to a product process, system, person
     or body are fulfilled;

“consignment” means all the commodities declared by one
     customs entry number;


                           6116
“destination inspection” means conformity assessment done
      within Uganda at the port of entry or at any other premises
      permitted by the bureau;

“digital conformity mark” means the distinctive mark when in
      a device-readable or app-readable mark or code format,
      affixed or imprinted on a unit of a commodity of the
      category specified in Part II of Schedule 3 to the Uganda
      National Bureau Standards (Certification) Regulations,
      2021, embedding conformity-related data pertaining to the
      unit of the commodity on which it is affixed or imprinted;

“distinctive mark” means a mark declared as such under section
      18 (1) (b) of the Act;

“electronic single window” means a platform that is Government
      mandated and allows for the submission of electronic
      information to fulfil regulatory requirements;

“Government project specific commodities” means commodities
    that are a direct input into a project for the Government of
    Uganda, where the project has a specific timeline and a
    quality management system to give assurance to quality;

“import clearance certificate” means a document issued by the
     bureau attesting that the imported commodity conforms
     to the compulsory standard specifications and has been
     cleared by a standards inspector;

“licensed commodity” means a commodity that is continuously
      assessed by the bureau and deemed compliant with the
      relevant compulsory standard specifications or any other
      approved international standards using a known process;

“low risk” means commodities profiled as low risk according to
      the bureau’s risk profiling framework;
                          6117
“non-conformity” means the non-fulfilment of specified
     requirements;

“notified product certification mark” means a mark notified
      by a Partner State of the East African Community under
      section 24 of the East African Community Standardisation,
      Quality Assurance, Metrology and Testing Act, 2006 as a
      product certification mark;

“Pre-export Verification of Conformity (PVOC)” means a
      conformity assessment performed in the country of export
      or origin that verifies the exporter or manufacturer’s
      statement that their commodities conform to the relevant
      compulsory standard specifications or other approved
      international standards;

“registered commodity” means a commodity with a reasonably
      consistent level of compliance to compulsory standards
      specifications or any other approved international standard,
      and which may be exempted from mandatory testing and
      physical inspection;

“re-work” means to improve, alter or revise a commodity
     to achieve compliance with compulsory standard
     specifications;

“risk” means the potential of non-compliance with these
      Regulations or effect of uncertainty on import inspection
      objectives;

“risk indicators” means specific criteria which, when taken
      together, serve as a practical tool to select and target
      consignments of goods for the potential for non-compliance
      with these Regulations;

“risk profile” means a predetermined combination of risk
      indicators, based on information which has been gathered,
      analysed and categorised;
                           6118
      “single customs territory (SCT)” means that wholesome territory
            of the East African Community Partner States where goods
            clearance is implemented at the first port of call for the
            entire territory;

      “standards inspector” means an employee of the bureau appointed
            under the Act to exercise the powers or perform the duties
            of a standards inspector and to enforce these Regulations;

      “unregistered commodity” means a commodity without prior
           information regarding its conformance and which shall be
           inspected and tested to assess compliance;

      “used motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle that has previously
           been registered in Uganda or elsewhere.

           Part II—Inspection and Clearance of Imports

4.   Commodities to conform to compulsory standard
     specifications
     (1) A person shall not import into Uganda any commodity for
which compulsory standard specifications have been declared by the
bureau, where the commodity does not meet the requirements of the
compulsory standard specifications.

      (2) Subject to section 14A of the Act, a person shall not release
or facilitate the release of any imported commodity into Uganda, where
the commodity does not meet the requirements of the compulsory
standard specifications.

5.     Commodities to be accompanied by certificate of conformity
       or certificate of road worthiness
       (1) The commodities specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to these
Regulations shall, prior to being imported into Uganda, be subjected
to Pre-export Verification of Conformity to Standards in the country of
origin or export, upon the payment of the fees prescribed in Schedule
2 to these Regulations.
                                6119
      (2) The commodities specified in Part 2 of Schedule 1 to these
Regulations are exempted from Pre-export Verification of Conformity
to Standards.

       (3) A certificate of conformity or a certificate of road worthiness
shall accompany the commodities referred to in subregulation (1).

     (4) A certificate of road worthiness shall be valid for twelve
months from the date of issue for each customs entry.

      (5)   Notwithstanding subregulation (1)—

      (a)   where the commodities specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to
            these Regulations qualify to be classified as commodities
            specified in Part 2 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations, the
            commodities shall be exempt from Pre-export Verification
            of Conformity to Standards;

      (b)   where the commodities specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1
            to these Regulations have been profiled as low risk, the
            commodities may be exempt from Pre-export Verification
            of Conformity to Standards; and

      (c)   where the commodities specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1
            to these Regulations are imported by an importer profiled
            as low risk and registered as an Authorised Economic
            Operator (AEO), the commodities may be exempt from
            Pre-export Verification of Conformity to Standards
            (PVOC).

6.    Assessment of imported commodities
The bureau shall, at a port of entry into Uganda or at entry into the
single customs territory, carry out conformity assessment of the
commodities specified in subregulation (1), to assess the compliance
of the commodities to the compulsory standard specifications, whether
the commodities are for trade or for personal use.
                                  6120
7.    Commodities not accompanied by certificate of conformity
      or certificate of road worthiness
      (1) Notwithstanding regulation 5, where the commodities
specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations are not
accompanied by a certificate of conformity or a certificate of road
worthiness, the commodities shall be subjected to destination
inspection.

      (2) For purposes of subregulation (1), the importer shall pay the
inspection fees and the charges prescribed in paragraph 2 of Schedule
2 to these Regulations, as applicable, a surcharge of fifteen per cent
of the Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF) value of the commodities
subjected to inspection clearance and any other fee prescribed in
Schedule 2, as may be applicable.

      (3) Where the commodities referred to in subregulation (1)
comply with the compulsory standard specifications, the standards
inspector shall issue an import clearance certificate in respect of the
commodities.
      (4) Where the commodities referred to in subregulation
(1) do not conform to the requirements of the compulsory standard
specifications, the bureau shall issue a notice to the importer to take
corrective action or to destroy or re-export the commodities, depending
on the risk of the commodities to the environment and in accordance
with regulation 15.

8.    Application for import clearance certificate
      (1) An importer of commodities specified in Schedule 1 to
these Regulations shall apply to the bureau for clearance and issuance
of an import clearance certificate by submitting an accurate customs
declaration through the electronic single window, prior to or upon the
arrival of the commodities at a port of entry into Uganda or at entry to
the single customs territory.

      (2)   The application in subregulation (1) shall be accompanied
by—
                                 6121
      (a)   the bill of lading or airway bill;
      (b)   the packing list;
      (c)   the invoice;
      (d)   the customs declaration;
      (e)   the customs transit document;
      (f)   the certificate of conformity or certificate of road
            worthiness, where applicable;
      (g)   a valid product certification permit for commodities
            that originate from a Partner State of the East African
            Community, or commodities to which regulation 14
            applies;
      (h)   an export certificate, in the case of motor vehicles;
      (i)   an exemption letter from the bureau in accordance with
            regulation 5 (5), where applicable;
      (j)   the passport bio data page and other supporting
            documentation for returning residents, where applicable;
            and
      (k)   a diplomatic note endorsed by the Ministry responsible for
            foreign affairs, in the case of persons seeking exemption
            for diplomatic cargo.

      (3) Where commodities are accompanied by a certificate of
conformity or a certificate of road worthiness, the standards inspector
shall verify the commodities to confirm that the commodities match
the declaration in the application and in the certificate of conformity or
the certificate of road worthiness.
9.     Issuance of import clearance certificate
A standards inspector shall issue an import clearance certificate where
the commodities, after verification, are found to conform with the
certificate of conformity or certificate of road worthiness, respectively.
                                   6122
10.   Destination inspection
      (1) The following commodities are subject to destination
inspection—
      (a) commodities in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations,
           which arrive at the port of entry or at entry to the single
           customs territory without a certificate of conformity or a
           certificate of road worthiness;
      (b)   commodities in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations
            which arrive at the port of entry or at entry to the single
            customs territory with a certificate of conformity or a
            certificate of road worthiness but in respect of which, upon
            verification, the standards inspector—
            (i)    has reason to believe that the commodities do
                   not conform with the certificate of conformity or
                   certificate of road worthiness, respectively; or
            (ii)   finds reason to doubt the compliance of the
                   commodities with the relevant compulsory standard
                   specifications;
      (c)   commodities in Part 3 of Schedule 1 to these Regulations
            which have a valid product certification permit and
            commodities to which regulation 14 applies, where the
            standards inspector has reason to doubt the quality of
            those commodities;
      (d)   commodities under regulation 5(5)(b) and 5(5)(c); and
      (e)   commodities which are re-exported from a Partner State of
            the East African Community and which are accompanied
            by a valid certificate of conformity.


     (2) A standards inspector shall, in order to determine
conformity with the compulsory standard specifications, inspect the
commodities subject to destination inspection.

                                 6123
      (3) An standards inspector may take a sample of the
commodities subject to destination inspection for laboratory analysis,
to determine conformity with the relevant compulsory standards
specifications.

      (4) An importer of commodities to which this regulation applies
shall pay a destination inspection fee and, where the commodities are
subject to sampling and laboratory analysis, the   relevant test charges,
as required in paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 to these Regulations and any
other fees required under regulation 7(2).

      (5) The importer of commodities subject to destination
inspection shall be responsible for the cost of storage and any other
incidental charges incurred during destination inspection.

     (6) An standards inspector shall, where the commodities
conform to the relevant compulsory standard specifications, issue an
import clearance certificate.

       (7) Where the standards inspector determines that commodities
which are subjected to destination inspection do not conform to the
relevant compulsory standard specifications, the standards inspector
shall notify the importer through issuance of a seizure notice copied to
the relevant authorities and, where the goods are still under customs
control, notify the Uganda Revenue Authority, and may—

      (a)   refuse entry of the commodities into Uganda;

      (b)   issue a notice to the importer to take corrective action or to
            destroy or re-export the commodities; or

      (c)   refuse to release the commodities, where the commodities
            are in a customs bonded warehouse or a storage facility
            under seal of the bureau.


                                  6124
11.    Standards inspector to verify shelf life of commodities prior
       to issuance of import clearance certificate
       (1) Where commodities have a definite shelf life, the standards
inspector shall, before issuing an import clearance certificate, determine
that the commodities have a defined and marked shelf life of at least—
      (a)   75% of the shelf life from the date of manufacture, in the
            case of food products at the port of entry or, in the case of
            food products with a shelf-life of more than 18 months, at
            least 12 months at the port of entry; and

      (b)   50% of the shelf life from the date of manufacture, for all
            other commodities.

     (2) In the case of cosmetics, the “best before” or “period after
opening” (PAO) shall apply for purposes of verification.

12.   Standards inspector not to release commodities without
      import clearance certificate
A standards inspector shall not release commodities from a port of
entry into Uganda or entry into the single customs territory, other than
to a customs bonded warehouse or to a storage facility under seal of
the bureau, unless the importer of the commodities has been issued
with an import clearance certificate.

13.   Commodities to conform with standards and bear distinctive
      mark
      (1) A person shall not import, distribute, sale or have in his or
her possession or control for sale or distribution, any commodity for
which compulsory standard specifications have been declared, unless
the commodity conforms to the compulsory standard specifications.
      (2) A person shall not distribute, sale or control for distribution
or sale, any imported commodity for which compulsory standard
specifications have been declared and which is specified in Part II of
Schedule 3 to the Uganda National Bureau Standards (Certification)
Regulations, 2021, unless the commodity bears a digital conformity
mark.
                                6125
      (3) An importer of a commodity for which compulsory standard
specifications have been declared and which is specified in Part II of
Schedule 3 to the Uganda National Bureau Standards (Certification)
Regulations, 2021 shall, before import clearance, produce evidence
of acquisition of the digital conformity mark for all the units of the
commodity to be imported.

      (4) An importer may apply the digital conformity mark, either
before importation, upon obtaining a certificate of conformity for the
commodities issued by any Pre-export Verification of Conformity
to Standards service provider contracted by the bureau or, after
importation, upon obtaining an import clearance certificate issued by
the bureau.

14.    Commodities manufactured within EAC Partner States
       (1) An importer of commodities manufactured within a Partner
State of the East African Community, with a valid product certification
permit and bearing a notified product certification mark of that Partner
State, shall apply for and be issued with an import clearance certificate
and the commodities shall not be subjected to Pre-Export Verification
of Conformity to Standards or destination inspection where—
      (a)   the commodities have been issued with a notified product
            certification mark of the Partner State of origin issued
            against the harmonised East African standards; or
      (b)   the commodities have been issued with a notified
            product certification mark of the Partner State of origin,
            issued against national or international standards where
            harmonised East African Community standards do not
            exist; or
      (c)   the commodities are determined by the Minister, in
            consultation with the bureau, by notice in the Gazette, to
            be of extraordinary importance.

      (2) Where imported commodities are not accompanied
or issued with a valid product certification permit or where the
                             6126
commodities are accompanied by a valid product certification permit
not issued against the harmonised East African Community standards
where they exist, the commodities shall be subject to destination
inspection.

15.   Notice to undertake corrective action, destroy or re-export
      commodities
      (1) Where a notice to undertake corrective action, destroy
or re-export commodities is issued by a standards inspector under
regulation 10(7) (b), the commodities shall be reworked, destroyed
or re-exported within twenty-one days of issue of the notice, at the
expense of the importer.

      (2)   The commodities under this regulation shall—

      (a)   where the commodities do not pose a significant risk to the
            environment, be destroyed;

      (b)   where the commodities pose a significant risk to the
            environment, be re-exported to the country from which
            they were imported and the importer or exporter shall
            obtain a URA customs re-export certificate as proof of re-
            export; or

      (c)   where commodities are required to be reworked, be re-
            worked in accordance with processes documented by
            the importer and approved by the bureau and issued
            with an import clearance certificate after re-evaluation
            for compliance with the relevant compulsory standards
            specifications.

     (3) The commodities for re-export shall not be re-exported to
any country, other than the country from which they were imported.

      (4) The destruction of commodities for which a notice to
destroy is issued shall be done in accordance with the applicable
national laws.
                              6127
16.   Release under seal
      (1) Where a standards inspector subjects commodities to
inspection and testing and the importer has been cleared by the Uganda
Revenue Authority, the standards inspector may release, under seal of
the bureau, the commodities to a sealable warehouse or storage facility
of the importer.

      (2) For purposes of subregulation (1), an importer shall apply
to the bureau for release under seal of the bureau, of the commodities
from a customs bonded warehouse, and the application shall be
accompanied by a banker’s cheque or bank draft worth fifteen percent
of the Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF) value of the commodities
under inspection and testing by the bureau with a validity period of six
months.

      (3) The importer shall sign an undertaking with the bureau not
to tamper with commodities under seal.

      (4) Where the commodities released under seal of the bureau
do not meet the requirements of the relevant compulsory standard
specifications, the banker’s cheque or bank draft shall be executed by
the bureau to cater for the cost of destruction.

      (5) Where the commodities released under seal of the bureau
meet the relevant compulsory standard specifications, the importer
shall be issued with an import clearance certificate by the bureau and
the banker’s cheque or bank draft shall be returned to the importer.

      (6) Where the importer elects to retain the commodities at
the customs bonded warehouse, the importer shall deposit with the
bureau, a banker’s cheque or bank draft which shall—

      (a)   be returned to the importer where the query is resolved
            and goods found to conform with the compulsory standard
            specifications; or


                                 6128
      (b)   be executed and used to facilitate destruction of the
            commodities where the commodities do not conform to
            the standard specifications.

      (7) The importer shall pay the release under seal fee prescribed
in paragraph 4 of Schedule 2 to these Regulations.

17.   Re-work of commodities
      (1) Where commodities which do not meet the relevant
compulsory standard specifications are required to be re-worked, the
importer shall submit to the bureau a proposal on how the commodities
shall be re-worked to meet the relevant compulsory standard
specifications.

       (2) The bureau shall review the proposal submitted under
subregulation (1) and may approve it, with or without amendments, or
reject it and require the importer to submit a new proposal.

      (3) The bureau shall communicate to the importer, in writing,
the conditions for executing the proposed re-work.

     (4) A re-work approved by the bureau shall be carried out
under the supervision of a standards inspector.

      (5) The importer shall pay the supervision fee for the re-work
as specified in paragraph 5 of Schedule 2 to these Regulations.

18.   Factory inspection
      (1) A manufacturer who is not certified by the bureau or
registered by any competent authority and who intends to import raw
materials, machinery or any related direct inputs for a manufacturing
process shall apply to the bureau for exemption of the commodities
from Pre-export Verification of Conformity to Standards.

     (2) The bureau shall carry out a factory inspection to ascertain
the existence of the factory before issuing an exemption under
subregulation (1).
                             6129
      (3) The importer shall pay the factory inspection fees specified
in paragraph 6 of Schedule 2 to these Regulations.

19.   Verification of commodities at owner’s premises
      (1) An importer who wishes to have his or her commodities
inspected at a place other than a customs bonded warehouse or a port
of entry, may apply to the bureau in writing.

     (2) The bureau shall review the request submitted under
subregulation (1) and may grant or reject it.

     (3) The importer shall pay the verification fees specified in
paragraph 7 of Schedule 2 to these Regulations.

20. Revocation of S.I. No. 69 of 2021
The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Inspection and Clearance
of Import) Regulations, 2021 are revoked.




                                6130
                             SCHEDULES

                             SCHEDULE 1

                                         Regulations 5(1), 7(1), 8(1) and 10

                                     PART 1

       CATEGORIES OF COMMODITIES SUBJECT TO PRE-
       EXPORT VERIFICATION OF CONFORMITY TO
       STANDARDS.

1.    Group I      Toys.
2. Group II        Electricals and electronics; including solar panels and
		                 systems.
3.    Group III    Automotive products and inputs.
4.    Group IV     Chemical commodities.
5.    Group V      Mechanical materials and gas appliances; including
                   construction materials and items.
6.    Group VI     Textiles, leather, plastic and rubber.
7.    Group VII    Furniture; including wood and metal articles.
8.    Group VIII   Paper and stationery.
9.    Group IX     Protective safety equipment.
10.   Group X      Food and food products.
11.   Group XI     Used commodities; including used motor vehicles.




                                  6131
                                      PART 2
                                                            Regulation 5 (2)

COMMODITIES EXEMPT FROM PRE-EXPORT VERIFICATION
         OF CONFORMITY TO STANDARDS

1.    A consignment whose Free on Board (FOB) value does not exceed
      US$ 2000, except for used motor vehicles.
2.    Consignments of commodities profiled as low risk.
3.    Consignments of imports by importers profiled as low risk and
      registered as Authorised Economic Operators (AEO).
4.    Government project specific commodities whose procurement has
      an inbuilt or demonstrated quality assurance system that guarantees
      conformity to national standards.
5.    Raw materials and direct inputs used in the manufacturing process,
      including packaging material imported for use in a manufacturing
      process and not for sale.
6.    Diplomatic cargo.
7.    Personal effects of returning residents and expatriates.
8.    Commodities manufactured in or originating from a Partner State of
      the East African Community.
9.    Industrial machinery and accessories; including spare parts for a
      manufacturing process and not for re-sale.
10.   Farm machinery, agro processing equipment and spare parts not for
      resale.
11.   Mining equipment and spares not for resale.
12.   Branded or engraved hospitality and tourism industry equipment;
      excluding vehicles.
13.   Classified military, police, prisons and State House cargo.
14.   Religious books and literature such as Bibles, Qurans and other related
      printed matter.
                                   6132
                                       PART 3

                                                          Regulation 10 (1) (c)

 COMMODITIES EXEMPT FROM DESTINATION INSPECTION

1.   Commodities whose Cost Insurance and Freight (CIF) value does not
     exceed   US$   1300 with   the   exception   of   food,   baby products,
     sanitary pads, cosmetics,  tungsten  filament  bulbs,  electric cables,   
     compact   fluorescent   lamps,   portable   socket outlets or extension
     sockets, flat irons, electric kettles, solar    lanterns, energy    saving   
     bulbs,   solar   battery chargers,  solar  panels,  electric  plugs,  water  
     heaters, electric  sockets,  electric  switches,  electric  blenders, shovels,
     garden hoes, pick axes, machetes and cement.

2.   Raw materials and direct inputs in a manufacturing process; including
     packaging material imported for use in a manufacturing process and
     not for sale.

3.   Industrial machinery and accessories; including spare parts brought in
     for a manufacturing process and not for re-sale.

4.   Farm machinery, agro processing equipment, and spare parts not for
     resale.

5.   Diplomatic cargo accompanied by a diplomatic note and which is
     clearly for personal or office use.

6.   Personal   effects of returning residents and expatriates.

7.   Commodities manufactured in a Partner State of the East African
     Community with a valid certification permit and bearing a notified
     product certification mark.

8.   Classified military, police, prisons and State House cargo.

9.   Religious books and literature such as Bibles, Qurans and other related
     printed matter.

                                    6133
                                SCHEDULE 2

                                      Regulations 5(1), 7(2), 10(4), 16(7),
                                                   17(5), 18(3) and 19(3)

     FEES AND CHARGES FOR IMPORT INSPECTION AND
                    CLEARENCE

1.   The inspection fees and charges shall be based on the Free On Board
     (FOB) value of the import shipment as follows—

     (a)   fees for unregistered commodities: 0.500% of Free on Board
           (FOB) value but in any case not less than USD 235 and not
           more that USD 3,000;

     (b)   fees for registered commodities: 0.45% of Free on Board (FOB)
           value but in any case not less than USD 235 and not more that
           USD 3,000;

     (c)   Fees for licensed commodities: 0.25% of Free on Board (FOB)
           value but in any case not less than USD 235 and not more that
           USD 3,000;

     (d)   fees for the inspection of used vehicles shall depend on the
           country of origin or export and shall be as follows—
           (i)     Japan – US$ 140;
           (ii)    Singapore – US$ 200;
           (iii)   United Kingdom – US$ 200 or GBP 125;
           (iv)    South Africa – US$ 220;
           (v)     United Arab Emirates – US$ 125; and
           (vi)    Other countries – US$ 140.

2.   Fees for destination inspection: 0.500% of Cost Insurance and Freight
     (CIF) value, but in any case not less than USD 235 and not more that
     USD 3,000 but shall not be applicable for consignments whose total
     cost in freight value is less than US$1300.

                                  6134
3.   Samples subjected to laboratory analysis: the importer shall pay
     the charges for the analysis as may be determined by the laboratory
     carrying out the analysis.

4.   Fees for release under seal: US$ 100 or the equivalent in Uganda
     Shillings.

5.   Fees for supervision of re-work: US$100 per day or the equivalent in
     Uganda Shillings.

6.   Fees for factory inspection under the Pre-export Verification of
     Conformity Exemption program: US$ 100 or the equivalent in Uganda
     Shillings.

7.   Fees for verification at owner’s premises: US$ 100 or the equivalent in
     Uganda Shillings.

8.   In respect of the import of a commodity of the category specified
     in Part II of Schedule 3 to the Uganda National Bureau Standards
     (Certification) Regulations, 2021, the fees prescribed in Part II of
     Schedule 3 to the Uganda National Bureau Standards (Certification)
     Regulations, 2021 shall apply to the acquisition of a digital conformity
     mark for each unit of imported commodity in that category.




                                  6135
Cross Reference
East African Community Standardisation, Quality Assurance,
Metrology and Testing Act, 2006.
Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Certification) Regulations,
2021, S.I. No. 68 of 2021.




                                    HON. FRANCIS MWEBESA,
                    Minister of Trade, Industries and Cooperatives.



                              6136
