                        SAINT VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES

                             PLANT       PROTECTION     ACT, 2005


j   SECTION
                                ARRANGEMENT         OF SECTIONS



                                            PART I

                                          PRELIMINARY

        1. Short title and commencement

        2. Interpretation

                                            PART II

                                       ADMINlSfRATION

        3. Powers of Minister

        4. Designation ofNPPO

        5. Duties ofNPPO

        6. Appointment or designation of inspectors

        7. Duties of inspectors

        8. Designation of official laboratories and analysts

       9. Plant quarantine stations

                                            PARTm

                                           IMPORTS

       10. Restrictions on importation

       11. Import permit


I      12. Inspection on importation

       13. Release of imports

       14. Minister may restrict certain imports

       15. Duty to report arrivals to the NPPO
                                        n

                                     PARTlY

                                     EXPORTS

16. Restriction on export

17. Inspection of exports



                                     PART V

             CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION OF PESTS

18. Duty of occupier to notify NPPO

19. Order declaring a quarantine

20. Expiration of Order

21. Action where quarantine pest is present

22. Service of notice in absence of occupier

23. Declaration of phytosanitary emergency

24. Expiration of declaration

25. Declaration of pest free or low pest prevalence area

                                      PART VI

                                   ENFORCEMENT

 26. Power of entry and search

 27. Seizure and notice of seizure

 28. Storage, removal etc.

 29. Forfeiture

 30. Confiscation and disposal

 31. Protection of action taken in good faith

 32. Limitation on Liability
                                       III


33. Compensation

34. Proceedings presumed to be valid

35. Offences

36. Penalties



                                 PART        vn
                             MISCELLANEOUS

37. Appeal

38. Regulations etc.

39. Repeal and savings

40. Act to bind Crown
                                              419




                                          @
                                          ~
                         SAINT VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES


                                   ACT NO. 16 OF 2005

                                          I ASSENT

                                                           DR. FREDERICK BALLANTYNE
[L.S.]                                                                   Governor-General
                                                                        25th October, 2005

AN ACT to prevent the introduction and to control the spread of plant
   pests, to protect plant resources; to facilitate trade in plants and plant
   products, and to regulate matters related thereto.

                                                          [By Proclamation]

    BE IT ENACTED by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the House of Assembly of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and by the authority of the same as follows:-


                                  PART I

                              PRELIMINARY

     1.   (1) This Act may be cited as the Plant Protection Act 2005.           Short  title and
                                                                                commencement
         (2) This Act shall come into operation on such date as the
Governor-General may appoint by Proclamation l?ublished in the Gazette.
     2.   In this Act,
                                                                                Interpretation
          "affected" means infected or infested with a pest;
          "area" means an area, place or site of production;
          "area of low pest prevalence" means an area, whether all or part
               of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as identified by the
               Minister, in which a specific pest occurs at low levels and
               which is subject to effective surveillance,     control or
               eradication measures;
                         420

No. 16             Plant Protection                                   2005


         "beneficial organism" means an organism including fungi,
             bacteria, virus, virus-like organism and invertebrate or other
             animal, which is declared by the Minister in writing to be
             beneficial to flora or agricultural production;

         "consignment" means a quantity of plants, plant products or
             other regulated articles being moved from one country to
             another and covered,       when required,  by a single
             phytosanitary certificate;

         "contain" means apply phytosanitary measures in and around
              an infested area to prevent the spread of a pest;

         "container" means a box, bag, or other receptacle in which plants,
              plant products or other regulated articles that may carry
              pests have been or are being transported;

         "conveyance" means any vessel, aircraft, vehicle, cart, container,
             animal, or other thing that can convey plants, plant products,
             pests, beneficial organisms, or other regulated articles from
             one place to another;

         "detain" means keep a consignment in official custody or
              confinement for phytosanitary reasons;

         "entry" means the movement of a pest into an area where it is not
              yet present, or present but not widely distributed and being
              officially controlled;

         "eradicate" means apply phytosanitary measures to eliminate a
              pest from an area;

         "establishment" means the perpetuation, for the foreseeable
              future, of a pest within an area after entry;

         "germplasrn" means a plant intended for use in breeding or
             conservation programmes;

         "Government" means the Government of Saint Vincent and the
             Grenadines;

         "import permit" means a permit in a form as may be prescribed;
                                            421

o. 16                                 Plant Protection                        2005


        "importer" means a person who, whether as owner, consignor,
            consignee, agent, broker or otherwise, is in possession of or
            in any way entitled to the custody of a plant, plant product,
            pest, beneficial organism or other regulated article landed or
            likely to be landed in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines from
            another country;

        "inspection" means official visual examination of plants, plant
             products or other regulated articles to determine ifpests are
             present or to determine compliance with phytosanitary
             requirements;

        "inspector" means a person appointed        or designated    under
             section 6;

        "introduction"    means the entry of a pest resulting        In its
             establishment in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines;

        "IPPC" means International Plant Protection Convention, as may
            be amended from time to time;

        "IPPC Secretariat" means the Secretariat of the International Plant
            Protection Convention;

        "Minister" means the Minister responsible for agriculture;

        "Ministry" means the Ministry responsible for agriculture;

        "National Plant Protection Organisation" or "NPPO" means the
             official unit designated under section 4 to discharge the
             functions assigned to that unit under the IPPC;

        "occupier", in relation to any land or building, means a person in
            actual occupation thereof;

        "official" means established,   authorised or performed by the
             NPPO;

        "official control" means the active enforcement of mandatory
             phytosanitary requirements and the application ofmandatory
             phytosanitary procedures with the objective of eradicating
             or containing quarantine pests or for the management of
             regulated non-quarantine pests;
                          422

No. 16             Plant Protection                                   2005


         "outbreak" means an isolated pest population, recently detected
              and expected to survive for the immediate future;

         "owner", in relation to any thing, includes any person having for
             the time being the possession, custody, or control thereof;

         "packaging" means any material used to pack, contain, or keep
             plants, plant products or other regulated articles;

         "pest" means any species, strain or biotype of plant, animal, or
              pathogenic agent injurious to plants or plant products;

         "pest free area" means an area in which a specific pest does not
              occur as demonstrated by scientific evidence and in which,
              where appropriate,    this condition is being officially
              maintained;

         "pest risk analysis" means the process of evaluating biological
              or other scientific and economic evidence to determine
              whether a pest should be regulated and the strength of any
              phytosanitary measures to be taken against it;

         "phytosanitary certificate"   means a certificate patterned after
             the model certificate     of the IPPC, and which may be
             prescribed;

         "phytosanitary emergency" means an emergency declared under
             section 23;

         "phytosanitary   measure" means any legislation or official
             procedure having the purpose of preventing the introduction
             or spread of quarantine pests, or limiting the economic impact
             of regulated non-quarantine pests;

         "plant products" means unmanufactured material of pi ant origin,
              including grain, and manufactured products which, by their
              nature or that of their processing, may create a risk for the
              introduction and spread of pests;

         "plants" means living plants and parts thereof, including seeds
              and germplasm;
                                              423

No. 16                                 Plant Protection                         2005


         "pre-clearance" means phytosanitary certification or clearance
              in the exporting country, performed by or under the
              supervision of the NPPO;

         "premises" means land or a building or other structure situated
             on land;

         "quarantine pest" means a pest of potential economic importance
             to the area endangered thereby, not yet present there, or
             present but not widely distributed and being officially
             controlled, and declared as such by Order;

         "regulated article" means a storage place, packaging, conveyance,
              container, soil, or other organism, object or material capable
              of harbouring or spreading pests, deemed to require
              phytosanitary measures, particularly where international
              transport is involved, and includes beneficial organisms;

         "regulated non-quarantine pest" means a pest which is not a
              quarantine pest, whose presence in plants for planting affects
              the intended use of those plants with an economically
              unacceptable impact, and which is therefore regulated in
              Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and which is declared as
              such by Order;

         "soil" means material wholly or partly derived from the upper
              layer of the earth's crust, which is capable of sustaining
              plant life and which contains solid organic substances such
              as parts of plants, humus, peat, or bark, but excluding any
              medium which is sterile, composed entirely of unused peat,
              or otherwise incapable of harbouring or transmitting pests;

         "surveillance" means an official process facilitating the collection
              and recording of data on pest occurrence or absence by
              monitoring or other procedures;

         "treatment" means an officially authorised procedure for killing
              or removing pests, or making pests infertile.
                                             424

No. 16                                Plant Protection                                     2005


                                                    PART II

                                              ADMINISIRATION

Powers of               3. (1) The primary responsibility for the administration of this Act
Minister           lies with the Minister.

                             (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Minister may in writing
                   delegate to the National Plant Protection Organisation, other government
                   officials or any other person the performance of specified powers subject
                   to conditions that may be specified.

Designation   of        4. (1) The Ministry responsible for agriculture is hereby designated
NPPO
                   the National Plant Protection Organisation.

                             (2) The Minister shall report the name of the NPPO to the IPPC
                   Secretariat.
Duties of NPPO         5.   The duties of the NPPO shall include:

                                (a) implementing the IPPC and the International Standards
                                    for Phytosanitary     Measures established      thereto,
                                    including the following responsibilities required under
                                    Article IV of the IPPC-

                                     (i)   issuing phytosanitary   certificates,

                                     (ii) carrying out surveillance      of growing plants,
                                          including areas under cultivation and wild flora,
                                          and of plants and plant products in storage or being
                                          transported, for the purpose of reporting the
                                          occurrence, outbreak, and spread of pests, and of
                                          controlling those pests,

                                     (iii) inspecting consignments        of plants and plant
                                           products and where appropriate, inspecting other
                                           regulated articles for the purpose of preventing the
                                           introduction or spread of pests, or both,

                                     (iv) carrying out pre-clearance        inspections   where
                                          requested,
                                    425

No. 16                       Plant Protection                         2005


         (v) disinfesting or disinfecting consignments of plants,
             plant products and other regulated articles,

         (vi) protecting endangered areas and designating,
              maintaining, and surveying pest free areas and
              areas of low pest prevalence,

         (vii) providing information to other countries concerning
               phytosanitary measures applied, either through
               pest risk analysis or by reference to applicable
               international standards,

         (viii) notifying trading partners of relevant instances of
               non-compliance with import requirements,

         (ix) ensuring    the phytosanitary        security    of
              consignments after certification and before export,

         (x) establishing audit and trace-back procedures for
             plants, plant products and other regulated articles
             for phytosanitary certification,

         (xi) establishing minimum qualifications for overseeing
              training and development of inspectors and other
              NPPOstaff,

         (xii) distributing information concerning regulated pests
               and the means of their prevention and control,

         (xiii)proposing, reviewing, and enforcing phytosanitary
               measures,

         (xiv)notifying    phytosani tary .measures   to other
              countries    in accordance   with international
              obligations, and

         (xv) providing information concerning import and export
              regulations in force, and technical requirements for
              plants, plant products and other regulated articles,
              on the request of any interested international,
              regional, or other national plant protection
              organisation;
                                             426

No. 16                                Plant Protection                                      2005


                                (b) enforcing this Act, as well as any other legislation
                                    relating to plant protection as may be specified;

                                (c) representing Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in
                                    bilateral, regional, and international fora related to
                                    phytosanitary matters;

                                (d) developing pest diagnostic, investigative and analytical
                                    capabilities as well as establishing laboratories and
                                    quarantine stations at places as may be considered
                                    necessary; and

                                (e) establishing procedures for accrediting quarantine
                                    stations, official analysts, official laboratories, or any
                                    other person or institution from the public or private
                                    sector involved in phytosanitary matters.

Appointment   or        6. The Public Service Conunission or the Ministry, as the case may
designation   of   be, may appoint or designate officers of the NPPO to carry out the duties
inspectors
                   assigned to inspectors under this Act.

Duties        of       7.   (1) The duties of inspectors shall include the following:
inspectors
                                (a) inspecting plants, plant products or other regulated
                                    articles under cultivation, in storage or in transit, in order
                                    to report the existence, outbreak, and spread of
                                    quarantine pests and regulated non-quarantine pests;
                                (b) inspecting consignments of plants, plant products or
                                    other regulated articles destined for import into or export
                                    from Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to determine
                                    whether they are affected, and where necessary, verify
                                    the pest status of consignments by taking samples or
                                    otherwise;

                                (c) ensuring the disinfestation        or disinfection       of
                                    consignments      of plants, plant products or other
                                    regulated articles destined for import into or export from
                                    Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as their
                                    containers, packaging, storage places, and transport
                                    facilities;
                                                427
No. 16                                   Plant Protection                                        2005

              (d) ensuring that where waste is being disposed of from-

                    (i)   aircraft, ships, and pleasure craft arriving in Saint
                          Vincent and the Grenadines, and

                    (ii) premises which process or wash imported plants,
                         plant products or other regulated articles,

                    no threat to plant resources in Saint Vincent and the
                    Grenadines is caused;

              (e) issuing phytosanitary certificates on behalf of the NPPO;

              (t)   inspecting and certifying exports of plants, plant
                    products and other regulated articles from Saint Vincent
                    and the Grenadines;

              (g) carrying out detection      activities to ensure the
                  maintenance of up-to-date information on the pest status
                  of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines;

              (h) enforcing the provisions of this Act;

              (i)   attending to other matters as may be prescribed.

           (2) An inspector may carry out an inspection under subsection
(1) (b) in the territory of an exporting country as a pre-clearance inspection
at the invitation of an exporting country.

          (3) In carrying out his duties under subsection (1) or (2), an
inspector shall, upon request, identify himselfby showing his identification
card or other proof of his appointment or designation.

      8. The Minister may designate laboratories to be official laboratories      Designation        of
and analysts to be official analysts to carry out analyses for the                official
administration of this Act.                                                       laboratories    and
                                                                                  analysts
      9. The NPPO may:                                                            Plant quarantine
                                                                                  stations
              (a) designate certain places as plant quarantine stations
                  where plants, plant products or other regulated articles
                  may be kept for phytosanitary observation, research,
                  inspection, testing, treatment, detention, or destruction.
                                                 428
No. 16                                    Plant Protection                                    2005


                                     (b) require that imported plants, plant products or other
                                         regulated articles be kept or cultivated at a plant
                                         quarantine station or at any other location identified by
                                         the NPPO and kept under the supervision of the NPPO
                                         for such time as the NPPO considers necessary.

                                                       PART ill

                                                       IMPORTS
Restrictions      on        10. (1) Plants, plant products and other regulated articles may be
importation            imported into Saint Vincent and the Grenadines only at the ports of entry
                       prescribed under this Act or any other Act.

                                 (2) The Minister, upon the advice of the NPPO, may require
                       that certain plants, plant products or other regulated articles not be
                       imported into Saint Vincent and the Grenadines except:

                                     (a) by virtue of an import permit granted under section 11
                                         (1);

                                     (b) they are accompanied by -

                                         (i)   an original phytosanitary certificate dated not more
                                               than thirty days before the entry of the articles
                                               into Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and

                                         (ii) any other documentation that may be prescribed;
                                              and

                                         (c) they meet al1 other requirements        that may be
                                             prescribed.

Import   permit             11. (1) Where an import permit is required under section 10 (2) (a),
                       an importer shall apply to the NPPO in the prescribed manner and shall
                       pay the prescribed fee, if any.

                                 (2) In evaluating an application for an import permit, the NPPO
                       shall apply existing international standards or conduct pest risk analysis
                       in order to determine the applicable phytosanitary requirements.
Inspection        on        12. (1) Plants, plant products and other regulated articles shall,
importation            upon importation into Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, be presented to
                       an inspector for inspection at the ports of entry prescribed under this Act
                       or any other Act.
                                            429
No. 16                                Plant Protection                                      2005


         (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), upon application by the
importer and where a container has been sealed and marked, certain plants,
plant products and other regulated articles may be inspected by an
inspector at their final destination, as may be prescribed.

         (3) Inspections carried out under subsection       (1) or (2) are
subject to the prescribed fee.

          (4) Inspections under subsection (1) or (2) shall be carried out
during regular working hours, except where the plants, plant products or
other regulated articles are in transit or extremely perishable or where
their entry has otherwise been delayed, in which case, upon application
by the importer and upon payment of the prescribed fee, the NPPO may
agree to an inspection being carried out at any other time.

      13. If upon inspection carried out under section 12 the inspector       Release of
determines that the imported plants, plant products or other regulated        imports

articles do not present a risk of the introduction and spread of pests, he
may release the consignment to the importer.

     14. The Minister may, on the advice of the NPPO, to protect plant        Minister         may
resources or the environment, or both:                                        restrict     certain
                                                                              imports
             (a) permit the entry of a plant, plant product or other
                 regulated article for scientific or experimental purposes,
                 subject to terms and conditions that may be considered
                 appropriate;

             (b) prohibit or restrict the entry of plants, plant products
                 or other regulated articles into Saint Vincent and the
                 Grenadines;

             (c) take any other necessary action to prevent             the
                 introduction or spread of quarantine pests.

      15. (1) A worker of the Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Postal         Duty to report
Corporation, private postal operator or private shipping concern or an        arrivals to the
                                                                              NPPO
official of the Customs Department, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Port Authority or the Royal Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Police Force
who has knowledge of the arrival of plants, plant products or other
regulated articles in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines shall forthwith
report the arrival to the NPPO and shall detain the plants, plant products
or other regulated articles.
                                              430

No. 16                                 Plant Protection                                       2005


                             (2) The NPPO shall take custody of any items detained under
                   subsection (1) within three days of their detention.

                            (3) A detention carried out under subsection (1) shall be deemed
                   to be an action taken by or on delegation from the NPPO.

                                                    PART IV

                                                    EXPORTS

Restriction   on         16. A person shall not export plants, plant products or other regulated
export             articles from Saint Vincent and the Grenadines unless he:

                                 (a) applies to the NPPO in the prescribed manner;

                                 (b) provides all documentations      that are prescribed;

                                 (c) makes the consignment available for inspection under
                                     section 17;

                                 (d) pays the prescribed fees.

Inspection    of         17. (1) The NPPO shall, upon application by an exporter under
exports
                   section 16, cause an inspection of the consignment to be carried out, and:

                                 (a) issue a phytosanitary    certificate in a form as may be
                                     prescribed where-

                                      (i)   the consignment meets the documentary and other
                                            requirements for import of the country to which
                                            the consignment is to be exported;

                                      (ii) the consignment satisfies any other requirements
                                           for export specified by the NPPO or any applicable
                                           law in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; or

                                 (b) deny the issue of a certificate where the requirements
                                     specified in subsection (1) (a) have not been met.

                             (2) Upon being issued a phytosanitary          certificate      under
                   subsection (1) (a), the exporter shall pay the prescribed fee.
                                             431

No. 16                                Plant Protection                                      2005


                                PART V

         CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION OF PESTS

     18. The occupier or owner of premises in which a thing that a person     Duty of occupier
suspects to be a pest is present or is suspected to be present shall notify   to notify    NPPO
the NPPO forthwith.

    19. (1) The Minister may, on the advice of the NPPO, by Order:            Order declaring     a
                                                                              quarantine
              (a) declare premises that are affected or are suspected of
                  being affected with a quarantine pest to be under
                  quarantine;

              (b) prescribe measures for the treatment or disposal of
                  plants, plant products or other regulated articles and
                  the treatment of conveyances whether or not they have
                  been found to be affected, in order to limit the spread
                  of quarantine pests;

              (c) prescribe the period of quarantine.

         (2) For the purpose of subsection (1), "to quarantine" includes:

              (a) to prohibit the movement of people, conveyances,
                  plants, plant products or other regulated articles from
                  or to a specified location;

              (b) to prohibit the planting or replanting of a specified
                  location;

              (c) to take any other measure which the Minister, on the
                  advice of the NPPO, considers necessary under the
                  circumstances.

     20. An Order made under section 19 (l)expires in respect of some         Expiration        of
or all of the affected premises when the Minister, on the advice of the       Order
NPPO, determines that:

              (a) the relevant quarantine pest is no longer present in the
                  premises in respect of which the quarantine was made;
                  and
                                                  432

No. 16                                     Plant Protection                                   2005


                                      (b) it is no longer necessary for the quarantine to be
                                          maintained in respect of some or all of the affected
                                          premises.

Action        where         21. If the NPPO believes that a quarantine pest is present on any
quarantine    pest is   premises, it shall:
present
                                      (a) require, by notice in writing, the owner or occupier of
                                          the premises, and if the NPPO considers it necessary,
                                          the owner or occupier of any premises in the vicinity,
                                          to take measures on his premises which the NPPO
                                          considers necessary to eradicate, contain or restrict
                                          the spread of the pest;

                                      (b) take measures for the treatment or disposal of plants,
                                          plant products or other regulated articles present on
                                          the premises.

Service of notice            22. If there is no person in actual occupation of any premises, or if
in absence of oc-
                        the occupier cannot be found, service of any notice under this Act may
cupier
                        be made by affixing the same in some conspicuous place on the premises,
                        and such affixing shall be deemed to be sufficient service for the purpose
                        of taking the measures authorised by section 21.

Declaration       of         23. (1) The Minister may, on the advice of the NPPO, by Order
phytosanitary           declare a phytosanitary emergency based on an inspection carried out
emergency
                        under this Act or on analysis of samples taken under section 26 (1) (d).

                                 (2) The NPPO shall take steps to bring a declaration to the
                        notice of persons likely to be affected by it.

Expiration         of        24. A declaration made under section 23 expires when the Minister,
declaration             on the advice of the NPPO, determines that the conditions giving rise to
                        the declaration of the phytosanitary emergency, no longer exist.

Declaration      of          25. (1) Where the NPPO is satisfied that a pest is not present in an
pestfree    or low
                        area, adopts phytosanitary measures to keep the area free of the pest,
pest prevalence
area                    and institutes a surveillance system to verify that the area remains free of
                        the pest, the Minister may declare it a pest-free area.

                                 (2) Where the PPO is satisfied that a pest occurs at low levels
                        in an area, adopts phytosanitary measures to keep the pest levels low
                                             433

No. 16                                Plant Protection                                      2005


and institutes a surveillance system to verify that the pest levels remain
low, the Minister may declare it an area oflow pest prevalence.

                                PART VI

                            ENFORCEMENT

    26. (1) For the purpose of detecting pests or ensuring compliance         Power    of   entry
with this Act, an inspector may:                                              and search

              (a) stop any conveyance, which the inspector believes on
                  reasonable grounds may harbour a pest;

              (b) subject to subsections (2) and (3), at a reasonable time,
                  enter and inspect any premises, not being a dwelling
                  house;

              (c) open any container, receptacle or other thing that the
                  inspector believes on reasonable grounds contains any
                  thing in respect of which this Act applies;

              (d) examine any thing in respect of which this Act applies
                  and take samples of it.

          (2) An inspector may not enter a dwelling house except with
the consent of the occupier or under the authority of a warrant issued by
a magistrate.

          (3) An inspector may, with a warrant issued by a magistrate,
enter and search any premises, where there is reasonable cause to believe
that an offence against this Act has taken or is taking place.

          (4) An inspector may, in the performance of his duties under
this section, be accompanied and assisted by a police officer.

      27. (1) In the course of an inspection carried out under this Act, if   Seizure and nonce
an inspector believes on reasonable grounds that the provisions of this       of seizure
Act have been or are being contravened, or any plant, plant product or
other regulated article presents a risk of the introduction or spread of
pests, the inspector may seize the plant, plant product or other regulated
article:
                                                  434

No. 16                                     Plant Protection                                    2005


                                     (a) by means of or in relation to which he believes on
                                         reasonable grounds that the contravention has been
                                         or is being committed;

                                     (b) that he believes on reasonable grounds will afford
                                         evidence in respect of the contravention    of the
                                         provisions of this Act.

                                 (2) An inspector who seizes and detains a plant, plant product
                       or other regulated article under this Act shall, as soon as is practicable,
                       advise the owner of the plant, plant product or other regulated article of
                       the reason for the seizure and that some or all of the plant, plant product
                       or other regulated article may be subject within a specified time to any
                       action specified in section 28.

                                 (3) An inspector, who seizes and detains a plant, plant product
                       or other regulated article may forego advising the owner of the plant,
                       plant product or other regulated article of the reason for the seizure if, ill
                       the opinion of the inspector, it is urgently required to destroy the plant,
                       plant product or other regulated article or the giving of the reason for the
                       seizure is impractical.

Storage,     removal        28. An inspector who seizes and detains a plant, plant product or
etc.                   other regulated article under this Act, or any other person designated by
                       the NPPO, may:

                                     (a) store, treat, quarantine or dispose of the plant, plant
                                         product or other regulated article at the place where it
                                         was seized or move it to any other place for storage,
                                         treatment, quarantine or disposition;

                                     (b) require its owner to store, treat, dispose of, export or
                                         move it to any other place.
Forfeiture                  29. (1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act,
                       the magistrate's court may, in addition to any penalty imposed, order that
                       any thing used in the perpetration of the offence be forfeited to the
                       Crown and shall be disposed of as the Minister may direct.

                                 (2) Where the owner of a thing that is seized and detained
                       under this Act consents to the seizure and detention, it is thereby forfeited
                       to the Crown and shall be disposed of as the Minister may direct.
                                             435

No. 16                                 Plant Protection                                       2005


    30. (1) An inspector may confiscate and dispose of:                        Confiscation      and
                                                                               disposal
              (a) any plant, plant product or other regulated article that,
                  after its entry into Saint Vincent and the Grenadines or
                  after treatment, lies unclaimed for a prescribed time;

              (b) any thing that the inspector believes on reasonable
                  grounds is a pest;

          (2) An inspector who confiscates a plant, plant product or other
regulated article or a pest shall, forthwith, advise the owner of the reason
for its confiscation.

     31. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against      Protection         of
an inspector for any act or omission which is done in good faith in            action    taken    in
                                                                               good faith
pursuance of the exercise of duties under this Act.

     32. Subject to section 33, the Crown shall bear no liability for loss     Limitation         of
resulting from the destruction or disposal of plants, plant products or        liability

other regulated articles carried out under the authority of this Act.

     33. (1) The Cabinet may, out of money voted for that purpose by           Compensation
Parliament, order compensation to be paid to occupiers or owners of
premises in respect of healthy plants destroyed in order to restrict the
spread of pests.

          (2) No compensation is payable to a person who commits an
offence under this Act and claims compensation in respect of any premises
or thing by means of or in relation to which the offence was committed.

      34. No act or proceedings taken under this Act shall be invalid          Proceedings
merely by reason of any formal irregularity not affecting the merit of the     presumed    to be
                                                                               valid
case.

    35. A person who:                                                          Offences

              (a) grows, possesses, sells, offers for sale, transports, or
                  distributes in any manner any plants, plant products or
                  other regulated articles knowing that they are affected
                  by a quarantine pest;

              (b) assaults, resists, threatens, intimidates, or obstructs
                  an inspector exercising lawful powers under this Act;
                                      436

No. 16                          Plant Protection                                  2005


                         (c) tampers with any samples taken under section 26 (1)
                             (d);

                         (d) fails to comply with an order or direction lawfully made
                             or given under this Act;

                         (e) imports any plants, plant products or other regulated
                             articles at a port of entry that is not prescribed by this
                             Act or any other Act;

                         (f)   imports any plants, plant products or other regulated
                               articles contrary to any requirements prescribed under
                               this Act;

                         (g) intentionally introduces, or causes the introduction or
                             spread of a quarantine pest;

                         (h) exports any plants, plant products or other regulated
                             articles except in accordance with Part IV;

                         (i)   fails to safeguard the phytosanitary   security of a
                               consignment      after the issue of a phytosanitary
                               certificate under section 17 (1 )(a);

                         G) fails to allow a search, inspection or taking of samples
                               authorised under this Act;

                         (k) knowingly or recklessly provides information which is
                             false for the purpose of obtaining any document under
                             this Act; or

                         (1) alters, forges, defaces,    or destroys   any document
                             issued under this Act;
            commits an offence.

Penalties       36. A person who commits an offence under this Act is liable on
            summary conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or to
            imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or to both fine and
            imprisonment.
Appeal           37. (1) A person who is aggrieved by a decision or action of an
            inspector or the NPPO under this Act may lodge an appeal with the
            Minister within three days of the decision or action in respect of which
            the appeal is made.
                                             437

No. 16                                 Plant Protection                                     2005


         (2) Cabinet shall appoint a Tribunal to hear the appeal which
shall consist of one or more persons but not more than three persons.

         (3) The decision of the Tribunal    is [mal and conclusive and is
not subject to further appeal.

                                PART    vn
                           MISCElLANEOUS

     38. (1) The Minister may make regulations to give effect to the          Regulations
provisions of this Act.

          (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of
subsection (1), the Minister may make regulations prescribing all or any
of the following matters:

             (a) procedures to be followed by inspectors in the exercise
                 of their duties under this Act;

             (b) conditions for the importation and exportation of any
                 plants, plant products, or other regulated articles;

             (c) the circumstances     under which phytosanitary
                 requirements for import may be modified based on pest
                 risk analysis;

             (d) the manner in which permits and certificates shall be
                 issued under this Act, and their form and content;

             (e) procedures      and    guidelines    for   pre-clearance
                 inspections;

             (f)   the procedure by which an importer may apply for
                   inspection to take place at any location other than at
                   the port of entry prescribed under this Act or any other
                   Act outside of regular working hours;

             (g) the manner in which containers must be sealed and
                 marked if they are to be inspected at their final
                 destination rather than at the port of entry;

             (h) the way in which plants, plant products and other
                 regulated articles must be stored or transported in Saint
                 Vincent and the Grenadines;
                                                438

No. 16                                    Plant Protection                                   2005


                                   (i)   the procedures to be adopted for the treatment of
                                         imported plants, plant products and other regulated
                                         articles;

                                   G)    the location, management, and functioning of any plant
                                         quarantine stations established under this Act;

                                   (k) the requirements for the control and care of regulated
                                       articles kept or maintained at plant quarantine stations;

                                   (I)   the manner in which inspectors shall arrange for the
                                         destruction, removal, uprooting, or treatment of plants,
                                         plant products and other regulated articles within an
                                         area or location declared to be under quarantine;

                                   (m) the period within which it shall not be lawful to plant or
                                       re-plant any thing in all or part of an area declared to be
                                       under quarantine;

                                   (n) the manner in which any samples may be taken, marked
                                       and retained under this Act;

                                   (0) the process by which any area may be declared pest-
                                       free or an area of low pest prevalence;

                                   (P) procedures relating to appeals;

                                   (q) fees recoverable in respect of services provided under
                                       this Act;

                                   (r)   criteria for the declaration of a phytosanitary emergency
                                         under section 23;

                                   (s) any other measures to be taken for the purpose of
                                       preventing the introduction or spread of pests.

Repeal and savings       39. (I) The Plant Protection Act is hereby repealed.
Act No. 10 of
1941                           (2)   otwithstanding subsection (1), subsidiary legislation
                     issued under or made by virtue of the Plant Protection Act, No. 10 of 1941,
                     shall remain in force, so far as they are not inconsistent with this Act,
                     until they have been repealed by subsidiary legislation issued or made
                                           439

No. 16                               Plant Protection                                  2005


under the provisions of this Act, and shall be deemed for all purposes to
have been made thereunder.

    40. This Act shall bind the Crown.                                      Act to bind Crown




    Passed in the House of Assembly this 3rd day of May,2005.


                                                              NICOLE HERBERT
                                                          Clerk of the House of Assembly


          Printed by the Government Printer at the Government Printing Office,
                     Carnpden Park, St. Vincent and the Grenadines.

                                          2005                              [Price $12.60]
