                         The Government of the Republic of China on (Taiwan) collaborated
                         with the Government of St. Vincent and the Grenadines to invest in a
                         project geared towards revitalizing the Banana Industry. The project
budgeted at an estimated Four Million, One Hundred and Eighty-five Thousand United
States Dollars (US$4,185,000), will be executed over a period of four (4) years.
The Project aims to address key problems such as low unit output per acre which can be ad-
dressed by technical improvement through upgrading farmer’s capability of cultivation man-
agement and the capacity of extension in the Ministry of Agriculture. The objective of the
project is to increase unit output to 25 tons per hectare in banana plantation.
At a signing ceremony held on Tuesday 7th May 2019, Ambassador of China on Taiwan, His
Excellency, Mr. Calvin Ho stated that the agriculture industry plays a major role and sets the
foundation for the development of any country.” He indicated that the project will play a
meaningful role in reviving the industry and looks forward to working alongside the neces-
sary personnel to achieve the desired goals of the project.
Hon Saboto Caesar, Minister of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, Rural Transformation, In-
dustry and Labour expressed his pleasure with the numerous developments made within the
agricultural sector, such as, increase in cocoa production, exportation of cattle, cultivation of
medical cannabis etc. He viewed this project as a step towards getting the agricultural sector
back to its previous state as one of the most lucrative industry in St. Vincent and Grenadines.
He expressed his gratitude to the Gov-
ernment of Taiwan for deciding to fund
the project.
Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, Rural
Transformation, Industry and Labour,
Mr. Raymond Ryan expressed his opti-
mism for the banana industry in the near
future.
Mr. Ashley Cain, Chief Agricultural Of-
ficer, dreamt that one day the youths of
this land will recognized the landscapes
and seascapes which we have here, we
have a potential in our country for viable
sustainable industry and I would want
                                             His Excellency Mr. Calvin Ho and Agriculture Minister Hon. Saboto
them to learn the science, the business
                                             Caesar exchange agreement documents at the launch of the Banana
and other dimensions. He claimed that        Revitalization Project.
with support from the Taiwanese, we
could rebuild not only the banana indus-
try but also other rural areas.
Representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Government of the Republic of China (Taiwan) along with farmers
at the signing of the agreement on the Banana Revitalization Project.
                      The Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture, IICA, is
                      continuing to support St. Vincent and the Grenadines’ to build resilience
                      to disaster impacts, through its technical cooperation agenda for the
                      country.
In its latest initiative, IICA introduced a new methodology for assessing community resil-
ience. This was taught to eighteen participants drawn from across public sector agencies, at a
workshop held July 15-18, 2019 in Kingstown and the rural community of Troumaca in the
North West. Dr. Chaney St. Martin, IICA’s International Specialist in Soil and Water Man-
agement, facilitated the workshop over the course of the four days.
According to IICA’s Technical Specialist at the Delegation in St. Vincent and the Grena-
dines, Michael Dalton, the use of the methodology allowed for a determination of a commu-
nity’s priority areas of concern in relation to climate-related impacts, and the courses of ac-
tions they would wish to see implemented to address those concerns and in the process im-
prove resilience of their community. As an immediate output, participants were able to in-
teract with community stakeholders in the target area - North Leeward - and propose poten-
tial courses of actions to address these issues.
Mr. Dalton further indicated that IICA’s action were part of a continuous process of support
by the Institute to build resilience in the agricultural sector and rural communities. IICA’s
support in this regard he said entailed :




                                                  Michael Dalton, IICA’s Technical Specialist give opening re-
                                                  marks at the workshop
   Undertaking studies on climate-related impacts on the environment and farming, de-
    signed to inform the actions of technicians, policy makers and other stakeholders in the
    agricultural sector;
   Education and training of technicians and other stakeholders in the area of climate sci-
    ence and natural resource management;
   Short term project activities to provide relief to farming communities immediately after
    disaster impacts; and
   Implementation of climate smart adaptation measures on farms to demonstrate to farm-
    ers, the use of such technologies in their farming practices.
He emphasized that these efforts have all been in support of a wider programme of action by
the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, Rural Transformation, Industry and Labour
and the state as a whole to build resilience to climate change as detailed in goal four of the
National Economic and Social Development Plan (2013-2025) for St. Vincent and the
Grenadines.
More information:
Michael Dalton, IICA’s Technical Specialist at the Delegation in St. Vincent and the Grena-
dines.
                       Fruits and vegetables are some of the most important foods. Good
                       quality fruits and vegetables are naturally healthy and consist of vita-
                       mins and minerals that play an essential role in the normal functioning
                       of the human body.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Trans-
formation, Forestry, Fisheries, Industry
and Labour is continuing its quest to en-
sure that the citizens of St. Vincent and
the Grenadines have sustainable food
sources. Borrowing the theme for World
Food Day 2018, “A Zero Hunger World
is possible by 2020,” And how is this pos-
sible?

It’s through the Home Gardening initia-        Mrs. Currel Thompson-Fergus, Senior Technical Officer in the Ru-
tive of the Rural Transformation Unit          ral Transformation Unit giving some opening remarks.
within the Ministry of Agriculture in col-
laboration with the Ministry of Education,
National Reconciliation and Information.
They hosted an award ceremony for the
schools that took part in the 2018 National
School Gardening Competition.
At a prize giving ceremony held on 8th
March 2019, Mrs. Currel Thompson-
Fergus, Senior Technical Officer in the
Rural Transformation Unit mentioned that
the competition commenced in April
2018, where twenty-six schools registered      Senior Education Officer in the Ministry of Education, Mrs. Joy-
to participate in three (3) categories which   celyn Blake-Browne giving remarks at the event.
consisted of crops only, livestock only and
Mixed (Crops and Livestock). She ex-              Feeding Program in schools across the country,
pressed her admiration for the work done          and encouraged the schools to get involved in
by each school. She sees this competition         the competition as this could complement the
as a means of accomplishing one of the            School Feeding Program as far as the con-
Ministry’s goals, “Youths in Agriculture”.        sumption of vegetables is concerned. She ex-
                                                  pressed her gratitude to the Ministry of Agri-
Senior Education Officer in the Ministry          culture, Teachers and parents for their efforts
of Education, Mrs. Joycelyn Blake-                in ensuring that the children got involved in
Browne congratulated all participating            this activity.
schools and winners. She mentioned that
there is an improvement in the School
                                         The Winners:

            Positions                                            Schools
                     1st                                   Sandy-Bay Gov. School

                     2nd                                  Adelphi Secondary School

                    3rd                                    Mustique Gov. School




2nd place winners of the 2018 National School Gardening
Competition, Adelphi Secondary School




                                                             1st place winners of the 2018 National School
3rd place winners of the 2018 National School Gardening      Gardening Competition, Sandy-Bay Gov.
Competition, Mustique Gov. School.                           School
                        In an effort to reignite an interest in the Fisheries Sector, the Fisheries
                        Division has been exposing the nation’s youths to different job oppor-
                        tunities available in the fisheries sector through its annual Fisheries
                        Summer Program.

This year, forty youths participated in the Program which ran from the 15th -24th of July un-
der the theme, “Changing perception through Fishery Education.”

The aim of the programme was to:
 Increase knowledge about the marine environment and fisheries management.

   Encourage appreciation for marine resources
   Provide basic hands-on training in navigation and safety, fishing gear and methods, prod-
    uct development and other aspects of fisheries, and
   Further promote their studies in fisheries related areas.
At the opening ceremony, Mr. Kris Isaacs, Senior Fisheries Officer said, “Young people con-
stitute a large part of St. Vincent and the Grenadines and it is you, the youths who will have to
live longer with the consequences of the current environmental decisions that we as adults
make.” He went on to highlight a few environmental issues that we are currently facing, such
as climate change, bio-diversity loss and balancing economic growth with environmental
stewardship. He stressed the importance of instilling good teaching habits to the students as it
relates to how they can utilize natural resources to ensure reduction of wastage and enabling
persons to be more responsible for the sustainability and protection of the environment and
resources around the country.

Dr. Rowena Kirby-Straker of Wake Forest University, North Carolina, also a past employee of
the Fisheries Division and founder of the Fisheries Summer Programme, which started in
2010, encouraged the students to take part in the activities as they were a lot of potential for
entrepreneurship and research. Commenting on the summer programme, she exclaimed, “It
can be an experience that can change your life!”

The summer program was facilitated by Mr. Ernie Bracken, Senior Fisheries Assistant and
constituted of two teams: Orange shirts- Lion Fish and Grey shirts – Coral Reef. Other than
being sensitized on the different careers in the fisheries sector, the participants were taught
several beach safety tips by the St. Vincent and the Grenadines Coast Guard, involved in a
treasure hunt, fishing competition and beach cleanup activities.
Fisheries Summer Program Activities
