General Plant Quarantine Import Requirements

Plant Quarantine is one of the first lines of
the introduction of unwanted plant pest and
diseases into any country. Unwanted pests
and diseases could seriously affect agricultural
crops of economic importance. The impact
of Moko and black sigatoka on bananas, the}
mango seed weevil on the mango industry
and the fruit fly on a number of different fruits
are prime examples of what unwanted pests
and diseases could do to the agricultural sector,

One of the responsibilities of the Plant Quarantine
Unit is to ensure thatthe Phytosanitary
requirements for the import of plant, plant
material and produce into St. Vincent and the
Grenadines are met. This is achieved. through
an import certification and;inspection process:
For a consignment of plant, plant material or
produce to meet the required import
requirements:
PERMISSION IS GRANTED TO IMPORT THE ABOVE
PLANTS/PLANTING MATERIALS AND PLANT
PRODUCES ON THE CONDITION THAT: |
(a)The consignment is free from soil, trash, organic
matter, pest and diseases;
(b) The consignment is accompanied by a
Phytosanitary Certificate;
(c) The consignment will be subject to inspection
by a Plant Protection/Quarantine Officer, and
Teleased if found to confirm with the Phytosanitary

lations:
(d)The consignment must be obtained from
t free area.
(ey the consignment must have label that is

clearly visible and legible
(f)Meet Specific condition (s) of entry.

Import permits are required for:

7- Importation of plants, ornamentals
plants, plant parts and seeds for
cultivation and propagation or fo
personal use;

2:-Importation of plants and plant
products used for processing or
for any other purpose:

3-Importation of cereals, pulses,

bulbs and other plant materials for
consumption;

Please note the following are only allowed
under special Import Requirements:

7- Importation of live insects,
microbial cultures, algae, bio-control
agents and mushrooms;

2:lmportation of soil, peat, organic
fertilizers and other growing media
of plant origin;

3:Impodified Organisms (GMO) for
research purpose:

4-Sand, stones and aggregates

5-Used Tires

6-Used Vehicles

7- potentially contaminated equipment
(such as used agricultural, military

and earthmoving equipment)

&:+ packaging materials including
dunnage (for example loose wood
or matting)

*The above is not an exhausted list. Please

Consult the Plant Quarantine Unit for
additional information.

NB: An application for an Import permit
shall be made at least seven (7) days. to
six (6) weeks prior to the importation of
the consignment.

