                 LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA

                       Importation Protection      ( C A P . 211                     1




                      CHAPTER 211
     T H E IMPORTATION PROTECTION ACT


Arrangement of Sections
Section
 1. Short title.
 2. Interpretation.
 3. Power to make regulations generally.
 4. No importation of secondhand wearing apparel without
         certificate.
 5. Powers of Comptroller of Customs to deal with second-
         hand wearing apparel.
 6 . Personal effects.
 7 . Offences and penalties.




               IMPORTATION PROTECTION


                                        (1st December, 1916.)



     1. This Act may be cited as the Importation Protec- Short title.
tion Act.

    2. In this Act-                                                Interpretation.


    "importer" includes consignee;

    "secondhand" includes worn, used or cast off;
     <<
          wearing apparel" includes all garments and clothing
            of every kind whatsoever, household linen and rags
            of all descriptions.
                                  LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA

2                   CAP. 211)           Importation Protection


Power to make
regulations
                          3. (1) The Cabinet shall have power to make regula-
generally.          tions under this Act for the prevention of danger arising to
                    public health from the importation, preparation, storage and
                    distribution of all articles imported into Antigua and Barbuda
                    intended for sale for human consumption or use, and, without
                    prejudice to the generality of the powers so conferred, the
                    regulations may-
                             ( a ) provide for the examination and taking of
                         samples of any such articles;
                              ( 6 ) provide for the recovery of any charges
                         authorized to be made by the regulations for any ser-
                         vices performed thereunder.

                         ( 2 ) For the purposes of regulations made under this Act
                    articles commonly used for the food or use of man shall be
                    deemed to be intended for sale for human consumption or
                    use unless the contrary is proved.

No importation
of secondhand
                        4. It shall not be lawful to import into Antigua and
wearing apparel     Barbuda any secondhand wearing apparel unless the importer
without             produces to the Comptroller of Customs a certificate from
certificate.
                    the Health Officer of the port or town of export as to the
                    innocuous nature of the articles imported.

Powers of
Comptroller of
                         5 . If any secondhand wearing apparel is imported and
Customs to deal     the importer is unable to produce a certificate as required
with secondhand     by the preceding section, the Comptroller of Customs may,
wearing apparel.
                    in his discretion, have the same fumigated or disinfected to
                    his satisfaction and hand the same over to the importer:
                         Provided that the importer first reimburses the
                    Comptroller of Customs for all the costs incurred in the pro-
                    cess of fumigation or disinfection.

Personal effects.        6. Nothing in this Act shall apply to the wearing ap-
                    parel if imported for his personal use, contained in the effects
                    of a bond fide traveller.

    Offences and
    penalties.
                          7. If any person wilfully neglects or refuses to obey
                    or carry out, or obstructs the execution of any provision of
                    this Act or of any regulation made under section 3, he shall
                    be liable on summary conviction to a penalty not exceeding
                    fifteen hundred dollars and in the case of a continuing offence
              LAWS OF ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA

                    Importation Protection      (CAP. 2 1 1    3


to a further penalty not exceeding five hundred dollars for
every day during which the offence continues with or without
imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months for the
former offence and a period of three months for the conti-
nuing offence.
