M1 L.R.O. 2007                    Health Services                                         CAP. 44
                          (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969                                          regs.1-2




                               Health Services                                                      Cap. 44.


               HEALTH SERVICES (FOOD HYGIENE)                                                       1969/232.
                     REGULATIONS, 1969                                                              1978/111.
                                                                                                    1996/48.
                                                                                                    1999/88.
Authority: These Regulations were made on 7th November, 1969 by the Minister under
           section 10 of the Health Services Act.

Commencement: 1st January, 1970.

  1. These Regulations may be cited as the Health Services (Food
Hygiene) Regulations, 1969.

                                          PART I

                                    Preliminary

  2. (1) For the purpose of these Regulations,
"business" includes the undertaking of a canteen, club, school,
    hospital or institution, whether carried on for profit or not;
"certificate of exemption", in relation to a food business, means a
     certificate for the time being in force and granted in accordance
     with the provisions of regulation 28;
"container" includes any basket, pail, tray, package or receptacle of
     any kind, whether open or closed;
"contamination" includes contamination by rodents, dust, flies and other
     insects and by odours, and "contaminated" shall be construed
     accordingly;
"equipment" includes apparatus, furnishings and utensils used for the
     storage, preparation and distribution of food and drink;
"fish" means cooked or uncooked fish (including cured or smoked
     fish) and includes any other form of seafood;


                                           THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                             Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                   by the authority of the Government of Barbados
           CAP. 44                  Health Services          L.R.O. 2007        M2
reg.2                       (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


1999/88.   "food" means any substance, whether processed, semi-processed or
                raw, which is intended for human consumption and includes drink,
                chewing gum and other substances which are used in the manu-
                facture or treatment of food, but does not include cosmetics,
                tobacco or substances used only as drugs;
           "food business" has the meaning assigned to it by regulation 3;
           "food premises" means any premises on or from which there is carried
                on any food business, and includes a stall;
           "food room" means any room in which any person engages in the
                handling of food or in the cleaning of equipment for the purposes
                of a food business, but does not include
                (a) a room used as a sleeping place if the only handling of food
                    which occurs in the room is in the course of serving food
                    there to any person occupying it as a sleeping place;
                (b) a room communicating with a room used as a sleeping place
                    if the only handling of food which occurs in the room is in
                    the course of serving food there to any person (not being a
                    person carrying on a food business at the premises which
                    include the room of a person employed by him) by whom
                    the room is occupied as a sleeping place; or
                (c) a day room in a hospital or in a home for the reception of
                    aged or disabled persons;
           "meat" means the flesh (including edible offal and fat) of cattle, swine,
               sheep, rabbits, poultry and goats which is sold or intended for
               sale for human consumption, and includes bacon and ham;
           "open food" means food not contained in containers and so closed as
               to exclude all risk of contamination;
1999/88.   "premises" means land, whether open or enclosed, built on or not,
               public or private and whether or not maintained under any enact-
               ment, and includes any aircraft, ship, vessel, boat, hulk, barge,
               tent, vehicle, shed, warehouse or any other structure designed
               and used for the carriage or storage of food;
M2A L.R.O. 2007               Health Services                                         CAP. 44
                      (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969                                          reg.2

"preparation", in relation to food, includes manufacture and any form
     of treatment, and "prepared" shall be construed accordingly;
"stall" includes any stand, marquee, tent or mobile canteen.
  (2) A person shall be deemed for the purpose of these
Regulations to engage in the handling of food if for the purpose
of a food business he carries out or assists in the carrying out of




                                       THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                         Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                               by the authority of the Government of Barbados
                                     Health Services                                                    CAP. 44
3                              (Food Hygiene) Regulations                                                         reg. 3


any process or operation in the sale of food or in the preparation,
transport,  storage,   packing,  wrapping,     exposure    for sale,
service or delivery of food.

   (3) For the purpose of these regulations, the supply of food
otherwise than by sale, at, in or from any place where food is
supplied in the course of a business, shall be deemed to be a sale
of that food, and references to purchasing and purchasers shall
be construed accordingly;     and where in connection with any
business in the course of which food is supplied the place where
food is served to customers is different from the place where food
is consumed, both these places shall be deemed to be places in
which food is sold.



   3. (1) In these regulations “ food business ” means, subject
to paragraph    (2), any trade or business for the purposes of
which any person engages in the handling of food, and includes
the undertaking of a canteen, club, school, hospital or institu-
tion, whether carried on for profit or not.

   (2) The expression “ food business ” does not include any
agricultural activity or (except so far as the handling of food
may be involved in the course of a retail business or in the
course of supplying food for immediate consumption)    so much
of any trade or business as consists of the handling of food at,
in or upon-

    (4 store;
       any dock, wharf, careenage, public warehouse or cold
               or
    w and
       (except for any requirements    relating to the transport
             carrying of meat) any premises or place occupied by
        a carrier of goods for the purposes of his trade or business
        as such a carrier; or
    (4 any slaughter-house; or
    (4 vegetables
       any premises or places occupied by a wholesaler of raw
                   and used exclusively for the purposes of his
        trade or business as such a wholesaler;                                         or
    (4 food.
       any premises which are not used for the storage of open


                                         THE   LAWS    OF   BARBADOS

        Printed   in England   by Eyre   and Spottiswoode   Limited,     2 Scrjeants’   Inn,   London   EC4,
                                by authority   of the Government       of Barbados
            CAP. 44                         Health Services
regs. 4-6                             (Food Hygiene) Regulations                        4



                                               PART    II

                                        General Requirements
               4. (1) No food business shall be carried on in any insanitary
            premises, stall or place or in any premises, stall or place the use
            of which because of the situation, construction       or condition
            thereof exposes food to the risk of contamination.
               (2) All multi-use utensils used for preparing, serving, eating,
            or drinking of food shall be thoroughly cleaned after each usage.
               (3) Single-service      containers    shall be used once.
              (4) Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and reasonably               dry
            and shall be used for no other purpose.
               (5) No article, polish or other substance containing    any
            cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used
            for cleaning or polishing of any utensil which is used for the
            preparation, storage or serving of food.
               (6) Without prejudice     to the provisions of the preceding
            paragraphs,   all containers   (including  returnable containers)
            intended for use with food in the course of a food business,
            whether or not they come into contact, or are liable to come into
            contact, with food, shall so far as is reasonably practicable,  be
            protected and kept free from contamination.

                                              PART    III

            Requirements   Relating    to Persons Engaged     in the Handling     of Food
               5. A person who engages in the handling of food shall, while
            so engaged, protect the food from risk of contamination,     and in
            particular, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing-
              (a)   shall not so place the food, or permit it to be so placed,
                    as to involve any risk of contamination;
              (b)   shall not in or about any alley, yard, market or stall place
                    any food lower than eighteen inches from the ground
                    unless it is adequately protected by other means from
                    risk of contamination.

              6. (1) No person shall engage in the handling                of food unless
                                        Health Services                                                        CAP. 44
5                                 (Food Hygiene) Regulations                                                                  reg. 6


he is in possession of a certificate of good health from a registered
medical practitioner,    and such certificate shall be in such form
as may be from time to time prescribed by the Chief Medical
Officer.

   (2) The duration of such a certificate shall extend                                                               over a
period not exceeding twelve months and shall expire                                                                  on the
31st day of December next after issue.

   (3) Such certificate shall be kept at the place of employment
and shall be available for inspection by any authorised officer
of the Ministry of Health.

   (4) A person who engages in the handling                                                 of food shall, while
so engaged-
    (a)   keep as clean as reasonably practicable all parts of his
          person which are liable to come into contact with the
          food;
    (6)   keep as clean as reasonably practicable     all parts of his
          clothing or overalls which are liable to come into contact
          with the food;
    (c)   keep any open cut or abrasion on any exposed part of his
          person covered with a suitable waterproof dressing;
    (d)   refrain        from spitting;
    (e)   refrain from the use of tobacco (including snuff) while
          he is handling any open food or is in any food room in
          which there is open food;
    (f) after using the toilet wash his hands before                                                         resumption
          of duties.
   (5) No person with any septic or infected cut or abrasion                                                            on
any exposed part of his body shall engage in the handling                                                               or
preparation  of food.
   (6) A person who engages in the handling                                                  of open food shall
not, while so engaged-
    (a)   carry any food in a vehicle or container along with any
          article from which there is risk of contamination   of the
          food, or with any live animal or live poultry, without
          taking all such precautions as are reasonably practicable
          to avoid risk of contamination,   and in particular shall

                                           THE   LAWS      OF   BARBADOS

          Printed   in England   by Eyre   and   Spottiswoode   Limited,     2 Serjeants’    Inn,   London    EC4,
                                  by authority    of the Government        of Barbados
         CAP. 44                   Health Seruices
reg. 7                       (Food Hygiene) Regulations                    6


                 not allow any live animal    or live poultry   to come into
                 contact with meat or fish;
           (b)   use for wrapping or containing any open food any paper
                 or other wrapping material or container which is not
                 clean or which is liable to contaminate  the food; and in
                 particular  shall not allow any printed material other
                 than printed material designed exclusively for wrapping
                 or containing food, to come into contact with any food
                 other than uncooked vegetables.


            7. (1) Subject to the following provisions of this regulation,
         as soon as any person engaged in the handling of food becomes
         aware that he is suffering from any fever, vomiting, diarrhoea,
         dysentery or other bowel disease, jaundice, persistent cough, any
         skin disease or any infection likely to cause food poisoning, he
         shall forthwith give notice of the fact-
           (a)   to the occupier of the food premises, if he is engaged   in
                 the handling of food at or from food premises;
           (b)   to the owner of the business, if he is engaged in the
                 handling of food otherwise than at or from food premises;
         and the owner or occupier, as the case may be, shall, im-
         mediately after being notified of such fact, cause such person to
         cease work forthwith and notify the Medical Officer of Health
         of the area in which the said premises or business are situated.
            (2) When the person referred to in paragraph (1) is himself
         the occupier of the food premises or the owner of the food
         business, as the case may be, he shall immediately cease work
         and give notice immediately to the Medical Officer of Health
         of the area in which the said premises or business are situated.
             (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of regulation 6 (l),
         if a Medical Officer of Health or a Public Health Inspector has
         reason to believe that a person engaged in the preparation or
         handling of food is suffering from any disease liable to cause
         food poisoning, he may require such person to submit to a
         medical examination by a Medical Officer of Health, who shall
         issue a certificate stating whether the person is fit or unfit to
         engage in such work, and if the certificate states that the person
         is unfit for such work the person shall cease work forthwith.
                                        Health Services                                                        CAP.    44
7                                 (Food Hygiene) Regulations                                                                 regs. 8-10


   (4) Any person who has ceased work under the preceding
paragraphs    shall not resume work unless he has obtained a
certificate of good health from a Medical Officer of Health.


                                                   PART           IV

                       Requirements Relating to Food Premises
  8. (1) No fresh air intake of any ventilation pipe included
in the soil drainage system of food premises shall be situated
in a food room.
   (2) Every inlet into such system situated                                                  in any such room
shall be trapped.

   9. No cistern for the supply of water to a food room shall
supply a sanitary convenience       otherwise than through an
efficient flushing cistern or some other flushing apparatus
equally efficient and suitable for the prevention of contamina-
tion of water supplies.


   10. (1) All food premises shall be supplied with sanitary
facilities which are, in the opinion of the Medical Officer of
Health, adequate.
   (2) Every             sanitary             convenience                     situated                on       any    food
premises-
    (u)   shall be kept clean and in efficient order;
    (b)   shall be so placed that no offensive odour therefrom                                                        can
          penetrate into any food room.
   (3) Any room or other place which contains a sanitary
convenience    shall be suitably and sufficiently     lighted and
ventilated to the satisfaction of the Medical Officer of Health.
         o room which contains                                   a sanitary           convenience                 shall be
u,di)a?a   food room.
   (5) No room which communicates    directly with a room or
other place which contains a sanitary convenience    shall be
used-
    (a)   for the handling                   of open food;

                                           TED3   LAWS      OF    BARBADOS

          Printed   in England   by Eyre    and   Spottiswoode    Limited,     2 Serjeants’    Inn,   London   EC4,
                                  by authority     of the Government         of Barbados
              CAP. 44                    Health Services
regs. 11-13                        (Food Hygiene) Regulations                  8


                (b)   for the cleaning of equipment for use in any food business
                      in the course of which open food is handled.
                (6) There shall be affixed and maintained      in a prominent
              and suitable position near every sanitary convenience situated
              on any food premises a clearly legible notice requesting users to
              wash their hands after using a convenience.

                 11. (1) Subject  to the provisions   of any certificate  of
              exemption, a supply of water sufficient in quantity to enable
              these regulations to be complied with shall be provided and
              maintained in all food premises.
                                   o water provided for the said purposes shall
              be(?l)ea?~n?!?%le~me.


                 12. (1) Subject    to the provisions   of any certificate    of
              exemption, in all food premises suitable and sufficient washhand
              basins for the use of all persons engaged in the handling of food
              on those premises shall be provided and maintained           in a
              position conveniently accessible to such persons.
                 (2) Subject as aforesaid, there shall be provided and main-
              tained for every such washhand basin an adequate supply of
              water.
                 (3) At or near every washhand basin available for the use of
              such persons as are mentioned in paragraph (1) there shall be
              provided and maintained      for the use of persons engaged in
              handling of food on the food premises adequate supplies of soap
              or other suitable detergent, nail brushes and clean towels or
              other suitable drying facilities, which shall be used only for
              securing the personal cleanliness of such persons.
                  (4) All washhand basins so available shall be kept clean, and
              any taps in connection therewith shall be kept clean and in
              efficient working order.


                 13. Suitable and sufficient bandages, dressing and antiseptic
              for first-aid treatment shall be provided and maintained in all
              food premises, in a readily accessible position, for the use of
              persons engaged in the handling of food on those premises,
                                      Health Services                                                         CAP. 44
                                (Food Hygiene) Regulations                                                              regs. 14-17


   14. Except where adequate provision is made elsewhere than
in a food room, suitable and sufficient cupboards or locker
accommodation    shall, subject to the provisions of any certificate
of exemption, be provided and maintained in all food premises,
other than food premises in which no open food is handled, for
the clothing and footwear not worn during working hours of all
persons engaged in the handling of food on those premises.

   15. (1) Subject to the provisions    of any certificate  of
exemption and to the provisions contained in paragraph (2)-
  (a)   there shall be provided and maintained      to the satis-
        faction of the Medical Officer of Health in all food
        premises suitable and sufficient sinks or other facilities
        (not being washhand basins mentioned in paragraph (3)
        of regulation 12) for washing food and equipment used
        in the food business;
  (4    for every such sink or other facility there shall be pro-
        vided and maintained to the satisfaction of the Medical
        Officer of Health an adequate supply either of hot and
        cold water or of hot water at a suitably controlled
        temperature, but a supply of cold water shall be sufficient
        for any sink or other facility not used for any other pur-
        pose than the washing of fish, tripe, animal casings, fruit
        or vegetables ;
  (c)   all sinks and other facilities available for the said pur-
        poses shall be kept clean and in efficient working order;
  jd)   there shall be provided and maintained for use at all such
        sinks and other facilities adequate supplies of soap or
        other suitable detergent    and clean cloths or other
        adequate and suitable cleaning and drying facilities.
   (2) Nothing contained in paragraph (1) shall apply in rela-
tion to food premises where open food is not handled.

   16. Suitable and sufficient means of lighting shall be pro-
vided in every food room, and every such room shall be suitably
and sufficiently lighted to the satisfaction of the Medical Officer
of Health.

  17. Except           in the case of a humidity-controlled                                            or tempera-

                                         THE   LAWS        OF   BARBADOS

        Printed   in England   by Eyre   and   Spottiswoode     Limited,     2 Serjeants’   Inn,   London   lX4,
                                hy authority    of the Government          of Barbados




                                                       /
              CAP. 44                     Health Services
regs. 18-20                         (Food Hygiene) Regulations                10


              ture-controlled    chamber,  suitable  and sufficient    means of
              ventilation shall be provided in every food room, and suitable
              and sufficient ventilation   shall be maintained     there to the
              satisfaction of the Medical Officer of Health.


                18. (1) No food room shall be used as a sleeping place, and
              no sleeping place shall be used as a food room.

                 (2) Subject to the provisions of any certificate of exemption,
              no food room which communicates         directly with a sleeping
              place shall be used for the handling of open food.


                 19. (1) The walls, floors, doors, windows, ceiling, woodwork
              and all other parts of the structure of every food room shall at
              all times be kept clean and shall be kept in such good order,
              repair and condition as to-
                (a)   enable them to be effectively      cleaned ; and
                (b)   prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable, any risk of
                      infestation by rats, mice and insects and the entry of
                      birds.

                 (2) Where at any time after the coming into operation of
              these regulations any works affecting the structure (other than
              mere removal of part of the structure)       are executed,   the
              structure affected by such works shall after completion of the
              works be such as to-
                (a)   enable it to be effectively   cleaned;   and
                (6)   prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable, any risk of
                      infestation by rats, mice and insects and the entry of
                      birds.


                 20. No refuse or filth, whether solid or liquid, shall be
              deposited or allowed to accumulate in a food room except so
              far as may be unavoidable     for the proper carrying on of the
              trade or business, and any such refuse or filth shall be removed
              as soon as is practicable, and in any case before the end of each
              working day.
                                         Health Services                                                       CAP. 44
11                                 (Food Hygiene) Regulations                                                         regs. 21-23


                                                     PART V

                                  Requirements Relating to Stalls
  21.      (1) Every stall from which a food business is carried                                                     on
shall-
     (a)   subject to the provisions of any certificate of exemption,
           bear conspicuously the name and address of the person
           carrying on the business;
     (b)   to the satisfaction of the Medical Officer of Health be
           kept clean and in such good order, repair and condition
           as to enable it to be effectively cleaned; and
     (t)   be provided with suitable and sufficient means of lighting
           and shall be suitably and sufficiently lighted to the
           satisfaction of the Medical Officer of Health.
     (2) No such stall shall be used as a sleeping place.


   22. (1) Every stall from which meat or fish is sold or exposed
for sale for human consumption-
     (a)   shall (if not in an enclosed and covered market place) be
           suitably covered over and be screened at the sides and
           back thereof in such a manner as to prevent any mud,
           filth or other contaminating       substance from being
           deposited upon any meat or fish therein;
     (b)   shall be provided with a sufficient number                                                        of suitably
           covered receptacles  for waste trimmings,                                                         refuse and
           rubbish.
   (2) Any such receptacle shall be constructed of impervious
materials or shall be replaced as often as may be necessary to
prevent the accumulation     of obnoxious matter, and shall be
kept apart from any meat or fish intended for sale.
   (3) Every person engaged in the handling of meat or fish
from any such stall shall place all waste trimmings, refuse or
rubbish in the receptacles provided therefor.

  23. Subject to any certificate of exemption, there shall be
provided and maintained for use in connection with every food
business which is carried on from a stall and which consists

                                             THE   LAWS     OF   BARBADOS

           Printed   in England    by Eyre    and Spottiswoodc   Limited,     2 Serjeants’   Inn,   London    EC+,
                                    by authority    of the Government       01 Barbados
M13 L.R.O. 2007               Health Services                                         CAP. 44
                      (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969                                       regs.25-26

  (d) every such vehicle shall be provided with a sufficient number
      of suitable receptacles to contain separately all offal (other than
      offal that has not been detached from the carcass) transported
      in the vehicle, which receptacles shall be constructed of
      impervious materials kept clean and in such good order, repair
      and condition as to enable them to be thoroughly cleaned;
  (e) no offal shall be transported in any such vehicle except in the
      separate receptacles provided therefor:
   Provided that sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) shall not apply in relation
to the transport of meat and fish on isolated occasions in the course of
the business of a carrier if the meat or fish is adequately protected by
suitable material from the risk of contamination.
  25. Every person who in the course of a food business carries meat
and fish or either of them, being meat and fish which is open food,
otherwise than in the course of distribution by a retailer to his
customers, shall while so engaged wear a clean and washable overall
and, if the meat or fish is liable to come into contact with his neck or
head, a clean and washable head covering:
   Provided that this regulation shall not apply in relation to the
transport of meat and fish in the course of a business of a carrier in
which the vehicle used for the transport is not ordinarily used for the
transport of meat and fish if the person carrying the meat or fish takes
all such other precautions as are reasonably practical to prevent the
meat or fish coming into contact with any exposed part of his person
or with any clothing other than an overall.

                                  PART VIA

             Requirements relating to the Inspection and
                      Condemnation of Food

   26. (1) A Public Health Inspector may at all reasonable times enter 1999/88.
any premises and inspect and examine, and may in any street or other
public place inspect and examine, any food sold or exposed for sale or
deposited in any place, or in the course of transmission for the purpose
of sale, preparation or manufacture for sale.

                                       THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                         Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                               by the authority of the Government of Barbados
            CAP. 44                  Health Services          L.R.O. 2007    M14
reg.26                       (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


               (2) A Public Health Inspector may condemn and seize and carry
            away or cause to be carried away any food which appears to him to be
            diseased, unsound, unwholesome or unfit for human consumption, and
            may cause any such food to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of;
1999/88.    and, where the food is condemned, the Public Health Inspector shall
            issue a Certificate of Condemnation of Food in Form 1 as set out in
Schedule.   the Schedule.
              (3) Where the Public Health Inspector is not in possession of a
            certificate denoting his competency for the inspection of meat and
            other foods, he shall not have the power to order the food to be
            destroyed or otherwise disposed of, but such an order may be made by
            another Public Health Inspector possessing such a certificate or by a
            Medical Officer of Health.
               (4) The expenses incurred in destroying or otherwise disposing of
            any food condemned in accordance with the provisions of this
            regulation shall be a debt due by the owner of the food and may, on an
            information laid in a summary manner before a magistrate by or on
            behalf of the person by whom such expenses were incurred, be
            recovered from the owner or from the person who is in possession of
            such food.
               (5) No person having in his possession any food which is diseased,
            unsound, unwholesome or unfit for human consumption shall give,
            sell or consign any such food to any other person or to any firm,
            business, organisation, institution or association.
               (6) Every person having in his possession any food which is
            diseased, unsound, unwholesome or unfit for human consumption shall
            destroy or dispose of such food to the satisfaction of the Medical
            Officer of Health:
              Provided that any such person may request the Medical Officer of
            Health or a Public Health Inspector to remove and dispose of any such
            food, and the Medical Officer of Health or Public Health Inspector
            shall cause it to be removed and disposed of, and such person shall
            pay a reasonable sum for such removal and disposal.
M15 L.R.O. 2007               Health Services                                         CAP. 44
                      (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969                                          reg.26A

   (7) The proof that any food was not sold, exposed or deposited or
in course of transmission for the purpose of sale, preparation or manu-
facture for sale or was not diseased, unsound, unwholesome or unfit
for human consumption shall rest upon the person alleging the same.
   (8) Nothing in this regulation shall affect or be construed as
affecting any provision of the Markets and Slaughterhouses Act or Cap. 265.
any regulations made thereunder, or the exercise of any powers
conferred by or under the said Act upon any person; and where any
provision of the said Act or regulations made thereunder is at variance
with any provision of this regulation, the provisions of that Act or of
such regulations shall prevail.

  26A . (1) All food imported into Barbados may be inspected at 1999/88.
any port of entry by a Public Health Inspector.
  (2) In conducting an inspection under paragraph (1), a Public Health 1999/88.
Inspector may request
  (a) the certificate of inspection issued by the country of origin;
      and
  (b) the temperature control charts from the vessel carrying the food.
   (3) Where food is inspected in accordance with paragraph (1) and 1999/88.
is found to be fit for human consumption, the Public Health Inspector
carrying our the inspection shall issue a Wholesome Food Certificate
to the importer of the food prior to releasing the food to the importer.
  (4) The certificate issued pursuant to paragraph (3) shall be in 1999/88.
Form 2 as set out in the Schedule.                                 Schedule.

   (5) Where food is inspected in accordance with paragraph (1) and 1999/88.
is found to be unfit for human consumption, the Public Health
Inspector carrying out the inspection shall
  (a) detain the food for further examination;
  (b) seek the opinion of the Government Analyst; and
  (c) notify the importer of the detention of the food.


                                       THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                         Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                               by the authority of the Government of Barbados
            CAP. 44                  Health Services          L.R.O. 2007       M16
reg.26A                      (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


1999/88.      (6) Where a Public Health Inspector detains food under
            paragraph (5), he shall
              (a) take a sample and divide it into 3 parts, each part to be marked
                  and sealed or fastened in such manner as its nature will permit,
                  and he shall
                   (i)   if required to do so, deliver one part to the importer or his
                         agent;
                   (ii) retain one part for future comparison; and
                   (iii) submit one part to the Government Analyst; and
              (b) issue a notice to the importer in accordance with Form 3 as set
Schedule.         out in the Schedule.
1999/88.       (7) Where the sample that is taken in accordance with para-
            graph (6) is packaged in containers of a convenient size and labelled
            with the batch number of the manufacture or producer, any 3 such
            containers each bearing the identical batch number shall be deemed
            for the purposes of these Regulations to be 3 parts of the same sample.
1999/88.      (8) Any report issued by the Government Analyst pursuant to
            paragraph (5)(b) shall be receivable as evidence in any court of law.
1999/88.       (9) Where an examination is conducted under paragraph (5) and
            the food is found to be unfit for human consumption, such food shall
            be destroyed or otherwise disposed of and the Public Health Inspector
            shall issue an Unwholesome Food Certificate to that effect in Form 4
Schedule.   as set out in the Schedule.
1999/88.       (10) Notification of the detention under paragraph (5) shall be in
Schedule.   Form 4 as set out in the Schedule, and a copy of the notice shall be sent
            to the Comptroller of Customs and to the Manager of the port through
            which the food entered Barbados.
1999/88.       (11) All costs of examination of any food that is detained by a
            Public Health Inspector and any resulting costs of destruction,
            re-export or disposal of food that is found to be unfit for human
            consumption shall be borne by the importer of the food so detained or
            destroyed.
M17 L.R.O. 2007               Health Services                                         CAP. 44
                      (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969                                       regs.27-28

                                   PART VII

                      Administrative Provisions

  27. (1) No person shall carry on a food business until he has
registered such food business with, and has received a licence
permitting him to carry on such food business from, the Medical
Officer of Health of the area in which it is intended to carry on such
food business.
  (2) The licence shall expire one year after the date of issue, but 1996-48.
may be suspended or withdrawn at any time by the Medical Officer of
Health upon the violation of any provisions of these Regulations by
the person to whom the licence has been granted or by his agent, if
any, in charge of the food business.
   (3) The licence shall be displayed in some conspicuous place in
the food premises and, if the licence is removed, damaged, hidden or
obscured or allowed to become illegible, the person to whom the
licence has been granted and his agent, if any, in charge of the food
business shall be guilty of a breach of this regulation.
  (4) If a licence to carry on a food business is refused, suspended
or withdrawn, the proprietor of the food business or his agent as
aforesaid may appeal to the magistrate for the district in which such
food business is carried on, and the magistrate shall make such order
concerning the licence as appears to be just and equitable.

   28. (1) In granting a licence to carry on a food business, a
Medical Officer of Health may grant a certificate to the effect that
compliance with any of the provisions of the regulations specified in
paragraph (4) cannot be reasonably required with respect to the premises
in which it is intended to carry on such food business or to any
activities carried on therein; and those premises shall be exempt from
the provisions mentioned in the licence.
   (2) Such a certificate of exemption shall not be granted by a
Medical Officer of Health with respect to any food premises unless he
is satisfied that by reason of restricted accommodation or other


                                       THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                         Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                               by the authority of the Government of Barbados
          CAP. 44                     Health Services          L.R.O. 2007       M18
regs.29-30                    (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


            special circumstances affecting the premises it is reasonable that such
            a certificate should be in force with respect thereto.
              (3) Any such certificate of exemption may be withdrawn by the
            Medical Officer of Health if at any time he ceases to be satisfied as
            aforesaid.
               (4) The provisions of the regulations referred to in paragraph (1)
            are: paragraph (1) of regulation 11, paragraphs (1) and (2) of
            regulation 12, regulation 14, sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of regula-
            tion 15(1), paragraph (2) of regulation 18 and sub-paragraph (a) of
            regulation 21(1).

               29. (1) If the occupier of any food premises fails to comply with
            the requirements of these Regulations with respect to the structure of,
            or provision of fixtures at or in, the food premises, he shall be guilty of
            an offence under these Regulations.
               (2) If the owner or the person in charge of any food business
            fails to comply with the requirements of these Regulations as to the
            provision of any equipment (including cloths, towels or other drying
            facilities and soap or other detergents) on the food premises where
            such business is carried on, he shall be guilty of an offence under these
            Regulations.
               (3) If any person engaged in the handling of food fails to comply
            with any provision of these Regulations other than a provision referred
            to in paragraphs (1) and (2), or if the occupier of any food premises, or
            the owner of any food business, or any other person for the time being
            having the control or management of a food business, fails to take all
            reasonable steps to secure compliance therewith by any person
            employed by him or under his control, he shall be guilty of an offence
            under these Regulations.
1978/111.      30. Any person guilty of an offence under these Regulations shall
            be liable on summary conviction to a fine of $5 000 or to imprison-
            ment for 12 months, or to both such fine and imprisonment and, in the
            case of a continuing offence, to a further fine of $200 for each day or
            part of a day during which the offence continues after a conviction is
            first obtained.
M19 L.R.O. 2007                  Health Services                                            CAP. 44
                         (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


                                    SCHEDULE

                                                                                    (Regulation 26(2))


                                         Form 1                                                            1999/88.

                           MINISTRY OF HEALTH

                     Certificate of Condemnation of Food


  I,                                                                                      , certify that
                          Name of Public Health Inspector

in accordance with the Health Services (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969 the un-
dermentioned items of food have been inspected and condemned as being unfit for
human consumption and they have been destroyed or otherwise disposed of by me:


                 Item                                                            Quantity




       Signature of Public Health Inspector



                  Date




                                          THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                            Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                  by the authority of the Government of Barbados
CAP. 44               Health Services          L.R.O. 2007              M20
              (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


                                Form 2

                                                          (Regulation 26A(4))


                      MINISTRY OF HEALTH

                     Wholesome Food Certificate


          Serial Number



                               Name of Importer



                               Address of Importer



            Name and Identification Number of Carrier



                     Country of Origin of food



                               Type of food



                               Quantity of food



                     Supporting documentation requested
            (Inspection certificates issued in the country of origin,
                     temperature control charts from the carrier)


             Premises where the food is examined
M21 L.R.O. 2007                     Health Services                                             CAP. 44
                            (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


                                    Form 2 - Concl'd

                                                                                     (Regulation 26A(4))


   I,                                                                                                    ,
                             Name of Public Health Inspector

certify that the
                                           specify type of food

imported by
                                          Name of Importer

on the             day of                                                                    and inspected
            Day                            Month                              Year

by me on the
                       Day                                  Month                                 Year


is fit for human consumption.




         Signature of Public Health Inspector




                     Date




                                              THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                                Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                      by the authority of the Government of Barbados
CAP. 44                       Health Services          L.R.O. 2007                     M22
                      (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


                                          Form 3

                                                                       (Regulation 26A(6))

                               MINISTRY OF HEALTH

                Notice of Detention of Food for Further Examination


   To:
                                        Name of Importer


                                        Address of Importer


TAKE NOTICE that the
                                        Specify type and quantity of food


imported by you on the                  day of
                              Day                           Month                Year

is suspected of being unfit for human consumption and will be detained for




                                                   by the
Type of analysis (bacteriological or chemical)                Agency performing the analysis


   AND FURTHER TAKE NOTICE that you
                                                                    Name of Importer

will be required to pay the costs of the examination and, if necessary, the costs of the
re-export, destruction or disposal of the food.


     Signature of Public Health Inspector


              Date
M23 L.R.O. 2007            Health Services                                            CAP. 44
                   (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


                                    Form 4

                                                                             (Regulation 26A(9))


                       MINISTRY OF HEALTH

                   Unwholesome Food Certificate


       Serial Number



                                 Name of Importer



                                 Address of Importer



           Name and Identification Number of Carrier



                    Country of Origin of food



                                 Type of food



                                 Quantity of food



                    Supporting documentation requested
           (Inspection certificates issued in the country of origin,
                temperature control charts from the carrier)



                Premises where the food is examined


                                     THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                       Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                             by the authority of the Government of Barbados
CAP. 44                       Health Services          L.R.O. 2007               M24
                      (Food Hygiene) Regulations, 1969


                                   Form 4 - Concl'd

                                                                    (Regulation 26A(9))


   I,                                                                                 ,
                              Name of Public Health Inspector

certify that the
                                      specify type of food

imported by                                                                      on the
                                      Name of Importer


                   day of                                                 and inspected
        Day                        Month                     Year

by me on the
                        Day                      Month                         Year


is unfit for human consumption.




   Reasons for the determination that the food is unfit for human consumption




          Signature of Public Health Inspector



                    Date
