CAYMAN ISLANDS




                 Supplement No. 1 published with Gazette No. 16
                 dated 11 August, 2014.




THE PLANTS (IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION) (AMENDMENT)
                      LAW, 2014

                     (LAW 13 OF 2014)
The Plants (Importation and Exportation) (Amendment) Law, 2014


                   THE PLANTS (IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION) (AMENDMENT)
                                         LAW, 2104

                                       ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

                  1.   Short title and commencement
                  2.   Amendment of section 2 of the Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law
                       (1997 Revision) - definitions
                  3.   Amendment of the principal Law - deletion of the word “C.A.V.O.” and
                       substitution
                  4.   Amendment of section 4 - power to prescribe conditions
                  5.   Amendment of section 6 - restriction or prohibition of inter-island
                       movement
                  6.   Amendment of section 9 - penalty
                  7.   Amendment of section 10 - regulations
                  8.   Transitional provisions




                                                        2
                                 The Plants (Importation and Exportation) (Amendment) Law, 2014

CAYMAN ISLANDS
                                                              Law 13 of 2014.


                                                                  I Assent


                                                             Franz Manderson

                                                             Acting Governor.


                                                           Date: 22 July, 2014




A LAW TO AMEND THE PLANTS (IMPORTATION AND
EXPORTATION) LAW (1997 REVISION) AS A CONSEQUENCE OF
THE ENACTMENT OF THE NATIONAL CONSERVATION LAW, 2013;
AND FOR INCIDENTAL AND CONNECTED PURPOSES
ENACTED by the Legislature of the Cayman Islands.


1. (1) This Law may be cited as the Plants (Importation and Exportation)         Short title and
                                                                                 commencement
(Amendment) Law, 2014.
     (2) This Law comes into force immediately after the commencement of
the National Conservation Law, 2013.
                                                                                 Amendment of section 2
2. The Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law (1997 Revision), in this Law     of the Plants
referred to as the “principal Law”, is amended in section 2 as follows-          (Importation and
                                                                                 Exportation) Law (1997
          (a)   by deleting the word “C.A.V.O” and its definition and by         Revision)- definitions
                substituting the following word and definition-
                “Director” means the Director of the Department of Agriculture
                and any person authorised by him;”; and
          (b) by inserting after the definition of the word “Director” the
              following definition-
          “National Conservation Council” means the National Conservation
     Council established under section 3 of the National Conservation Law,
     2013.”.

                                      3
The Plants (Importation and Exportation) (Amendment) Law, 2014

Amendment of the          3. The principal Law is amended by deleting the word “C.A.V.O.” wherever it
principal Law- deletion
of the word “C.A.V.O.”    appears and by substituting the word “Director”.
and substitution


Amendment of section      4.   The principal Law is amended in section 4 as follows-
4- power to prescribe
conditions                          (a) by renumbering section 4 as section 4(1);
                                    (b) by amending section 4(1) as renumbered by inserting at the
                                        beginning of the subsection the words, “Subject to subsection
                                        (2),”; and
                                    (c) by inserting after section 4(1) as renumbered, the following
                                        subsection-
                                                “(2) When considering an application for a licence to
                                          import a live or viable specimen of an alien or genetically altered
                                          plant, the Director, in accordance with any directives issued by
                                          the National Conservation Council, shall consult with that
                                          Council and take into account any views of the Council before
                                          granting any such licence.”.
Amendment of section
6- restriction or
                          5. The principal Law is amended in section 6 by deleting the words “Governor
prohibition of inter-     in Council” and by substituting the word “Cabinet”.
island movement


Amendment of section      6.   The principal Law is amended in section 9 as follows-
9- penalty
                                    (a) by renumbering section 9 as section 9(1);
                                    (b) by amending section 9(1) as renumbered by inserting at the
                                        beginning of the subsection the words, “Subject to subsection
                                        (2),”; and
                                    (c) by inserting after section 9(1) as renumbered, the following
                                        subsection-
                                                “(2) A person who imports a live or viable specimen of an
                                          alien or genetically altered plant without a licence commits an
                                          offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of five hundred
                                          thousand dollars or to imprisonment for a term of four years or to
                                          both.”.
Amendment of section      7.   The principal Law is amended in section 10 as follows-
10- regulations
                                    (a) by deleting the words “Governor in Council” and by substituting
                                        the word “Cabinet”; and
                                    (b) by inserting after the word “effect” the words “and, where the
                                        regulations relate to live or viable specimen of alien or
                                        genetically altered plants, shall consult with the National
                                        Conservation Council prior to making such regulations”.
                                                                  4
                                  The Plants (Importation and Exportation) (Amendment) Law, 2014

8. (1) After the commencement of the National Conservation Law, 2013 and            Transitional provisions
this amending Law all proceedings in respect of offences committed or alleged to
have been committed against the principal Law prior to the date of the
commencement of the National Conservation Law, 2013 and this amending Law
shall be dealt with as if the National Conservation Law, 2013 and this amending
Law had not come into force.
       (2) Where anything done under or for the purposes of the principal Law
would cease to have effect by virtue of this amending Law it shall have effect as
if it had been done under and for the purposes of the corresponding provisions of
the National Conservation Law, 2013.


                  Passed by the Legislative Assembly this 26 th day of June, 2014

                                                     Juliana O’Connor-Connolly

                                                                        Speaker.


                                                              Zena Merren-Chin

                                              Clerk of the Legislative Assembly.




                                       5
