                         FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS




                       AHIS


I have applied for an import permit and paid the fees; how soon can I receive my
import permit?
With a fully completed application form and supporting documents, a permit will be
issued within 3 working days. Import permits can take up to ten working days to process
if additional review or assessment is required for invasive or exotic species. Incomplete
or inaccurate application will lead to further delays.


Can I import fruits and vegetables?
Yes, ONLY if you are in possession of a valid Import permit.
Fruits and vegetables are regulated by import permits from all countries with conditions
that must be met because of the potential pests risks to agriculture and the
environment. This includes fresh fruits or vegetables given to you on the aircraft or
cruise ship.


Whenever I travel, can I take back agricultural products in my luggage?
Yes, but the products MUST be declared to Customs and Border Control for an
Agricultural Inspection on arrival to determine pest presence and any other Regulations
might be in place for the products.


What documents do I need to clear agricultural products shipped as manifested
cargo?
To pre-clear agricultural commodities, you will need, suppliers’ invoice, shipping
document (airway bill or bill of lading), sanitary/wholesome certificate for meats and
seafood, phytosanitary certificate for plants and plant products, and CITES Certification
for endangered species
Do I need an import permit to import seeds for planting?
Yes, all seeds for propagation regardless of the quantity require a valid Import Permit.


Can I purchase seeds online?

Yes, you will require a valid import permit. Certified and sealed commercially packaged
seeds from authorized seed companies are allowed without a phytosanitary certificate
from the country of export. Loose seeds, weed species, invasive and exotic species are
further regulated.



What countries can I import meats from?
      1. Australia, Canada, CARICOM States, Costa Rica, Honduras, New Zealand, &
         United States of America
      2. United Kingdom (cattle & swine only)
      3. Nicaragua (boneless meat products only)
      4. European Union (swine only)
      5. Thoroughly cooked boneless meat may be imported into the Islands in
         hermetically sealed metal cans from any country with the exception of; the
         Republic of Ireland, United Kingdom and any country of the European Union.
      6. Notwithstanding line 5, thoroughly cooked boneless meat derived from poultry
         and swine may be imported into the Islands in hermetically sealed metal cans
         from any country.

Can I import poultry products?
Yes, once in possession of a valid import permit. Poultry from the all countries/
territories are allowed, some restriction may be placed due to disease outbreaks such
as Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza and Newcastle Disease.
Individual travelling passenger is allowed up 5 kg from eligible countries/ territories
without an import, providing its thoroughly cooked or must be in the unopened original
package bearing the inspection mark/icon from a competent authority.


Can I import meat for personal use?
Yes, once in possession of a valid import permit.
Individual travelling passenger is allowed up 5 kg without an import permit from eligible
countries/ territories, providing its thoroughly cooked or must be in the sealed original
package bearing the inspection mark/icon from a competent authority in the country of
export. All species listed in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) appendices must be accompanied by the
CITES permit.
Can I import seafood for personal use?

Yes, once in possession of a valid import permit.
Individual travelling passenger is allowed quantity up 20 pounds of seafood without an
import permit from eligible countries/ territories, providing it is thoroughly cooked or
must be in the sealed original package and supported by invoice of purchase.
All species listed in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) appendices must be accompanied by the CITES permit.
Dissostichus Export or Re-Export Document/ Dissostichus Catch Document is required
for Dissostichus species (Tootfish, Chilean Seabass)


Whenever I travel, can I bring back processed food in my luggage?
Yes, all food items MUST be declared to Customs and Border Control for an Agricultural
Inspection. Commercially processed, canned, cooked, shelf-stable foods are
allowed. Home-canned products are not allowed entry because canning practices can
vary and may not remove all pest and disease risks.


Can I import soil for my garden?
No, soil from all countries is prohibited from entering the Cayman Islands. However,
treated and certified potting mediums are allowed in sealed commercial packages.


Can I import agricultural souvenir items that I have acquired during travel?
 Yes, all items MUST be declared to Customs and Border Control for an Agricultural
Inspection. Items must be accompanied by a certified treatment certificate providing it is
processed, and free of signs and symptoms of pests and contaminants
Souvenir items of animal origin are subjected to an import permit.
Items such as rocks, stones and beach sand are subjected to other requirements
according to aggregate products import conditions.

All species listed in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) appendices must be accompanied by the CITES permit.


Can I buy and take a plant souvenir items to the Cayman Islands?

No, not without a valid import permit
Craft items made of plant especially palm fronds, such as baskets, bracelets, fans, hats,
headband, napkin rings, and placements are prohibited entry unless the item was
processed (oven dried, bleached, dyed or painted) beyond just crafting/weaving.


Can I travel with my wedding bouquet of fresh flowers?
Yes, but you MUST declare to Customs and Border Control for an Agricultural
Inspection. Bouquet must be pest free and free of signs and symptoms of pests and
contaminants.
If the inspector finds harmful plant pests or diseases on your bouquet or determines that
the items do not meet entry requirements, they may refuse entry.


Can I import processed tea and coffee?
Yes, all food items MUST be declared to Customs and Border Control for an Agricultural
Inspection. Products should be commercially packaged.


I have musical instruments made of animal products can I import them?

Yes, once in possession of an import permit. Items must be accompanied by the
required treatment certificate and must be free of pests and contaminants.
All species listed in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) appendices must be accompanied by the CITES permit


What do I need to do if I have visited a farm on my trip?

You should laundry all clothing, clean any footwear that were worn on the farm and
ensure they are free of soil to prevent the transfer of any harmful diseases.

My family is living overseas, can I export locally grown fruits to them?

Yes, providing that have written permission from the importing country and the
conditions can be met. You must contact the country of import for their requirements.

Where do I get further information about agricultural importations and
regulations?

   1. Visit www.doa.gov.ky
   2. Email: ciagricultureimports@gov.ky or CI.AgricultureVS@gov.ky
   3. Phone: (345) 946-2967 or 949-7909
