                                          Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law (1997 Revision)


Supplement No. 4 published with Gazette No. 26 of 22nd December, 1997.




      THE PLANTS (IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION) LAW
                                 (29 OF 1983)

                                (1997 Revision)




Revised under the authority of the Law Revision Law (19 of 1975).




Originally enacted-

                      Law 29 of 1983-22nd November, 1983.




Revised this 9th day of December, 1997.
Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law (1997 Revision)




                                                           2
                                            Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law (1997 Revision)

          PLANTS (IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION) LAW

                                 (1997 Revision)

                      ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS


1.    Short title
2.    Definitions
3.    No importation or exportation without permission
4.    Power to prescribe conditions
5.    Power to order destruction
6.    Restriction or prohibition of inter-island movement
7.    Obstruction, etc., an offence
8.    Import or export only through certain ports
9.    Penalty
10.   Regulations




                                        3
Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law (1997 Revision)




                                                           4
                                             Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law (1997 Revision)

          PLANTS (IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION) LAW

                                 (1997 Revision)

1. This Law may be cited as the Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law               Short title

(1997 Revision).

2.   In this Law -                                                                     Definitions


“C.A.V.O.” means the Chief Agricultural and Veterinary Officer and any person
authorised by him; and

“plant” includes any growing plant, cutting, bud, graft, bulb, root or seed, and
also any fruit or vegetable intended for propagation or for consumption as food.

3. Any person who, without the written permission of the C.A.V.O., imports             No importation or
                                                                                       exportation without
into or exports from the Islands any plant is guilty of an offence.                    permission


4. The C.A.V.O. may, in granting the permission referred to in section 3,              Power to prescribe
                                                                                       conditions
prescribe conditions upon which the importation or exportation is permitted, and
any person who contravenes any such condition is guilty of an offence.

5. The C.A.V.O. may, at any time in writing, direct that any plant imported            Power to order
                                                                                       destruction
into the Islands without the permission required by section 3 or any plant with
respect to which any condition prescribed under section 4 has not been complied
with to his satisfaction be destroyed.

6. The Governor in Council may, when it has been certified by the C.A.V.O.             Restriction or
                                                                                       prohibition of inter-
that it is necessary for the prevention of the spread of disease to restrict or        island movement
prohibit the importation or exportation of plants between the Islands, make
regulations for that purpose.

7. The C.A.V.O., when accompanied by an officer of the Royal Cayman                    Obstruction, etc., an
                                                                                       offence
Islands Police Force of the rank of Sergeant or over, may, for the purpose of
carrying out a directive under section 5, and having obtained the prior written
authority of a Justice of the Peace after such Justice of the Peace has been
satisfied that it is fit and proper so to do, enter any place where such plant may
be, and any person who assaults, obstructs, hinders or resists, or aids or incites
any other person to assault, obstruct, hinder or resist any person acting under this
section, is guilty of an offence.


                                         5
Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law (1997 Revision)

Import or export only   8. Any person who imports into or exports from the Islands any plant, other
through certain ports   than through-
                                   (a) in Grand Cayman, the port of George Town or Owen Roberts
                                       International Airport; or
                                   (b) in Cayman Brac, the port of Creek or Gerrard Smith Airport,
                        is guilty of an offence.

Penalty                 9. Whoever is guilty of an offence is liable on summary conviction to a fine of
                        one thousand dollars and to imprisonment for one year.

Regulations             10. The Governor in Council may make regulations for carrying this Law into
                        effect.




                        Publication in revised form authorised by the Governor in Council this 9th day of
                        December, 1997.

                                                                                    Carmena H. Parsons

                                                                             Clerk of Executive Council




                                                               6
