                                      Conditions Governing Importation of Fresh Plant Products from
                                         a Foreign Country (except USA and JAMAICA) into the
            P.O. Box 459                                    Cayman Islands
     Grand Cayman KY1-1106
 Ph.: 345-946-2967 / 345-947-3090        The Plants (Importation and Exportation) Law, (Revised 1997)
 Fax: 345-945-2251 / 345-947-6501
 Email: ciagricultureimports@gov.ky


1. Under the Plants (Regulation of Importation and Exportation) Law (Revised 1997), term ‘Plant’
   includes any growing plant, cutting, bud, graft, bulb, root, seed, and vegetables intended for
   propagation and/or consumption.

2. The Plant Law requires that a Plant Import Permit be obtained from the Cayman Islands Department
   of Agriculture (DOA) prior to the importation of any ‘Plant(s)’ into the Cayman Islands.

     A written application to obtain this Import Permit must be made on a form supplied by the
     Department before procuring the consignment of ‘plants(s)’ for importation. Applications will be
     processed within 72 hours of receipt of completed forms.

3. Under this Law the Director of Agriculture has prescribe the following conditions to be met before,
   and on, landing:

General Conditions for Low and Medium Risk Products
An application must be made to obtain a Plant Import using the prescribed application form that is
provided by the DOA.

Only single entry Import Permits will be issued and the applicable processing fees must be paid at the
time of submission of each application.

Plant Import Permit will be issued with specific conditions for Low and Medium quarantine risk plant
products only. The level of risk will be determined by the DOA. Please note that the status of
various products may change over time due to changes in pest outbreaks and distribution in the
country of origin of the products.

Fresh plant products must arrive only at the Cayman Islands Official Ports of Entry namely:
                   Owen Roberts International Airport, Grand Cayman
                   Charles Kirkconnell International Airport, Cayman Brac
                   George Town Port, Grand Cayman
                   Creek Dock, Cayman Brac

Forty-eight (48) hours’ notice must be given to the Cayman Islands Department of
Agriculture/Agricultural Health Inspection Services (DoA/AHIS) Unit prior to the arrival of every
consignment.

All consignments will be subjected to inspection by the Director of Agriculture or his/her designate at the
Port of Entry. If plant products are found infested and/or infected with a pest, the consignment will be
refused landing, for immediate return to the country of origin at the expense of the importer or seized and
destroyed by the Director of Agriculture or his/her designated.



                                                                                               Page 1 of 2
The consignment must be accompanied by the original Phytosanitary Certificate from the country of
export and must be issued by an authorized officer of the National Plant Protection Organization of that
country within seven (7) days of export. Where the Phytosanitary Certificate is in Spanish of any other
foreign language, a certified English translation MUST be attached to the original version.

The phytosanitary certificate must indicate that the consignment has been inspected and found free of
pests and soil. Additional stamps affixed to the Cayman Islands Import Permit by the competent authority
in the country of origin DOES NOT constitute a phytosanitary certificate.

Further to the above, the Director of Agriculture prescribes the following specific conditions:

Specific Conditions for Low Risk Products:
All plant produce must be washed or cleaned and be free of pest and soil.
Plant product must be packed in new/unused container.
Product fifty (50lbs) pounds or more must be packed separately in new/unused carton/sacks and exported
as manifested cargo.

Specific Conditions for Medium Risk Products:
Specific conditions will be determined for each product in this category and may include all or any
combination of the following condition depending on the plant product and the country of origin:

      Washing in 5% bleach solution or brushing with a fungicide
      Hot water or steam-heat treatment
      Fumigation treatment with methyl bromide or other suitable compound such as Phostoxin
       (aluminium phosphide)
      Trimming of crown leaves
      Removing hands from bunches
      Packing at specific packing house(s) only
      Originate from a specific geographic area/production area within a country

Each medium risk product must be packed separately in new, unused carton of sack and exported as
manifested cargo.

Specific Conditions for High Risk Products:

A full Pest Risk Assessment (PRA) will be necessary for all high quarantine risk plant products
which MAY require that DOA officers undertake a mission to the country of origin to gather
detailed information regarding the product(s) and processing facility. In such cases where a
mission is requested, the applicant will be required to finance all costs associated with the mission
and an import permit will be issued for the import of the product only if the PRA indicates a
favorable conclusion.

Note: Live plants are HIGH RISK products and therefore are not considered under these
procedures.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 2
