(8.7.7) If the product is likely to deteriorate while being detained, it shall be rejected and
destroyed.

8.8 Holding for Physical Checks

If, after documentary and identity checks there is a need to hold the products for physical
checks, the National Food Inspector shall notify the importer and Customs in writing of the
intent to physically examine the product.

8.9 Permitting Foods to Be Moved

(8.9.1) Where it is necessary to conduct a physical check and it is not possible to do so ina
timely manner while in the Customs controlled area, the National Food Inspector can
establish an agreement with the importer for the product to be moved to another location
within Federated States of Micronesia and to be held without further distribution until a
permit to import has been provided.

(8.9.2) The National Food Inspector shall apply a lock/seal/tape to the container or product
of interest to ensure it is not further distributed before examination.

8.10 Physical Checks

When physical checks are carried out they can include any physical observation or test
appropriate to assess compliance with the regulations.

8.11 Sampling Food

(8.11.1) If the specific product is not accompanied by adequate documentation showing the
safety of the food, the National Food Inspector or National Food Analyst shall take samples in
a manner and quantity as prescribed in from time to time in the High Risk Food List and in the
Food of Regulatory Interest List.

(8.11.2) The National Food Inspector shall advise the importer that samples of the food have
been collected for further testing. As a consequence, the inspector shall complete a collection
report and provide copies as directed in the collection report.

(8.11.3) The National Food Inspector shall also discuss with the importer the need to detain
the product until the analysis has been completed. Detention of the product can take place
in an agreed location pending the receiving of the analytical results.

8.12 Satisfactory Checks

The inspector shall permit the importer to place the food in free circulation by issuing an
import permit.

8.13 Re-labelling

(8.13.1) Where the food is rejected but the National Food Inspector considers it suitable for
re-labelling the importer may re-label the food in accordance with the requirements of the

Regulations.
