(c) serial number of the container; and
(D) the name or registration number of the processing factory.

(8.5.3) A National Food Inspector may also check to verify that the product, health marks,
stamps and other necessary product and or package information conforms to the declaration
on the health certificates for the products as well as any accompanying documentation.

8.6 Health or Sanitary Certificates

(8.6.1) National Food Inspectors shall inspect any accompanying health or sanitary certificate
to determine that:

(A) it is from a recognized competent authority and is signed;

(B) it is relevant to the specific product for which it is associated;

(Cc) Certification is in English and in an agreed format;

(D) Certification contains a statement of the controls in place at the food business e.g.,
good hygienic practice, good manufacturing practice, and a HACCP program is
implemented;

(E) product is safe and fit for purpose;

(F) Certification confirms that an audit or inspection has been undertaken in a reasonable
time frame prior to product being distributed from the premises;

(8.6.2) If the certificate is unsatisfactory a National Food Inspector shall ensure the food is
detained until the importer can provide such a certificate.

(8.6.3) If no certificate can be provided by the importer in a timely manner the product be
shall be re-exported or rejected and destroyed.

(8.6.4) If the product is likely to deteriorate while being detained, it shall be rejected and
destroyed.

8.7 Analytical Certificates
(8.7.1) National Food Inspectors may evaluate the food analysis certificates to determine that:

Certification shall cover the microbiological, chemical or physical parameters required by
these regulations.

(8.7.2) Certification must be in English and in an agreed format.

(8.7.3) Testing must be conducted by an accredited or approved laboratory.

(8.7.4) The test methodology is to be defined on the certificate and approved.

(8.7.5) If the certificate is unsatisfactory a National Food Inspector shall ensure the food is
detained until the importer can provide such a certificate or until the food is analysed.

(8.7.6) If no certificate can be provided by the importer in a timely manner the product be
shall be re-exported or rejected and destroyed.

58
