(d) collect appropriate number of samples for identification and laboratory
analysis.
(h) The authorized officer may carry out a physical check on the consignment to verify
(a) the species of fish in the consignment;
(b) the quantity as mentioned in the import documents;
(c) the quality of the product through organoleptic assessment whenever possible;
(d) compliance with temperature requirements;
(e) the cold chain during transport;
(f) the freshness criteria (organoleptic) for fresh or chilled fish
(g) the safety of the fish through laboratory analysis;
(h) packaging and labelling of the products; or
(I) the importer shall not be entitled to any compensation for the fish or fish
products forfeited and seized.
(8.3.14) For all new imports, to facilitate the competent authority decision making process,

an import risk assessment may be carried out. The cost of such activity shall be met by the
customer.

8.4 Personal Import of Food

(8.4.1) Foods imported into Federated States of Micronesia for personal consumption are
exempt from food legislation requirements.

(8.4.2) For chilled and frozen meat and chilled and frozen fish personal imports shall not
exceed 10kg in total per person.

(8.4.3) For meat products, dairy products, fishery products e.g. processed fish (dried, cooked,
cured or smoked), lobsters and prawns personal imports shall not exceed 5kg in total per
person and shall also comply with the following:

(A) the product does not require refrigeration before consumption;
(B) the product is in commercially branded packaging; and
(Cc) the packaging is unbroken unless in current use.

(84.4) For powdered infant formula, and infant food, personal imports shall not exceed 5 kg
in total per person.

(8.4.5) For other foods, personal imports shall not exceed 2 kg in total per person.

If the food shall be consumed by the person bringing the food into Federated States of
Micronesia and/or consumed by his/her family and complies with the aforementioned
quantities, the National Food Inspector shall not hold the product for further assessment.

8.5 Product Identity

(8.5.1) If the food is not a food for personal import, National Food inspectors shall inspect the
documents accompanying the food to confirm the specific product identity.

(8.5.2) Product identity checks require the inspector to check:

(A) the name;
(B) quantity (weight);

57,
