(8.3.5) All bills of lading or airway bills for imported food consignment shall be stamped by
National Food Inspector prior to release from port of entries,

(8.3.6) The National Food Inspector shall select and stamp “hold for inspection”on bills of

lading or airway bills of food consignment for inspection at the port of entry or business
premises.

(8.3.7) the National Food Inspector may lock any food container that is place on hold for
inspection.

(8.3.8) Any food business Operator or persons who contravenes 8.35 and/or 8.3.7 commits an
offence,

(8.3.9) All fish and fisheries products imported into FSM for either sale or for further
processing and/or re-export shall only be carried out with the approval of the competent
authority and should be accompanied by a health certificates and should also comply with
other requirements of this Regulation.

(8.3.10) With reference to (8.3.9) above, any importation of fish for further export to any EU
market shall only be from any EU listed country. Hence the fish to be sourced from legal
source and from a CA and EU approved and listed vessel. Such export needs to be
accompanied by a health certificate from the country of export/origin with an attestation that
confirms the legality and eligibility of the fish.

(8.3.11) The importer shall ensure that the fish or fish product imported into FSM have
adequate information on the product for its traceability throughout the supply chain.

(8.3.12) An authorized officer may, for the purpose of the Act or these regulations, enter and
inspect any premises, boat, vessel, transport vehicle, reefer container, warehouse or cold
storage facility where the fish or fish product is stored.

(8.3.13) On arrival of the consignment, the registered person, importer or his agent shall —
(a) notify the authorized officer of the date of arrival of the consignment at least 48
hours in advance;

(b) submit relevant import documents for verification;
(c) request for an inspection at the port of entry; and
(d) make arrangement for inspection of the consignment at the port of entry.

(e) The importer shall ensure that the consignment of fish, or fish product, is not
removed from the port before it is inspected and approved by an authorized officer.
(f) Any consignment of fish or fish product, landed at the port of entry, shall be
inspected in the presence of the importer or his agent.
(g)Where an inspection is being carried out, the authorized officer may —
(a) require the importer to produce any document in relation to the business;
(b)check the whole consignment, or parts thereof, as may be deemed appropriate;
(c) open as many boxes, containers or packages as he may deem fit;

56
