                             BIOSECURITY ACT 2011

                           ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS


PART 1 - PRELIMINARY

1.    Short title and commencement
2.    Interpretation
3.    Application of the Act
4.    Act binds the Republic
5.    Responsibility for the Act
6.    Biosecurity functions of the Government
7.    Relationship with other Acts


PART 2 - BIOSECURITY BORDER CONTROL


8.    Regulated pests and diseases
9.    Prohibited imports
10.   Biosecurity points of entry and departure
11.   Designation of biosecurity holding areas
12.   Management of biosecurity holding areas
13.   Biosecurity clearance agents


PART 3 - VESSELS AND AIRCRAFT
14.   Biosecurity arrival declaration
15.   Biosecurity landing clearance
16.   Biosecurity port quarantine of vessels and aircraft
17.   Management of biosecurity port quarantine areas




                                        1
    18.    "'Conduct of vessels and aircraft in biosecurity port quarantine
    19.     Biosecurity port quarantine cleafimce of vessels and aircraft
"

    20.    Outgo'ing vessels and aircraft

    21.    Environmental obligations of masters and captains
    22.    Passengers and crewmembers



    PART 4 - BIOSECURITY IMPORT PROCEDURES
    23.   "Biosecurity entry inspection of incoming articles

    24.    Biosecurity import clearance of regulated articles

    25.    Grant and refusal of biosecurity import clearance

    26.    Biosecurity import specifications

    27.    Biosecurityaccess arrangements

    28.    Application for a biosecurity import permit

    29.    Issue of a biosecurity import permit

    30.    Revocation of a biosecurity import permit

    31.    Exemption from biosecurity import requirements

    32.    Articles and passengers in transit



    PART 5 - BIOSECURITY EXPORT PROCEDURES
    33.    Biosecurity export inspection of outgoing articles

    34.    Reql\irement for biosecurity export clearance

    35.    Issue of sanitary and phytosanitary certificates.

    36.    Biosecurity export specifications
    37.    Application for biosecurity export clearance

    38.    Grant of biosecurity export clearance




                                        2
PART 6 - BIOSECURITY QUARANTINE-
 39.    Biosecurity quarantine of regulated articles·

40.     Biosecurity quarantine stations

41.    Conditions of biosecurity quarantine

42      Management of biosecurity quarantine stations

43.    Release from biosecurity quarantine

44.    Biosecurity quarantine notices

45.    No plant or animal to be at large



PART 7 - POWERS OF BIOSECURITY OFFICERS
46.    General rules as to exercise of powers
47.    Entry, search and seizure

48     inspection of documents

49     Inspection of articles

50.    Detention of articles

51     Taking of samples

52.    Testing of articles

53.    Treatment of articles
                       -§
54.    Reconsignment of articles

55.    Destruction of articles

56.    Post mortem examination of an animal

57     Powers in relation to people



PART 8 - BIOSECURITY INTERNAL CONTROL
58.    Pest and disease surveys

59.    Entry, search and seizure



                                      3
60.    Detention and testing of animals and plants and their products

61     Treatment or destruction of animals and plants and their products

62     Infested biosecurity controlled areas

63     Regulation of infested biosecurity controlled areas

64     Pest-free biosecurity controlled areas

65.    Regulation of pest-free biosecurity controlled areas

66    Destruction of wild animals
67.    Notifiable pests and diseases

68     Beneficial organisms and biocontrol agents



PART 9 - BIOSECURITY EMERGENCIES .

69.    Declaration of a biosecurity emergency area

70.    Response to a biosecurity emergency

71.   Action in a biosecurity emergency area

72     Biosecurity Emergency Regulations


PART 10 - THE DIRECTOR OF BIOSECURITY ETC.
73.   Designation of Director of Biosecurity

74.   Designation of biosecurity officers

75.   Functions of the Director

76.   Functions ofthe Ministry
77.   Directions

78.   Delegation of functions

79.   Biosecurity register and records

80.   Status of biosecurity register and records




                                    4
PART 11 - ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACT

81.    FinanCial provisions
82.    Powers of Island Councils
83.    Consultation and outsourcing

84.    Duty to coordinate
85.    Facilities at biosecurity points of entry or departure

86.    Safe carriage and safe working environment
87.    Compliance agreements
88.    Biosecurityapproved premises
89.    International cooperation
90.    Notifications


PART 12 - OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
91.    Dereliction of duty by officers
92.    Obstruction, false information etc.
93.    Fraudulent use of official documents
94.    Fixed penalties
95.    Forfeitu re

96.    Fixed penalty system
97.    Offences by corporate bodies


PART 13 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
98.    Civil and criminal proceedings

99.    Abandoned goods
100.   Compensation
101.   Appeals from decisions



                                    5
102.   Limitation of liability
103.   Evidence
104.   Publication of orders and notices
105.   Specifications

106.   Regulations
107.   Repeals and savings
108.   Transitional provisions
109.   Consequential amendments
110.   Amendment of Schedule


Schedule   Fixed penalties




                                  6
                           REPUBLIC OF KIRIBATI
                              (No.2 of 2011)
                                                                       I assent,




AN ACT TO prevent the entry of animal and plant, pests and diseases into
Kiribati; to control their establishment and spread in regulate the
movement of animal and plant pests and diseases and of animals and plants
and their products; to facilitate international cooperation in respect of
animal and plant diseases; and to make ancillary and related provisions


                                                                 Commencement:
                                                                          2011


MADE by the Maneaba ni Maungatabu and assented to by the Beretitenti



                           PART I • PRELIMINARY


Short title and commencement

1.    (1)   This Act may be cited as the Biosecurity Act 2011.

      (2)   This Act comes into force on a date appointed by the Minister by
            Order.

      (3)   The Minister may appoint different days for the coming into force
            of different provisions.




                                     7
Interpretation

2.     (1)    In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-

       "aircraft" means any conveyance that may be used in navigation by
        air;
      "animal" means any mammal (other than a human), bird,
      insect, amphibian, reptile, fish, mollusc or other member ofthe
       animal kingdom, whether alive or dead, and includes the egg,
       embryo, ova or semen and any organic animal tissue from which
       another animal could be produced, and the hide, skin, hair,
       feathers, shell, horns, hoof,' viscera or any other part or portion of
       the body of an animal;
        "animal product" means any article or substance derived from an
     _- animal, whether or not in combination with any other article or -
        substance, and includes -
        (a)   meat, fat, milk, whey, cream, butter, cheese, eggs and other
              foodstuffs derived from an animal;
        (b)   the dung, urine, faeces, saliva, bone or blood of an animal, or any
              article or substance derived from the dung, urine, faeces, saliva,
              bone or blood of an animal;
        (c)   the secretions of any animal;
       (d)    any product or biological preparation derived from any animal
              tissue or animal secretion;
       "article" means a Single unit of any goods;
       "authorised" means duly authorised by the Minister, the Director or a
       public officer for the purposes of this Act;
       "baggage" means any goods which -accompany a passenger or crew
        member on a conveyance, including clothing and any article attached
        or otherwise connected to the body or clothing of any passenger or
        crew member;
       "ballast water" means water (including sediment that is or has been


                                     8
contained in water) used as ballast in a vessel;
"biosecurity" means the control by legal and administrative means of
 pests and diseases affecting animals, plants and their products, in
 order to avoid adverse effects from such pests and diseases on the
 economy and health of Kiribati;
"biosecurity access arrangements" means arrangements under section
 2 7(1) for specifications in respect of new imports; .
"biosecurity approved premises" means premises approved for the
 inspection, testing and treatment of regulated articles under section
 88;
 "biosecurity authority" of a receiving country means the authority or
  officer in that country which administers its biosecurity Acts;
 "biosecurity certification requirement", in relation to .an article, i'Tleans
 a requirement by a receiving country for a sanitary or phytosanitary
 certificate or a certificate of origin in respect of the article;
 "biosecurity clearance", in respect of a regulated article or
  conSignment, means biosecurity import clearance or biosecurity
  export clearance;
 "biosecurity clearance agent" means a person in Kiribati appointed by
 an importer or exporter under section 13 for the purposes of this Act
 as the agent of the importer or exporter to supervise the biosecurity
 clearance of a conveyance, container, animal, plant, a,nimal or plant
 product or any other goods;
 "biosecurity control" of a regulated article means submission of the
 article for inspection under this Act, and thereafter taking such
 biosecurity measures, or permitting such measures to be taken, as
 are directed pursuant to this Act, until biosecurity clearance is
 granted in respect of the article;
 "biosecurity controlled area" means an infested biosecurity controlled
 area declared under section 62 or a pest-free biosecurity controlled
 area declared under section 64;


                              9
"biosecurity declaration" in relation to an article or consignment
means a written statement of the nature, quantity and origin of the
article or consignment, and of other details relating to it required by
or under this Act;
"biosecurity emergency" means the incursion or suspected incursion
 of a regulated pest or disease into any area of Kiribati, or the
 existence of some other biosecurity threat, which requires urgent
 action, whether by eradication, containment or other response, and
 for which the powers under this Act are not otherwise adequate;

"biosecurity emergency area" means an area declared in response to a
 biosecurity emergency under section 69;

"biosecurity entry inspection" of an incoming article means inspection
 of it pursuant to section.23;
"biosecurity export clearance" of an article means permission under
 section 38 for the article or consignment to be exported;
"biosecurity export inspection" of an outgoing article means
inspection of it pursuant to section 33;
"biosecurity functions of the Government" means the functions set
 out in section 6;

 "biosecurity goods holding area" means an area of land at or
 adjacent to a seaport or airport deSignated under section 11 (3) for
 the biosecurity inspection of incoming or outgoing articles and
 consignments;

 "biosecurity holding area" means a biosecurity port holding area, a
  biosecurity goods holding area or a biosecurity postal holding


 "biosecurity import clearance" of an article means permission under
  section 2S for the article or consignment to be removed from a
  biosecurity holding area;

  "biosecurity import clearance inspection" of an incoming article
   means inspection of it pursuant to section 24;


                          10
  "biosecurity import permit" means a biosecurity import permit
  issued under section 29;

 "biosecurity import requirements" in relation to an article or
 consignment mean -

 (al   the conditions of a biosecurity import permit, if one is required;

 (b)   the requirements of any sanitary or phytosanitary certificate
       relating to the article or consignment;

 (c)   any other biosecurity measures specified under section 26(1 )(c);

"biosecurity inspection" of an incoming or outgoing conveyance,
article or consignment means an inspection to ascertain whether
 the conveyance, article or consignment presents a biosecurity risk
 to Kiribati or a receiving country and whether in other respects it
 conforms to the requirements of this Act;

"biosecurity landing clearance" means clearance for a vessel or aircraft to
land cargo or passengers under section 1 5;
"biosecurity measure" means the inspection, detention, quarantining,
testing, treatment, re-consignment or destruction of a regulated article
to eliminate or reduce the biosecurity threat presented by the article;
"biosec'urity officer" means -

(a)    the Director and his or her deputy, if any;

(b)    any person designated as a biosecurity officer under section 74;

(cl    in respect of any particular function, a biosecurity officer to whom
       the function has been assigned or delegated under section 76 or
       78;
"biosecurity point of departure" means a seaport, airport or mail
exchange designated under section 10(4) for the exportation of
regulated articles;

"biosecurity point of entry" means a seaport, airport or mail
exchange designated under section 1 0(1) for the importation of
regulated articles;


                                 11
 "biosecurity port holding area" means an area designated under
 section 11 (1) for the biosecurity inspection of incoming vessels or
 aircraft;

 "biosecurity port quarantine" means quarantine of a vessel or aircraft in
 a biosecurity port quarantine area under section 16;
 "biosecurity port quarantine area" means an area designated under
 section 16(1) for the quarantine of vessels and aircraft;

"biosecurity port quarantine clearance" means permission under
section 19 for a vessel or aircraft to unload passengers and cargo
after being in biosecurity port quarantine;

"biosecurity postal holding area" means an area of a mail exchange
designated under section 11 (5) for the biosecurity inspection of
incoming or outgoing postal items;
"biosecurity quarantine" means confinement in isolation of a
regulated article and any conveyance, container or packaging in
which the article is carried, for inspection, testing and/or
treatment; in order to prevent or limit the entry, introduction,
establishment or spread of a regulated pest or disease;

"biosecurity quarantine station" means a facility under the control of the
Director and designated under section 40 for the performance of
biosecurity quarantine, and includes a temporary biosecurity quarantine
station;

"biosecurity register" means the register kept by the Director under
section 79;

"biosecurity risk" means the likelihood of the introduction, establishment
or spread of a pest or disease which would adversely affect animals,
plants, human beings, the environment or economic activities, and the
likely extent of such harm;

"biosecurity risk assessment" in relation to a regulated article means
evaluation of the biosecurity risk posed by the article;

"biosecurity specifications" means biosecurity import specifications


                              12
 made under section 26 or biosecurity export specifications made under
 section 36;

 "biosecurity threat" means the threat of harm being caused or
 adverse effects resulting to animals, plants, human beings, the
 environment or economic activities as a result of the introduction,
 establishment or spread of a regulated pest or disease;
"captain", in relation to an aircraft, means the person for the time
being in command of the aircraft;
"compliance agreement" means an agreement between the          Director
 and another person as provided for in section 87;
"consignment" means a quantity of goods which arrive in the same
vessel or aircraft and which in accordance with this Act can be
covered by a single import permiLorsanitary or phytosanitary
certificate;

"container" means anything in which or by which goods are encased,
covered, enclosed or packed, including any material in contact with the
goods;

"contamination" means the presence in any item of a pest, not
constituting an infestation;
"conveyance" means a ship, aircraft, vehicle or other means of
transporting people, goods or animals from one location to another,
while it is being used or prepared for such transport;
"country of origin" includes a re-exporting country;
"custodian", in respect of an item, means the occupier of a place or the
person in possession and charge of an article, whether lawfully or not,
but does not include a person who has possession or control ofthe item
only for the purpose of taking biosecurity measures in respect of it;
"Deputy Director" means the Deputy Director of Biosecurity
designated under section 73;
"Director" means the Director of Biosecurity designated under
section 73, any person for the time being performing the functions


                               13
   of Director and, in respect of any particular function, a person to
  whom the function has been delegated under section 78;
   "disease" means any unhealthy condition in an animal or plant which is
   known or suspected to be caused by an organism, and includes a
   disease transmissible from animals to humans and a disease capable of
   harming the environment;
  "document" means any mode of communicating information in a
   retrievable form, including electronically;
  "environment" includes -
  Ca)    the ecosystem and its constituent p'arts, including people and
         communities;
  (b)    all natural and physical resources;
". (C)   the qualities and characteris1:ics of locations;' places and are~s.

  "eradication" means the application of measures to eliminate a
  pest or disease from an area;
  "establishment", in relation to a pest or disease, means the perpetuation
  in an area of the pest or disease for the foreseeable future after its entry
  into the area;
  "export" means to take or send goods out of Kiribati;
  "exporter" means a person who exports or seeks to export goods, other
  than as the master of the vessel or captain of the aircraft in which the
  goods are carried; and includes a biosecurity clearance agent;
  "fittings" means any stall, box, cage, enclosure, pen, net or other
  material used for penning, yarding, confining or containing any animal
  and' includes any harness, saddlery, rope, bucket, trough, bedding,
  utensil or implement used in the handling or keeping of animals or
  animal products;
  "fodder" means any water, meat, vegetables, grain or material used for
 the food or litter of animals, or the storage of animal products;

 "garbage" means waste material derived in whole or in part from plants,


                                 14
 fruit, vegetables, meat or other plant or animal material, or other refuse
 of any kind that has been associated with any plants, fruits, ve-getables, .
 meat or other plant or animal material;
 "genetic material" means any material of plant, animal, microbial or
 other origin containing functional units of heredity;
 "goods" means any kind of moveable property or thing;
"host material" means any packing material, container, fittings,
litter, manure, fodder or similar goods that might have had contact
with animals or plants or their products;
"import" means to bring goods, or cause goods to be brought, into
Kiribati;
"importer" means a person who imports or seeks to import goods, other_
than asthe master of a vessel or captaill ofthe aircraft in which the· .
goods are carried; and includes a biosecurity clearance agent;
"in transit", in relation to goods, means the goods are not imported into
an area but pass through it to another area, whether by the same or
another conveyance, during which time they remain enclosed, are not
split up, are not combined with other goods, and do not have their
packaging changed;
"infected", in relation an animal or plant, means that the animal or plant
is diseased or may have been exposed to the risk of infection during the
preceding 6 months;
"infested", in relation an item or area, means that there is present
in the item or area a living pest or disease;
"inspection", in relation to an item, means an official examination of the
item to determine if any pest or disease is present in the item and
whether in other respects the item conforms to the requirements of this
Act;
"IPPe" means the International Plant Protection Convention of the Food
and Agriculture OrganizatIon of the United Nations;
"introduction", in relation to a pest or disease, means the entry of the


                              15
 pest or disease into an area, reSUlting in its establishment in the area;

"Island Council" means a council established under the Local
Government Act;

 "item" means any kind of moveable or immoveable property or thing,
 induding premises;

 "living organism" means anyorganism capable of transferring or
 replicating genetic material, including sterile organisms, viruses, viroids,
 plasmids, bacteriophages and prions;

"master", in relation to a vessel, means the person for the time being in
charge of the vessel, not being the pilot;

"microbe" means any organism or biotic entity of microscopiC
proportions, whether unicellular, multicellular or sub-cellular in
common form;·

"Minister" means the Minister who has responsibility for the
administration of this Act; and "Ministry" means the Ministry of
that Minister;

"notifiable pest or disease" means a pest or disease which is dedared
under section 67(l} to be notifiable;

"OlE" means the Organisation Internationale Epizootique;

"organism" means a biotic entity capable of reproduction or replication,
other than a human;

"packing material" means any fabriC, paper, cardboard, plastiC, wood,
straw, grass or leaves used in packing any goods, and any other type of
material in which goods are covered, enclosed, contained or wrapped;

"pest" means any species, strain or biotype of a plant, animal, microbe
or pathogenic agent, or any organism, which -
(a)   causes disease; or

(b)    is detrimental to or capable of harming or adversely affecting
      animals or animal products, plants or plant products, human
      beings or the environment;


                              16
 "pest risk analysis" means the evaluation by a qualified person of
 biological or other scientific and economic evidence to determine
 whether a pest or disease should be regulated and the nature of
 any biosecurity measures to be taken against it;

 "phytosanitary certificate" means a certificate relating to a plant or
 plant product which -

 (a)   is issued by the biosecurity authority of the country of origin or
       re- exporting country;

 (b)   certifies that the plant or plant product is substantially free from
       plant pests and diseases and in other respects meets the plant
       health import requirements of the receiving country; and

 (c)   is patterned after the model certificates of the IPpe;

. "plant" includes seeds, germplasm, any other part of a plant and a
dead or preserved plant;

"plant material" means any unmanufactured material of plant
origin, including grain;
"plant product" means -

(a)    plant material;

(b)    timber; and

(c)    any product manufactured wholly or partly from one or more
       plants;

"PPPO" means the Pacific Plant Protection Organisation;

"precautionary principle" means the principle that it is not
unreasonable to refuse permission for an activity that has great
potential negative impact, even if there is not sufficient scientific
data to support a refusal, as incorporated in Article 5.7 of the SP$
Agreement;

"premises" means any immoveable property, other than land;

"prescribed" means prescribed by this Act or by regulations made
under it;


                               17
"prohibited import" means a regulated article the importation or
ownership of which is prohibited under section 9;

"re-exporting country", in relation any goods, means a country which is
 not the country of origin of the goods, but where a container or
consignment of goods is opened and re-packed for export;
"receiving country" means a country which is the intended destination of
an article being or proposed to be exported;

"reconsign", in relation to a regulated article or consignment which has
been refused biosecurity import clearance, means to send the ·article or
consignment out of Kiribati, either by the vessel or aircraft on which it
was imported or by another vessel or aircraft;

"regulated article" means -
(a)    any animal or animatproduct; .

(b)    any plant or plant product;

(c)    any living organism, whether modified or not;

(d)    soil, sand gravel and aggregate;

(e)    any genetic material;
(f)    human remains;

(g)    any host material;

(h)    a regulated pest or disease;
(I)    any clothing, machinery or other article that contains or has
       adhering to it anything mentioned in paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d);

(j)    garbage;
(k)    any other article, substance, goods or thing declared by the
       Minister by order under subsection (2) to be a regulated article for
       the purposes of this Act;
"regulated consignment" means a consignment of regulated
articles;

"regulated pest or disease" means a pest or disease -


                               18
 (a)    the importation of which into Kiribati is prohibited or restricted
        under section 8; or
 (b)    which is under official control;
 "regulations" means regulations, orders and any other subsidiary
 legislation made under this Act;
"repealed laws" means the Act and subsidiary legislation repealed by
section 107(1);
"sanitary certificate" means an international health certificate
relating to an animal or animal product which -
(a)      is issued by the biosecurity or agricultural Director of the country
        of origin or re-exporting country;
(b)     certifies that the animal or animal product Is substantially free
       . frCllTI anim<fl pests and diseases and in other respects meets the·
        animal health import requirements of the receiving country; and
(c)     complies with relevant requirements of the SPS Agreement or the
        exporting country, as the case may be;
"Secretary" means the Secretary ofthe Ministry;
"ship's stores" means any food or other regulated articles carried
on a vessel or aircraft for consumption or use on the vessel or
aircraft;

"specified", in relation to a requirement, document, procedure or any
other matter, means specified by the Director under section 105;
"spread", in relation to a pest or disease, means the expansion of
the geographical distribution of the pest or disease within an area;
"SPS Agreement" means the World Trade Organisation Agreement on
the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures;
"status", in relation to a pest or disease, means its presence, absence,
prevalence, incidence, distribution and occurrence in an area;
"technical section head" means the head of the department or
section of government responsible for animal health, plant health,


                                19
      fisheries, environment and health quarantine matters respectively,
      nDt being the DirectDr;
      "test" means an examinatiDn which gDes beYDnd a visual inspecticn, to.
      determine if a pest cr disease is, Dr is likely to. be, present Dr to' identify
      a pest Dr disease, and includes chemical      tests Df plant material and
      diagnDstic tests in respect Df an animal;
      "this Act" includes regulatiDns and orders made under it;
      "timber" includes roundwcod, sawn wODd, wDod chips and
      dunnage, with or withDut bark;
      "treatment" means an authorised precedure fer the killing, remDval,
      mDdification or rendering infertile or non-viable of a pest er disease by
      way of cleansing, fumigation, ineculatien, disinfectiDn, disinfestation,
      decontaminatiDn,Drotherwise;
      "uncleared", in relation to a regulated article, means that the article has
      not received biosecurity clearance;
      "under official centrol", in relatien to. a pest or disease, means that its
      presence is knDwn, its distributien is limited and its further spread is
      controlled by the exercise of powers under this Act;
      "vehicle" includes a bicycle (whether motorized er not), a cart and any
      other wheeled conveyance;
      "vessel" includes a ship, hevercraft, boat, ferry, raft, yacht, canoe or
      pontoon that is used as a conveyance in or en water, whether er          nct it
      is self~propelled;
      "written" and "in Writing"· mean any mede ef cemmunicating
      infermation in aretrievable form, including electronically (as to
      which see section 104(2)).
(2)   The Minister, Dn the advice of the Director, may by order declare
      any article, substance goods or thing to be a regulated article for
      the purposes of this Act.




                                    20
 Application of the Act

 3.    (1)    This Act applies to every person in Kiribati, irrespective of the person's
              nationality or citizenship.
       (2)    This Act applies to all conveyances, containers and goods while they are
              in Kiribati, including vessels and aircraft owned or operated by the
              government of a foreign State;
       (3)    This Act applies to persons, conveyances, containers and goods outside
              Kiribati to the extent needed for its effective enforcement.


Act binds the Government
4.     This Act binds the Government, including every. Government department and
      statutory authority and every person in the employment ofthe Government.
                  .   -.                                        --.     ..


Responsibility for the Act
5,    (1)    The Minister is responsible to the Maneaba ni Maungatabu for the
             implementation of this Act and the performance of the biosecurity
             fu nctions of the Government, within the resources available to the
             Ministry.
      (2)    The Secretary is responsible to the Minister for the efficient and effective
             running of the Ministry.
      (3)    The Director is responsible to the Secretary for the performance of the
             functions of the Director set out in this Act.

Blosecurity functions of the Government
6.    The biosecurity functions of the Governrnent are, to the extent of the available
      resources and consistently with this Act -
      (a)    to protect Kiribati against the entry of regulated pests and diseases
             affecting animals, plants, human beings and the environment;
      (b)    to carry out surveillance and monitoring of pests and diseases in Kiribati
             and assess the status of regulated pests and diseases;


                                            21
      (c)   to prevent the establishment and spread of regulated pests and diseases
            and the release of organisms that might adversely affect animals, plants,
            human beings and the environment in Kiribati;
      (d)   to eradicate, contain or control the movement of regulated pests and
            diseases that are already present in Kiribati;
      (e)   to prevent the introduction and spread of regulated pests and diseases
            not already present in Kiribati;
      (f)   to facilitate the safe importation of animals and plants and their
            products, and related equipment and technology;
      (g)    to facilitate the export of animals and plants and their products in
            accordance with the biosecurity requirements of the receiving countries;
      (h)   to facilitate international cooperation to prevent the spread of pests and
            -diseasesaffecting'plants; animals,"human beings and the environment.


Relationship with other Acts
7,    (1)   This Act is in addition to and does not derogate from any other Act. In
            particular, but without limiting this rule -
      (a)    the notification requirements in section 14 relating to human health do
            not displace any other statutory requirement relating to such
            notification;
      (b)   the provisions of Part 3 relating to biosecurity port quarantine of vessels
            and aircraft is an addition to any other laws relating to quarantine of
            vessels and aircraft;
     (e)    the requirements relating to imports and exports in Parts 4 and 5 is in
            additional to any other statutory requirements relating to imports and
            exports, trade in endangered species, biosafety, biodiversity or
            environment acts generally.
     (2)    To the extent of any inconsistency between this Act and any other Act,
            every other Act must so far as possible be construed so as to fulfill the
            purpose of this Act.



                                          22
                            PART 2 - BORDER BIOSECURITY CONTROL
Regulated pests and diseases

8.    (1)    The Minister may by order declare the pests or diseases -

             (a)     the importation of which is prohibite.d for all purposes;
             (b)     the importation of which is permitted subject to conditions
                     specified by the Director under section 26;
            (c)'     which are under official control.
      (2)   A person who imports or attempts to import a pest or disease which is
             prohibited under subsection (1 )(a) commits an offence and shall be liable
            to a fine $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment or both.
      (3)   Aperson who imports or attempts to import a pest or disease which is'
            regulated under subsection (1 )(b) in brea.ch of the conditions of import
            commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years
            imprisonment or both.
      (4)   Before making an order under this section, the Minister must obtain -
            (a)    a pest risk analysis;
            (b)    the advice of the Director and of relevant technical section heads.


Prohibited imports
9.    (1)   The Minister may by order prohibit the importation of -

            (a)      particular regulated articles from all countries; or
            (b)      particular regulated articles from one or more particular countries
                     of origin,
     (in this Act referred to as "import prohibited articles") if the importation would
     present an unacceptable biosecurity risk to Kiribati.
     (2)    An order under this section in respect of an article -
            (a)      may be made at any time before biosecurity import clearance is


                                            23
                     granted in respect of the article; and

              (b)    continues in force until the prohibition is revoked or varied, but
                     must be reviewed every 12 months.

       (3)     In making a decision under this section, the Minister

              must have regard to the international obligations of Kiribati in respect of
              biosecu rity;

      (4)     Before making an order under this section the Minister must obtain -

              (a)    a pest risk analysis in relation to the article;

              (b)   the advice of the Director and of relevant technical section heads.

      (5)     If a person imports or attempts to import a prohibited article -

              (a)    the person commits an offence; and shall be liable to a fine of
                    .$5,OOOor2-years imprisonment or both, and

              (b)   biosecurity import clearance under section 25 will be refused for
                    the article.

      (6)     A person who without lawful excuse owns or is in possession of any
              prohibited article commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of
              $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment.


Biosecurity pOints of entry and departure

10.   (1)     The Minister may by order designate as biosecurity points of entry the
             . seaports and airports at which regulated articles may enter Kiribati.

      (2)     5ubjectto subsection (9), a master or captain who causes or permits an
              incoming vessel or aircraft to berth or land except at a seaport or airport
              that is a biosecurity point of entry commits an offence and shall be liable
              to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment or both.

      (3)     A person who imports, or attempts to import, a regulated article or
              consignment except at a biosecurity point of entry commits an offence
              and shall be liable to a fine $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment or both.

      (4)     The Minister may by order designate as biosecurity points of departure
             the seaports and airports at which regulated articles may be exported.


                                             24
       (5)    A master or captain who causes or permits a vessel or aircraft to leave
               Kiribati except from a seaport or airport that is a biosecurity point of
               departure commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2
              years imprisonment or both.
       (6)    A person who exports, or attempts to export, a reg ulated article or
              consignment except at a biosecurity point of departure commits. an
              offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment
              or both.

       (7)     A designation of a biosecurity point of entry or departure may be
              limited to particular types of vessels, aircraft or articles or to arrivals
              from or exports to particular countries.
       (8)     A vessel or aircraft may berth or land elsewhere than at a biosecurjty
              point of entry -

              (a)    if constrained by adverse weather, mechanical failure or superior
                     force; or
              (b)   if so directed or permitted by the Director or a biosecurity officer.
       (9)     In the circumstances mentioned in subsection (9), the place where the
              vessel has berthed or the aircraft has landed is deemed to be a
              biosecurity point of entry for the purposes of this Act, once the Director
              has been notified of the berthing or landing.
       (10)   Before making an order under subsection (1) or (4) the Minister must
              obtain the advice of the Director and consult, as the case may be, the
              officers or authorities responsible for the movement of vessels and
              aircraft in Kiribati.


Designation of biosecurity holding areas
1 1.   (l)    The Minister may by order designate -
              (a)   any territorial waters or any part of a seaport as a biosecurity port
                    holding area for vessels;
              (b)   any airport or part of an airport as a biosecurity port holding area
                    for aircraft.


                                             25
       (2)    A biosecurity port holding area is one where incoming conveyances may
              be heJd for biosecurity.inspection pending biosecurity landing clearance
              or other disposition under this Act.

       (3)    The Minister may by order designate any area of land at or adjacent to a
              seaport or airport as a biosecurity goods holding area for incoming or
              outgoing containers and goods.

       (4)   A biosecurity goods holding area is one where incoming or outgoing
              containers or goods may be held for biosecurity inspection pending
              biosecurity clearance or other disposition under this Act.

      (S)    The Minister may designate any part of a mail exchange as a biosecurity
             postal holding area for incoming or outgoing postal items.

      (6)    A biosecurity postal holding area is one where incoming or outgoing
             postal items may be held forbiosecurity inspection pending.biosecurity. .
             clearance or other disposition under this Act.

      (7)    Before making an order under subsection (l), (3) or (5), the Minister
             must obtain the advice of the Director and consult, as the case may be,
             the officers or authorities responsible for the movement of vessels,
             aircraft and postal items in Kiribati.

      (8)    A mail exchange may only be designated as a biosecurity holding area in
             respect of regulated articles that at the time of entry or departure are in
             a mail bag or other container that conforms to the requirements of the
             postal legislation of Kiribati.


Management of biosecurity holding areas
12.   (1)     Section 40(2) and (3) apply to biosecurity holding areas as they apply to
             biosecu rity quarantine stations.

      (2)    No person, other than the person in charge of the area or a biosecurity
             officer acting in the course of duty, may enter a biosecurity holding area
             without the written permission of the Director, or the permission of the
             person in charge of the area or of a biosecurity officer.

      (3)    A biosecurity officer may, in order to reduce a biosecurity threat, lock,


                                               26
              seal or otherwise prevent entry to and exit from a biosecurity holding
              area or any building in it.
       (4)    A person who -

              (a)   enters a biosecurity holding area without permission given under
                    subsection (2); or

              (b)   damages, interferes with or in any way reduces the effectiveness of
                    measures taken to secure a biosecurity holding area, or any
                    regulated article or other item in the area,
                    commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $2,000 or 1
                    year imprisonment or both.
      (5)    The Director may issue written directions to the person in charge of a
             biosecurity holding area as to the management of the area.
      (6)    A person who removesorattempts to remove from a biosecurity holding
             area any regulated article without obtaining biosecurity clearance in
             respect of it, unless for the purpose of biosecurity measures being
             applied to the article in accordance with this Act, commits an offence
             and shall be liable to a fine of $1 0,000 or 5 years imprisonment or
             both.


Biosecurity clearance agents

13.   (1)    A person who proposes to import or export regulated articles through a
             seaport or airport and who will not be present when biosecurity
             inspection is to take place must-
             (a)    in writing appoint a person resident in Kiribati as a biosecurity
                    clearance agent for the purposes of this Act; and

             (b)    notify the Director in writing of the appointment before the agent
                    performs any agency functions.
      (2)    A biosecurity clearance agent appointed under subsection (1) ceases to
             be an agent for the purposes of this Act jf the Director notifies the
             importer or exporter in writing that, in the opinion of the Director, the
             agent's conduct in the performance of functions under this Act renders

                                            27
              the agent unacceptable for purposes of this Act.

       (3)    Notice under subsection (2) must be given within a reasonable time to
              allow the importer or exporter to appoint another agent.

      (4)     A biosecurity clearance agent who performs or purports to perform any
              functions of an importer or exporter under this Act is liable to the same
              extent as the importer or exporter for any act or omission which
             amounts to an offence or which creates any legal obligation under this
             Act.

      (5)     If a person referred to in subsection (1) fails to complywith that
             subsection, biosecurity clearance will not be granted for any regulated
             article or consignment which the person seeks to import or export .


                                . PART3 ~ VESSELS AND AIRCRAFT ....


Biosecurity arrival declaration

14.   (1)    The master or captain of every vessel or aircraft destined for Kiribati
             must make to the Director a biosecurity arrival declaration stating -

             (a)    the destination seaport or airport in Kiribati and the estimated
                    time of arrival of the vessel or aircraft;

             (b)    its immediately preceding port or place of call;

             (e)    the proposed itinerary of the vessel or aircraft until it leaves
                    Kiribati;

             (d)    the nature and country of origin of its cargo;

             (e)    the number of passengers and crew;

             (f)    the presence of any live animal or live plant on the vessel or
                    aircraft;

             (g)    the nature of any illness or malady affecting any live animal,
                    plant, crew member, passenger or other individual on board the
                    vessel or aircraft; and


                                              28
             (h)    any other matter relevant to facilitating biosecurity landing
                    clearance of the vessel or aircraft that is specified by the Director.
      (2)    The declaration required by subsection (1) -
             (a)    must be made not less than 24 hours in the case of a vessel, or
                    60 minutes in the case of an aircraft, before the estimated time of
                    arrival;
            (b)     may be made by electronic means, in accordance with directions
                    of the Director issued from time to time;
            (c)     may be made through a biosecurity clearance agent;
            (d)     may be made in conjunction with or as part of a declaration made
                    for customs or other border control purposes
      (3)   A master or captain who fails to make a biosecurity arrival declaration,
            either directly or through a biosecurity clearance agent, commits an
            offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment
            or both.


Biosecurity landing clearance
15.   (1)   The master or captain of every incoming vessel or aircraft must -
            (a)    take the vessel or aircraft directly to a biosecurity port holding
                   area as directed by a biosecurity officer;
            (b)    permit a biosecurity officer to board and search the vessel or
                   aircraft in accordance with section 47(1);
            (c)    provide to the officer the log, cargo manifest, bill of lading, stores
                   list, passenger list, crew list and any other document that is on or
                   in and relates to the vessel or aircraft and that the officer
                   reasonably requests for the purposes of this Act;

            Cd)    ~omplete an incoming conveyance biosecurity certificate, in the
                   form specified or approved by the Director, certifying that all
                   garbage, live animals, meat or animal products and plants or plant
                   material on board the vessel or aircraft will be lawfully disposed


                                           29
               of.

(2)   After inspecting relevant documents and conducting any necessary
      search of an incoming vessel or aircraft, and if satisfied -

      (a)      that the vessel or aircraft does not have on board any regulated

               article that might pose a biosecurity threat to Kiribati; and

      (b)      that the prescribed fee, if any,. has been paid,

      a biosecurity officer may grant biosecurity landing clearance to the
      vessel or aircraft.

(3)    Biosecurity landing clearance means that a vessel or aircraft may land'
      crew members and any cargo or passengers on board, but the crew and
      any cargo or passengers remain subject to biosecurity control under this
      Act.

(4)   Biosecurity landing clearance must be refused if a biosecurity officer
      orders the vessel or aircraft into port quarantine pursuant to section
      16(2).

(5)   A master or captain who contravenes a provision of subsection(J)
      commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years
      imprisonment or both.

(6)   A master or captain who lands any crew, cargo or passengers from a
      vessel or aircraft without biosecurity landing clearance, except with the
      perrilission of a biosecurity officer, commits an offence and shall be
      liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment or both.

(7)   A crew member or passenger who lands from a vessel or aircraft before
      it has received bioecurity landing clearance, except with the permission
      of a biosecurity officer, commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine
      of $10,000 or imprisonment or both.

(8)   Biosecurity landing clearance of a vessel or aircraft may be granted
      unconditionally, or conditioned on entry into a bond to the Government,
      in the form specified or approved by the Director, by the master of the
      vessel or captain of the aircraft, for compliance with any requirements
      imposed pursuant to this Act in respect of the vessel or aircraft or cargo.


                                      30
Biosecurity port quarantine of vessels and aircraft
16.   (1)   The Minister may by order designate -
            (a)    any territorial waters or any part of a seaport as a biosecurity port
                   quarantine area for vessels;
            (b)    any part of an airport as a biosecurity port quarantine area for
                   aircraft.
      (2)   Before making an order under subsection (1) the Minister must obtain
            the advice of the Director and consult, as the case may be, the officers or
            authorities responsible for the movement of vessels and aircraft in
            Kiribati.
      (3)   If a biosecu rity officer reasonably suspects that an incoming vessel or
            aircraft is ~..

            (a)    infected or infested with a regulated pest or disease; or
            (b)    carrying any regulated article which might pose a biosecurity
                   threat to Kiribati,
            the officer may order the vessel or aircraft into biosecurity port
            quarantine.
      (4)   If a vessel or aircraft is ordered into biosecurity port quarantine under
            subsection (2), a biosecurity officer may -
            (a)    order the master or captain to remove the vessel or aircraft to
                  quarantine in a biosecurity port quarantine area; or
            (b)   if necessary (because the master or captain refuses to obey the
                  order, or because of the nature of the biosecurity threat) arrange
                  for the vessel or aircraft to be removed to the biosecurity port
                  quaranti ne area.
      (5)   The cost of removal of a vessel or aircraft to biosecurity port quarantine
            is to be borne by the owner or charterer, and no compensation is
            payable for any loss or destruction or consequential loss caused as a
            result of any such removal, unless negligence or malice is proved.


                                          31
       (6)    The owner or charterer and master or captain must each be given written
              notice stating the reasons for an order under this section in respect of
              the vessel or aircraft and, if it was removed under subsection (3), the
             whereabouts of the vessel or aircraft.
       (7)   Ifthe Director reasonably believes that a vessel or aircraft poses a
             serious biosecurity threat to Kiribati which cannot adequately be dealt
             with by appropriate biosecurity measures, the Director may in writing
             direct the vessel or aircraft to leave the waters of Kiribati.
       (8)   Before issuing a direction under this section, the Director must consult,
             as the case may be, the officers or authorities responsible for the
             movement of vessels or aircraft in Kiribati.


Managementof biosecurity port quarantine area
17.   (1)    No person, other than the person in charge of the area or a biosecurity
             officer acting in the course of duty, may enter a biosecurity port
             quarantine area without the written permission of the Director or of the
             person in charge of the area.
      (2)    A person who -
             (a)   enters a biosecurity port quarantine area without permission; or
             (b)   damages, interferes with or in any way reduces the effectiveness
                   of measures taken to secure a biosecurity port quarantine area, or
                   any regulated article or other item in the area,
             commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years
             imprisonment or both.
      (3)    The Director may issue written instructions to the person in charge of a
             biosecu rity port quarantine area as to the management of the area.

      (4)    A biosecurity officer may affix a notice at any biosecurity port quarantine
             area, and on any vessel or aircraft held in the area, stating the conditions
             and duration of quarantine and other information relating to the area or
             the item as specified by the Director.
      (5)    A person who removes a notice affixed under subsection (4) without

                                             32
               lawful authority commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of
              $2,000 or 1 year imprisonment or both.

Conduct of vessels and aircraft in biosecurity port quarantine
i 8.   (1)   The Director may give written directions to the master of a vessel or
             captain of an aircraft in biosecurity port quarantine -
             (a)    as to the movement of the vessel or aircraft while it is in
                    q uaranti ne;
             (b)    as to the movement of passengers, crew and cargo while the
                    vessel or aircraft is in quarantine; and
             (c)    as to any treatment or other biosecurity measure that must be
                    applied to the vessel or aircraft.
       (2)   The cost of keeping a vessel or aircraft in biosecurity port quarantine, - .
             and of any treatment or other measures that must be applied to it, is to
             be borne by the owner or charterer.
       (3)   No compensation is payable for any loss or destruction or consequential
             loss caused by a vessel or aircraft being detained in quarantine, unless
             negligence or malice is proved.
       (4)   A master or captain who fails to take all reasonable steps to ensure that
             the vessel or aircraft and its cargo, crew and passengers conform to
             directions given under subsection (1) commits an offence and shall be
             liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment or both.


Biosecurity port quarantine clearance of vessels and aircraft
19.    (J)   If satisfied -
             (a)    that a vessel or aircraft in biosecurity port quarantine is
                    substantially free from regulated pests and diseases;
             (b)   that any potential biosecurity risk from ships' stores and other
                   regulated articles on the vessel or aircraft is suitably contained;
                   and


                                            33
             (c)   that the prescribed fee, if any, has been paid,
             a biosecurity officer may grant biosecurity port quarantine clearance for
             the vessel or aircraft to unload passengers and cargo.
      (2)    Biosecurity port quarantine clearance of a vessel or aircraft may be
            gianted unconditionally, or conditioned on entry into a bond to the
            Government, in the form specified or approved by the Director, by the
            master of the vessel or captain of the aircraft, for compliance with any
            requirements imposed pursuant to this Act in respect of the vessel or
            aircraft or cargo.
      (3)   Biosecurity port quarantine clearance of a vessel or aircraft has the same
            effect as biosecurity landing clearance granted under section 15.

Outgoing vessels and aircraft
20.   (J)   If a bibsecurity officer has reason to believe that there is on board an
            outgoing vessel or aircraft any regulated article that requires biosecurity
            export clearance and that has not been cleared, the officer may -
            (a)    board and search the vessel or aircraft in accordance with section
                   47(1 );

            (b)    request the master or captain to produce for inspection the cargo
                   manifest, bill of lading, stores list, passenger list, crew list and any
                   other document that is on or in and relates to the vessel or aircraft
                   and that the officer reasonably requires for the purposes of this
                   Act;
            (c)    direct the master or captain not to move the vessel or aircraft
                   unless permitted by the officer, and then only as directed by the
                   officer;
            (d)    direct the vessel or aircraft to be subjected to any treatment or
                   other biosecurity measure that is prescribed or specified; and
            (e)    give to the master or captain any other lawful direction that is
                   reasonably required to protect the destination country from a
                   biosecurity threat posed by the vessel or aircraft.



                                           34
       (2)    A master or captain who -
              (a)    refuses to permit a search pursuant to subsection (1 lea); or
              (b)    fails to comply with a request or direction given under
                     subsection (1 lib) to (e),
              commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years
              Imprisonment or both.


Environmental obligations of masters and captains
21.   (1)    The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in
             Kiribati -
             (a)    take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel
                    from making contact with any animal on'shoreunless permitted by
                    a biosecurity officer, and then only as directed by the officer; and
             (b)    seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas at all times
                    except as needed for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
      (2)    The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to
             ensure that -
             (a)    no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant
                    product;
             (b)    no bilge water or ballast water; and
             (c)    no sewage or foul wastewater,
             is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Kiribati.
      (3)    The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming
             aircraft must, while the vessel or aircraft is in Kiribati, take all reasonable
             steps to ensure that -
             (a)    all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a
                    suitable leak-proof container, with a lid, and the container is
                    securely fastened at all times and kept within the vessel or aircraft;
                    and


                                              35
            (b)    garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from
                   the vessel or aircraft under and in accordance with the directions
                   of a biosecurity officer.

      (4)    The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming
            aircraft must take all reasonable steps to ensure that no ships' stores are
            removed from the vessel or aircraft while it is in Kiribati, except under
            and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.

      (5)   A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores of any incoming vessel
            or aircraft while it is in Kiribati.

      (6)   The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the
            owner or charterer of the vessel or aircraft.

      (7)    A master who contravenes subsection (1 )(b), fails to take all reasonable
            steps as required by subsection (J lea), (2), (3) or (4) or fails to.obey a
            direction of a biosecurity officer given under any Of those subsections
            commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $1 0,000 or 5 years
            imprisonment or both.

      (8)   A captain who fails to take ali reasonabie steps as required by
            subsection (3) or (4) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer
            given under either of those subsections commits an offence and shall be
            liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment or both.
      (9)   An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements
            prescribed by regulations.

Passengers and crew members
22.   (1)   Subject to subsections (2) and (3), every passenger or crew member who
            arrives in Kiribati on board a vessel or aircraft must make to a
            biosecurity officer a passenger arrival biosecurity declaration.

      (2)   The passenger arrival biosecurity declaration must be in the form
            specified or approved by the Director and contain all required particulars
            relating to the person and any baggage that accompanies the person.

      (3)   A passenger or crew member does not need to declare-



                                             36
         (al   articles of clothing worn on the body;
         (b)   articles visibly attached or connected to the body or clothing; or

        (c)    suitcase and other visible containers of personal baggage;
        unless a biosecurity officer so' requests because of the biosecurity risk
        posed by the item, and in the absence of any such request, the article or
        container is deemed to have biosecurity entry clearance.
 (4)    A single declaration under subsection (l) may be made by a person in
        respect of the person and the person's spouse and any member of the
        family aged 16 years .or less travelling on the same vessel or aircraft .
. (5)   When a declaration is tendered under th is section, a biosecurity officer
        may-

        (a)    question the passenger or crew member;
        (b)    inspect the baggage to which it relates; and
        (c)    if necessary, question a spouse or family member included on the
               declaration.
 (6)    After taking the steps in subsection (5), a biosecurity officer may either
        grant biosecurity entry clearance of the persons and baggage to which
        the declaration relates, or -
        (a)    detain the passenger or crew member for further questioning and
               search; and
        (b)    detain the baggage and other articles in the possession of the
               passenger or crew member for further inspection and application
               of other biosecurity measures as the officer considers appropriate.
        (7)    An arriving passenger or crew member who fails -
               (a)   to make a declaration as required by subsection (1); or
               (b)   to submit baggage for inspection when so directed under
                     subsection (5),
               commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $2,000 or 1
               year imprisonment or both.



                                        37
            (8)     Every passenger or crew member departing from Kiribati
                    must -

                   (a)     submit for inspection on request by a biosecurity officer any
                           regulated article on the person or in the person's baggage;
                           and
                    (b).    permit the officer to sea(ch the person's baggage.
            (9)    A departing passenger or crew member who fails to comply with
                   subsection (8) commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of
                    $2,000 or J year imprisonment or both.
            (10)   Section 57 applies to the questioning, detention and searching of
                   persons and baggage under this section.


                           PART 4 - BIOSECURITY IMPORT PROCEDURES
Biosecurity entry inspection of incoming articles
23.   (1)   Every incoming article or consignment of articles is liable to biosecurity
            entry inspection by a biosecurity officer at the biosecurity point of entry
            to ascertain whether it is or includes a regulated article.
      (2)   If an importer of goods fails to make the goods available for biosecurity
            entry inspection at the biosecurity point of entry at the request of a
            biosecurity officer -
            (a)    the importer commits an offence and shall be liable to fine of a
                   $2,000 or J year imprisonment or both; and
            (b)    the goods may be reconsigned or destroyed as if they were a
                   regulated article for which biosecurity entry clearance had been
                   refused.
      (3)   If, after inspecting an incoming article or consignment, a biosecurity
            officer is satisfied -
            (a)    that it is or includes a regulated article; the provisions of this
                   Part apply to it;
            (b)    that it is not or does not include a regulated article; the article or

                                           38
                   consignment may be released from the biosecurity pOint of entry
                   upon payment of the prescribed fee, if any.

      (4)    If an incoming article or consignment is not inspected under this
             section, a biosecurity officer is deemed to be satisfied that it is not or
             does not include a regulated article, and subsection (3)(b) applies to it.
      (5)    Section 49 applies to an inspection under this section. >

      (6)    Subject to section 101, the actual or deemed opinion of a biosecurity
             officer under this section as to whether an article or consignment is or>
             includes a regulated article is conclusive for the purposes of this Act.
      (7)   This section does not apply in respect of baggage accompanying
             passengers or crew members, but section 22 applies to such baggage>


Biosecurity import clearance of regulated art>ides
24.   (1)    Every incoming article or consignment of regulated articles -

            (a)    is liable to biosecurity import clearance inspection by a biosecurity
                   officer; and
            (b)    for that purpose must be taken to or retained in a biosecurity
                   holding area for inspection.
      (2)   An application for biosecurity import clearance of a regulated article or
            consignment must -

            Ca)   be made to a biosecurity officer in the manner specified or
                  approved by the Director;
            (b)   be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any;.

            (c)   state the country of origin of the article or consignment:
            (d)   state the nature and quantity of the article or consignment;
            (e)   attach any sanitary or phytosanitary certificate issued by the
                  country of origin in relation to the article or consignment;

            (f)   attach any biosecurity import permit relating to the document; and
            (g)   attach documentation relating to any other biosecurity measures


                                           39
             specified under section 26(1) in relation to the article or
             consignment.

(3)   The importer of a regulated article or consignment must on the request
      of a biosecurity officer-

      (a)    if the article or consignment is in a container - open the container
             or enable the officer to do so;

      (b)    allow the officer to inspect the article or consignment in
            accordance with section 49;

      (cl   allow the officer to take samples and conduct tests in accordance
            with Part 7 to enable the officer to determine whether biosecurity
             import clearance should be granted; and
      (d)    if the article or consignment requires biosecurity measures to be
            . applied to it ~ submit the article or consignment tosu'ch
            measures.

(4)   The cost of taking an article to a biosecurity holding area, and of
      keeping it there, is to be borne by the importer of the article, and no
      compensation is payable for any loss or destruction or consequential
      loss caused as a result of the taking or keeping, unless negligence or
      malice is proved.
(5)   If the importer of a regulated article or consignment fails to comply with
      any of the requirements of subsection (3) -

      (a)   the person commits an offence and shall be liable to fine of
            $2,000 or 1 year imprisonment or both; and
      (b)   a biosecurity officer may refuse to grant import clearance for the
            article or consignment, and may order the article or consignment
            to be reconsigned or destroyed.

(6)   This section does not apply to passengers or crew members, but section
      22 applies to such persons.




                                    40
Grant and refusal of biosecurity import clearance
25.    (1)     Before granting biosecurity import clearance of an article or
              consignment, a biosecurity officer must be satisfied that the article
              meets the biosecurity import requirements in relation to it,
              (a)    if a biosecurity import permit is required - it has been obtained in
                     respect of the article or consignment and the conditions of the
                     permit have been complied with; or
             (b)     if a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate is required for an article -
                     the relevant certificate has been issued by the country of origin, .
                     and any requirement in it complied with; and
             (c)     if any other biosecurity measures are specified under section 26(1)
                     (c) - they have been applied to or in respect of the article or
                     consignment.
      (2)    If satisfied in respect of an article or consignment -
             (a)     of the matters mentioned in subsection (1); and
             (b)    that all prescribed fees and charges relating to the article or
                     consignment have been paid,
             a biosecurity officer must grant biosecurity import clearance for the
             article or consignment.
      (3)    If the biosecurity risk presented by an incoming regulated article or
             consignment so requires, a biosecurity officer may refuse to grant
             biosecurity import clearance for the article or consignment, or may
             require additional biosecurity measures to be applied to it, even if the
             article or consignment meets the biosecurity import specifications in
             re lation to it.
      (4)    Biosecurity import clearance may be made conditional on the article
             performing biosecurity quarantine if-
             (a)    quarantine is a biosecurity import requirement for the article; or

             (b)    during biosecurity entry inspection or biosecurity import clearance
                    inspection the article is found to be, or is suspected to be,
                    infested, infected or contaminated.

                                             41
      (5)    Biosecurity import clearance must be refused for an incoming article
             which is a prohibited import.
      (6)   A biosecurity officer may cause any incoming article or consignment in
             respect of which biosecurity import clearance is refused to be
             reconsigned or destroyed, but the importer must be given reasonable
            time to make arrangements for reconsignment of the article or
            consignment before it is destroyed.
      (7)   No compensation is payable in respect of a refusal in good faith to grant
            biosecurity import clearance under this section.


Biosecurity import specifications
26.   (1)   The Director may specify in respect of incoming regulated articles -
            (a)   whether a sanitary or phytosanit'arv certiftcate   from the biosecurity··
                  authority in the country of origin is required for an article and if so
                  the matters that must be certified;
            (b)   whether a biosecurity import permit must be obtained for the
                  article and if so the conditions to be attached to the permit; and
            (c)   what biosecurity measures, if any, must be applied to the article
                  on arrival in Kiribati before biosecurity import clearance can be
                  granted.
      (2)   SpeCifications under subsection (1) -

            (a)   may be different for different types and quantities of regulated
                  article;
            (b)   may be by reference to the country or area of origin of the article;
                  or
            (c)   must only be those reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate
                  the biosecurity risk to Kiribati presented by the article.
      (3)   In determining specifications under subsection (1), the Director-
            (a)   must make a biosecurity risk assessment;
            (b)   must have regard to the requirements of the SPS Agreement and
                  other international standards relating to biosecurity matters;

                                          42
             (c)   must have regard to the resources available for biosecurity
                   control;and
             (d)   may apply the precautionary principle.

      (4)   The biosecurity risk assessment needed for making a specification under
            this section -
            (a)    may be performed by any qualified person (other than the
                   importer) at the request of the Director; and
            (b)    is performed at the importer's expense.
      (5)    Specifications made under subsection (1) in respect of an article may be
            changed at any time before biosecurity import clearance is obtained in
            respect of the article if the biosecurity risk presented by the article or
            consignment changes.
      (6)   Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an article
            should be given to intending importers as soon as practicable but no
            liability arises from a fail ure to do so.
      (7)   Before making or changing a specification under this section, the
            Director must obtain the advice of relevant technical section heads.
      (8)   Specifications made under this section must be -
            (a)    published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the
                   Director; and
            (b)    made available to the public for inspection or purchase.


Biosecurity access arrangements
27.   (1)   A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is not the
            subject of a biosecurity import specification must apply in writing to the
            Director for a specification under section 26 in respect of the article.
      (2)   An application under subsection (1) in respect of an article must -
            (a)    be made in sufficient time before the intended importation; and
            (b)    give adequate information about the biosecurity procedures of the


                                            43
                   country of origin, the nature of the article and the proposed
                   importation,
            to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment in relation
            to the article.
      (3)   Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), and on payment of
            the prescribed fee, if any, the Director must as soon as practicable,
            unless the article is or becomes a prohibited import under section 9,
            make a specification in respect of it in accordance with section 26.
      (4)    Section 26(2), (3) and (4) apply to the making of a specification under
            this section.


Application for a biosecurity import permit
28.   (J)   If a biosecurity import permit is required under section 26(1) in respect
            of a regulated article or consignment, an application for a permit must -
            (a)   be made before the article or consignment leaves the country of
                  origin or, in the case of re-exported goods, the re-exporting
                  country.
            (b)   be made to the Director in the manner specified or approved by
                  the Director; and
            (c)   be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any.
      (2)   An applicatioh for a biosecurity import permit must
            (a)   include evidence of the country of origin of the regulated article
                  or consignment;
            (b)   state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;
            (c)   state the expected date of arrival in Kiribati; and
            (d)   give any other information the Director reasonably requires to
                  enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment.
      (3)   A decision on an application for a biosecurity import permit must be
            communicated to the applicant as soon as reasonably practicable after
            the application is received duly completed.

                                          44
       (4)    If the decision is to refuse the permit, the applicant must be notified in
              writing, with brief reasons.


Issue of a biosecurity import permit

29.    (l)    If satisfied of the matters set out in section 28(1) and (2), and on
              payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director, or a biosecurity
             officer, must as soon as practicable issue a biosecurity import permit.
       (2)   The form of a biosecurity import permit is as prescribed by the
             Regulations.
       (3)   A biosecurity import permit may -
             (a)    be general or specific;

             (b)    relate to a single article or to a consignment of articles; or
             (c)    be different for different types of regulated article and relate to
                    different countries of origin.
      (4)    A general permit may relate to all imports of a type specified in the
             permit, or from an area specified in the permit, and may relate to
             continuing imports over a period specified in the permit. A specific
             permit will relate to a single article or consignment and may specify an
             expiry date.


Revocation of a biosecurity import permit
30.   (1)    The Director may at any time, on written notice to the holder of a
             biosecurity import permit, revoke the permit, or vary the conditions of
             the permit, if a change in the biosecurity risk to Kiribati presented by the
             article or consignment to which the permit relates so requires.
      (2)    Biosecurity import clearance must be refused for an article or
             consignment in respect of which a biosecurity import permit is revoked,
             but section 26(5) applies to a revocation as it does to the change of a
             biosecurity specification.
      (3)    When a biosecurity import permit is revoked, the holder of the permit


                                              45
               must surrender it to a biosecurity officer as soon as practicable.

       (4)     A person who contravenes subsection (3) commits an offence and shall
               be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment or both.

        (5)    No compensation is payable in respect of the revocation in good faith of
               a permit under this section.



Exemption from biosecurity import requirements

31 .   (l)    The Director may in writing exe mpt any regulated article, class of
               regulated articles or consignment of regulated articles -

              (a)   from any or all of the biosecurity import specifications that would
                     otherwise apply to the article or class of articles; or
              (b)   from a requirement for a biosecurity import permit that would
                     otherwise apply to the article or consignment.

       (2)    An exemption under subsection (1) applies only to a single
              importation.

       (3)    An exemption under subsection (1) may specify the conditions on which
              the article,class of articles or consignment is exempt. If the conditions
              are not met the exemption ceases to apply.

       (4)    The Director may only grant an exemption under subsection (1) upon
              receipt of advice from relevant technical section heads, and if satisfied
              that the biosecurity risk to Kiribati is not increased as a result.

       (5)    A request for exemption under this section must be -

              (a)   made in writing to the Director;
              (b)   accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any, and the specified
                    documents; and

              (c)   made in sufficient time to allow the Director to give due
                    consideration to the request.

       (6)    Articles exempted from biosecurity import specifications or the
              requirement for an import permit under this section are not exempt
              from the req uirement for biosecurity import clearance.

                                              46
Articles and passengers in transit

32.    (1)    Regulated articles in transit are liable to biosecuritY import control, and
              require biosecurity import clearance at a biosecurity holding area.
       (2)   The Director or a biosecurity officer may in writing waive" any
              requirement for a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate or biosecurity
              import permit that would otherwise apply to articles in transit.
       (3)    If a waiver is granted under subsection (2), the Director or officer m"ay
             attach conditions to the waiver.
      (4)    A person who -
             (a)    deals with articles to whith this section applies other tnan by way
                    of transit; or
             (b)    contravenes a condition specified under subsection (3) in relation
                    to them,
             commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $2,000 or 1 year
             imprisonment or both.
      (S)    A request for a waiver under this section must be -

             (a)    made in writing to the Director;
             (b)    accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any, and the specified
                    documents; and
             (c)·   made in sufficient time to allow the Director or a biosecurity
                    officer to give due consideration to the request.
      (6)    In the case of regulated articles which accompany a crew member or
             passenger in transit -
             (a)    subsection (5) is deemed to have been complied with if the
                    passenger or crew member complies with other requirements for
                    regulated articles in transit; and
             (b)    the requirement in subsection (2) for a waiver to be in writing does
                    not apply"
      (7)    A biosecurity officer may at any time inspect an article in transit if the
             officer reasonably suspects the article might pose a biosecurity threat to

                                            47
            Kiribati or a receiving country.

      (8)   A person in charge of an article in transit who refuses to comply with a
            request for inspection under subsection (7) commits an offence.



                         PART 5 - BIOSECURITY EXPORT PROCEDURES


Biosecurity export inspection of outgoing articles

33.   (J)   Every outgoing regulated article or consignment of regulated articles is
            liable to biosecurity export inspection at the biosecurity point of
            departure to enable a biosecilrity officef-

            (a)   to ascertain whether it is or includes an article that requires
                   biosecurity export clearance pursuant to section 34; and

            (b)    if so to decide whether to grant export clearance under section
                  38.
      (2)   An exporter of goods who fails to make'the goods available for
            biosecurity export inspection at the biosecurity point of departure at the
            request of a biosecurity officer commits an offence.

      (3)   A biosecurity officer may only request to inspect an outgoing article or
            consignment if the officer has reasonable cause to suspect that it is or
            indudes a regulated article that requires biosecurity export clearance
            pursuant to section 34.

      (4)   If, after inspecting an outgoing article or consignment under this
            section, a biosecurity officer is satisfied -

            (a)   that it is or includes an article that requires biosecurity export
                  clearance - the provisions of this Part apply to it; or

            (b)   that it is not or does not include such an article - the article or
                  consignment may be released from the biosecurity point of
                  departure upon payment of the prescribed fee, if any..

      (5)   Section 49 applies to an inspection under this section.

      (6)   This section does not apply in respect of baggage accompanying

                                           48
                     passengers or crew members.



Requirement for biosecurity export clearance
34.    (l)    An article intended for export to a receiving country that requires -

              (a)   a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate for importation into that
                    country; or

              (b)   any biosecurity measures to be applied to it under section 36(2)
                    before being exported to that country,
              must have biosecurity export clearance for export to that country.
      (2)     A person who exports or attempts to export an article or consignment
             that requires biosecurity export clearance without such clearance·
             commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $2,000 or
              imprisonment or both.



Issue of sanitary and phytosanitary certificates
35.   (1)    A person who wishes to obtain a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate or a
             certificate of origin in respect of an article in order to comply with the
             blosecurity certification requirements of the receiving country must -
             (a)    apply to the Director in writing;
             (b)    pay the prescribed fee, if any; and
             (c)    su bmit the article for inspection or other biosecurity measures as
                    required by the receiving country.
      (2)    Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), the Director must -
             (a)    ascertain the biosecurity certification requirements of the receiving
                    country, through the applicant or directly from the country;
             (b)    perform appropriate inspection and apply appropriate biosecurity
                    measures to the article as required by the receiving country; and
             (e)    if satisfied that the biosecurity certification requirements of the
                    receiving country have been met, issue the appropriate certificate


                                            49
                   upon payment of the prescribed fee.

      (3)    A biosecurity certification requirement entered in the biosecurity
             register -

             (a)   if certified by or on behalf of the Director, is conclusive evidence
                   of the requirement for the purposes of this Act; but

             (b)   does not create any liability on the Government or the Director if
                   relied on by an exporter to the exporter's detriment.



Biosecu rity export speCifications

36.   (1)   The Director may specify in respect of outgoing animals or plants, or
            their products, any biosecurity measures, in addition to biosecurity
            certification requirements of the receiving country, that must be applied
            to the animal, plant or prod uct before export.
      (2)   Specifications under subsection (1) may only be made if required by an
            international agreement to which Kiribati and the receiving country are
            party in respect of the movement of animals, plants or animal or plant
            products, and must conform to any such agreement.

      (3)   Specifications under subsection (1) in respect of an animal or animal
            product may be changed at any time before biosecurity export clearance
            is granted, if there is a change in the relevant international obligations
            relating to the animal or animal product, and section 26(6) applies to
            any such change.

      (4)   Before making or changing a specification under this section, the
            Director must obtain the advice of relevant technical section heads.

      (5)   Specifications made under this section must be -

            (a)    published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the
                   Director; and

            (b)    made available to the public for inspection or purchase.




                                          50
Application for biosecurity export clearance

37.    (1)   An application for biosecurity export clearance of an article or
             consignment must be made to a biosecurity officer in the manner
             specified or approved by the Director and be accompanied by the
             prescribed fee, if any.
      (2)    An application for biosecurity export clearance for a regulated article or
             consignment must -

             (a)    be made before the regulated article or consignment arrives at a
                   biosecurity point of departure; and
             (b)   allow sufficient time for processing of the application.
      (3)    An application for biosecurity export clearance for an article or
             consignment must -
             (a)   specify the receivIng country;

             (b)   specify the nature and quantity of the article or consignment;
             (c)   attach any sanitary or phytosanitary certificate issued under
                   section 35(2) in relation to the artieie or consignment; and
             (d)   attach documentation relating to any other biosecurity measures
                   required under section 36(1) in relation to animals or plants or
                   animal or plant products.
      (4)    If the article or consignment requires biosecurity measures to be applied
             to it, the person seeking to export it must submit the article or
             consignment to such measures, failing which biosecurity export
             clearance will not be granted.
      (5)    If a person seeking to export an article or consignment fails to comply
             with any of the requirements of thiS section, a biosecurity officer may
             refu se to grant biosecurity export clearance for the article or
             consignment.
      (6)    This section does not apply to passengers or crew members, but section
             22 applies to such persons.




                                           51
Grant ofbiosecurity export clearance

38.    (1)    Before granting biosecurity export clearance in respect of an article or
              consignment, a biosecurity officer must be satisfied -

              (a)   that the biosecurity certification requirementS of the receiving
                    country have been complied with;
              (b)   that any biosecurity measures specified under section 36(1} in
                    respect of an animal or animal product have been applied; and
              (c)   that the prescribed fee, if any, has been paid.
      (2)     If an outgoing article that requires biosecurity export clearance is found
             to be infected, infested or contaminated by a regulated pest or disease,
              biosecurity clearance will be refused in respect of it.
      (3)    A decision on an application for biosecurity export clearance must be
             communicated to the applicant as soon as r~asonably practicable after
             the application is received duly completed.
      (4)    If the decision is to refuse clearance, the applicant must be notified in
      (S)    If a biosecurity officer considers it necessary to inspect any outgoing
             article or consignment for the purposes of this section, section 49
             applies.


                              PART 6 - BIOSECURI1Y QUARANTINE


Biosecurity quarantine of regulated articles
39.   (1)    A biosecurity officer may, by notice in writing to the importer, order into
             biosecurity quarantine any incoming regulated article if-
             (a)    the article is a prohibited import and must therefore be
                    reconsigned or destroyed;
             (b)    quarantine is a bioseeurity import requirement for the article; or
             (e)    during bioseeurity entry inspection or bioseeurity import clearance
                    inspection the article is found to be, or is suspected to be,


                                            52
                    infested, infected or contaminated.
       (2)    If an article is ordered into biosecurity quarantine under this section,. a
              biosecurity officer may-
              (a)   in writing direct the importer to remove the article to a specified
                    biosecurity quarantine station; and
              (b)   if necessary (because the importer, exporter, owner or custodian
                    refuses to obey the direction, or because of the nature of the
                    biosecurity threat) arrange for the article to be removed to a
                    biosecurity quarantine station.
      (3)    An importer who refuses to remove an article to biosecurity quarantine
             as directed under this section commits an offence.
      (4)    The cost of removal of an article to biosecurity quarantine is to be borne
             by the importer of the article, and no compensation is payable for any
             loss or destruction or consequential loss caused as a result of any such
             removal, unless negligence or malice is proved.
      (5)    If an article is quarantined under this section, the importer must be
             given written notice stating the reasons for the quarantine and, if it was
             removed under subsection (2)(b), the location of the article.


Biosecurity quarantine stations
40.   (1)    The Minister, on the advice ofthe Director, and after consulting other
             relevant Ministries, may by order designate any public or private land as
             a biosecurity quarantine station for animals, animal products; plants,
             plant products, conveyances, containers or other goods for the purposes
             of this Act.
      (2)    Before designating any private land as a biosecurity quarantine station,
             the Minister, through the Director, must consult the owner, and must
             pay compensation as agreed or as determined by a court for use of the
             land as a quarantine station.
      (3)    The Secretary must ensure that every biosecurity quarantine station is
             provided with such buildings and facilities as are reasonably needed-


                                            53
            (a)    to hold regulated articles in biosecurity quarantine;

            (b)    to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the station or
                   removing items from the station; and
            (c)    to enable the Director to perform tests, provide treatment and
                   apply other biosecurity measures as required by or under this Act.



Conditions of biosecurity quarantine
41.   (1)   The Director may issue specifications as to -

            (a)   the examination, treatment, disposal or destruction of articles
                  while in abiosecurity quarantine station or in transit to or from a
                  quarantine station; and
            (b)   the period for which different types of regulated articles must
                  remain in a biosecurity quarantine station.

      (2)   The fees or charges payable for keeping items in biosecurity quarantine
            are as prescribed.
      (3)   The cost of keeping an article in biosecurity quarantine is to be borne by
            the importer of the article.
      (4)   No compensation is payable for any loss or destruction or consequential
            loss caused by an item being detained in biosecurity quarantine, unless
            negligence or malice is proved.



Management of biosecurity quarantine stations
42.   (1)   No person, other than the person in charge of the station or a
            biosecurity officer acting in the course of duty, may enter a biosecurity
            quarantine station \.vithout the V".fritten permission of the Director or of
            the person in charge of the station.
      (2)   A biosecurity officer may, in order to reduce a biosecurity threat, lock,
            seal Dr otherwise prevent entry to and exit from a biosecurity quarantine
            station or any building in it, regardless of the ownership of the station.

      (3)   A person who -

                                           54
              (a)   enters a biosecurity quarantine station without permission
                    pursuant to subsection (1); or

              (b)   damages, interferes with or in any way reduces the effectiveness of
                    measures taken to secure a biosecurity quarantine station, or any
                    regulated article or other item in the station,
              commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $2,000 or 1 year
              imprisonment or both.
       (4)   The Director may issue written instructions to the person in charge of a
              biosecurity quarantine station as to the management of the station.


Release from biosecurity quarantine

43.   (1)    A conveyance, container or article must not be released from biosecurity
             quarantine except upon the Director of a biosecurity quarantine release
             certifkate issued by a biosecurity officer.
      (2)    Before an article can be released from biosecurity quarantine -
             (a)    any treatment required as a condition of importation of the article
                    must have been applied; and

             (b)    all quarantine fees must have been paid.
      (3)    Once subsection (2) has been complied with, the conveyance, container
             or article must be released from biosecurity quarantine as soon as
             practicable and a biosecurity release certificate issued.
      (4)    A person who releases an article from a biosecurity quarantine station
             contrary to subsection (1) commits an offence and shall be liable to a
             fine of $1,000 or 6 months Imprisonment or both.


Biosecurity quarantine notices

44.   (l)    A biosecurity officer may affix a notice on any biosecurity quarantine
             station, and on any conveyance, container or article held in biosecurity
             quarantine, stating the conditions and duration of quarantine and other
             information relating to the station or the item as specified by the


                                           55
             Director.

      (2)   A person who removes a notice affixed under subsection (1) without
            lawful authority commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of
             $1,000 or 6 moths imprisonment or both.



No plant or animal to be at large
45.   (l)    No person may liberate or cause to be liberated from a biosecurity
            quarantine station, biosecurity port quarantine area, or biosecurity
            holding area or let go at large in Kiribati any animal, plant or organism
            which is subject to biosecurity control under this Act.
      (2)   A person who contravenes subsection (1) is not entitled to any
            compensation for loss of or damage to the animal, plant or organism
            occasioned by its being recaptu red and confined or if necessary .
            destroyed in accordance with Parts 7 and 8.

      (3)   A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence and shall
            be liable to a fine of $2,000 or 1 year imprisonment or both and, in
            addition to the prescribed maximum penalty, is liable to pay the Director
            the cost of recapturing and confining or if necessary destroying the
            animal, plant or organism.



                         PART 7 - POWERS OF BIOSECURITY OFFICERS


General rules as to exercise of powers

46.   (1)   The powers conferred by this Act on biosecurity officers may be
            exercised only for the purpose of ascertaining whether there is a
            biosecurity risk presented by a conveyance, container or item and
            eliminating or reducing the risk to an acceptable extent.

      (2)   A reference in this Act to a biosecurity officer, when exercising powers,
            means a duly authorised biosecurity officer acting in the performance of
            his or her duties.



                                         56
(3)    A biosecurity officer may use only such force as is reasonably necessary
      when exercising a power under this Act. If necessary, the officer should
       obtain the assistance of a police officer to effeq an arrest or enter
       premises.

(4)   Before exercising a power to enter and search premises, to search a
      conveyance or container or to inspect or test any article, a biosecurity
      officer must, if practical, request the assistance of the person in control
      of the premises, conveyance, container or article.
(5)   Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a biosecurity officer may
      exercise a power under this Act without a warrant or other order of a
      magistrate, provided the action is taken in good faith for the purposes of
      this Act.

(6)   A biosecurity officer exercising powers under this Part must produce for
      inspection his or her identification as an officer, upon request by the
      person in charge of the conveyance, premises or area, or the importer,
      exporter, owner or custodian of the item, in respect of which the power
      is being exercised.
(7)   Before exercising a power in a situation that involves sh ipping, civil
      aviation, human health, the environment or any other activity governed
      by another Act, a biosecurity officer must if practicable consult the
      officer or authorjty responsible under that Act for that activity.
(8)   The powers conferred on biosecurity officers by or under this Act must
      be exercised subject to -
      (a)   any regulations made by the Minister under this Act in respect of
            those powers;
      (b)   any biosecurity specifications made in respect of regulated
            articles;
      (c)   any written directions of the Director given under section 77; or

      (d)   the provisions of-

            (I)    the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations relating to
                   the premises of a diplomatic mission, diplomatic bags and


                                    57
                             the personal baggage of diplomatic agents;
                      (ij)   the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations relating to
                             consular premises, archives and documents.


Entry, search and seizure
47.   (1)   A biosecurity officer may -
            (a)      search an incoming vessel or aircraft at a biosecurity port holding
                     area to ascertain whether the vessel or aircraft has on board any
                     regu lated article that might pose a biosecurity threat to Kiribati;
            (b)      search an outgoing vessel or aircraft if the officer lias reason to
                     believe there are on board any uncleared articles that require
                     . export clearance;
            (c)      at any time enter and search any premises, building or area,
                     including a biosecurity holding area, biosecurity quarantine station
                     or biosecurity approved premises and land adjacent to a dwelling
                     house, but not a dwelling house, in order to ascertain the presence
                     of uncleared regulated articles that have not received biosecurity
                     import clearance;
            (d)      at any time with the consent of the owner, enter and search a
                     dwelling house for purposes of this Act; or
            (e)      at any time, on a warrant issued under subsection (2), enter and
                     search a dwelling house for uncleared regulated articles that the
                     officer reasonably suspects to be in it.
      (2)   If a Magistrate is satisfied on affidavit evidence by a biosecurity officer
            that -
            (a)      there may be in a dwelling house uncleared regulated articles; and
            (b)      the consent of the owner or occupier to entry and search of the
                     dwelling house cannot be obtained;
            the magistrate may issue a warrant authorising the officer to enter and
            search the dwelling house for uncleared regulated articles.


                                             58
       (3)    A biosecurity officer may at any time enter and search any store,
              warehouse, silo, pen or similar premises, or any conveyance, in which
              regulated articles intended for importation to or exportation from
              Kiribati are kept.

       (4)    A person who keeps regulated articles' in or on any premises, or in a
              conveyance, prior to importation or exportation of them must make the
              premises or conveyance available for inspection by a biosecurity officer
              upon request at any reasonable time.
      (5)     Subsections (1), (3) and (4) apply to premises and conveyances outside
              Kiribati in respect of articles intended for importation to Kiribati.
      (6)     A person who contravenes subsection (4) commits an offence and shall
              be liable to a fine of $1 ,000 or 6 months imprisonment or both.
      (7)     During a. search of premises or a conveyance under this. section a
             biosecurity officer may seize anything which -
             (a)    is an uncleared regulated article; or
             (b)    may be used as evidence of the commission of an offence under
                    this Act.
      (8)    A biosecurity officer who seizes anything from a person under
             subsection (7) must -
             (a)    inform the person of the reason for the seizure;
             (b)    give the person a receipt for the thing seized; and
             (c)    remove the thing to a place of safekeeping and deal with it in
                    accordance with this Act.
      (9)    A biosecurity officer may, at the expense of the importer, submit to
             appropriate biosecurity measures any regulated article seized pursuant
             to this section.


Inspection of documents
48.   (1)    A biosecurity officer may -

             (a)   call for and inspect documents on or in incoming or outgoing

                                            59
                    vessels and aircraft as provided in sections 15 and 20 respectively;

              (b)   open and inspect at a biosecurity point of entry any incoming
                    document, including mail, in order to ascertain whether the
                    document contains or relates to a regulated article; or

             (c)    open and inspect at a biosecurity point of departu re any outgoi ng
                    document, including mail, if the officer reasonably suspects that
                    the document contains or relates to-

                    (I)    an uncleared regulated article that requires biosecurity
                           export clearance; or

                    (Ii)   a regulated article that could pose a s.erious biosecurity
                           threat to the country of destination of the document.
       (2)   The powers relating to mail in subsection (1)(b) and (c) must only be
             exercised in respect of personal letters if the officer reasonably suspects
             that a letter contains or relates to a biosecurity threat.


Inspection of articles

49.   (1)    A biosecurity officer may at a biosecurity holding area inspect any
             incoming regulated article, and any conveyance, container or baggage in
             which the article is carried, in order to assess the biosecurity risk
             presented by the article, conveyance, container or baggage.
      (2)    A biosecurity officer may at a biosecurity pOint of departure inspect any
             article, which requires biosecurity export clearance, in order to facilitate
             such clearance.

      (3)    The powers of inspection in subsection (1) and (2) are in addition to the
             powers of inspection in sections 23 and 33 and any other powers of
             inspection in or under this Act.

      (4)    For the purpose of exercising the powers of inspection under this Act, a
             biosecurity officer may request an importer or exporter to unpack
             and/or break up a consignment, or to open a container, at the person's
             risk and expense.

      (5)    If an importer or exporter refuses to comply with a request under

                                            60
             subsection (4)-

                    (a)   the person commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine
                          of $1,000 or 6 months imprisonment or both;

                   (b)    the biosecurity officer may break up the consignment or
                          open the container or cause it to be broken or opened;

                   (c)    the cost of action under paragraph (b) is a debt owing to the
                          Government by the importer or exporter, as the case may
                          be; and

                   (d)    no liability lies on the Government, the Director or any
                          biosecurity officer and no compensation is payable, for the
                          actionof breaking up or opening, unless negligence or
                          malice is proved.
      (6)   When conducting an inspection under this Act, a biosecurity officer" "
             may seek access to, and take photographic, electronic or other
            copies of any evidence, information, records and things related to
            the regulated article or consignment that the officer reasonably
            requires in order to ensure compliance with this Act or to
            investigate a possible offence under it.

      (7)    Inspection of articles in transit is governed by section 32(7).


Detention of articles

SO.   (1)   If an incoming regulated article requires biosecurity measures to be
            taken in respect of it before biosecurity import clearance can be granted,
            a biosecurity officer may detain the article, and any conveyance,
            container or baggage in which the article is carried, for biosecurity
            measures to be taken.

      (2)   If an outgoing regulated article that requires biosecurity export
            clearance has not been cleared, a biosecurity officer may detain the
            article, and any conveyance, container or baggage in which the article is
            carried, until clearance or other disposition of the article under this Act.

      (3)   An article detained under this section must be detained in a place


                                          61
               specified by the officer, being a biosecurity holding area, biosecurity
               quarantine station or biosecurity approved premises.
      (4)       If an article is to be detained under this section, a biosecurity officer
               may-
               (a)    direct the importer or exporter of the article to remove it to the
                      specified place; and
               (b)    if necessary (because the importer or exporter refuses to obey the
                      direction, or because of the nature of the biosecurity threat,)
                      arrange for the article to be removed to the specified place.
      (5)        If an article is detained under this section, a biosecurity officer
                 must give to the importer or exporter a notice in writing stating
                 the reasons for the detention and, if It was removed under
             ... subsection (4)(b), the specified place.
      (6)     The cost of removal of an article to and its detention in a specified place
              is to be borne by the importer or exporter, and no compensation is
              payable for any loss or destruction or consequential loss caused asa
              result of any such removal or detention, unless negligence or malice is
              proved.
      (7).    The charges for detention of an article under this section are as
              prescribed by the Regu lations.


Taking of samples
51.   (l)     A biosecurity officer may, with the consent of the importer, owner or
              custodian, take samples from -
              (a)    any part of an incoming vesse I or aircraft that has on board
                     regulated articles;
              (b)    any warehouse containing regulated articles intended for
                     importation;
              (cl    any consignment of incoming regulated articles, wherever
                     located;or


                                             62
        (d)    any incoming container, baggage or thing that the officer
               reasonably suspects to be or include a regulated article.
 (2)   If an importer refuses consent under subsection (1), the biosecurity
       officer may require the person to provide appropriate samples.

(3)    An importer who refuses either to allow samples to be taken.or to
       provide samples, when required to do so under this section, commits an
       offence and shall be liable to a fine of $2,000 or 1 year imprisonment or
       both.

(4)    A biosecurity officer may, with the consent of the person in charge of the
       article, take samples of any outgoing regulated article if the taking of a
       sample is necessary for the issue of a sanitary or phytosanitary
       certificate.
(5)    Ifthe,person in charge. of a regulated article refuses consent under
       subsection (4), the biosecurity officer may require the person to provide
       a sample, failing which the sanitary or phytosanitary certificate will not
       be issued.

(6)    A biosecurity officer may request the importer or exporter of a
       consignment to unpack it or break it up to facilitate sampling, at the risk
       and expense of the importer or exporter.
(7)     When exerciSing powers under subsection (1) or (2), a biosecurity officer
       must give the importer or exporter a written notice, identifying the
       quantity of the sample and the place where the sample is to be analysed.
(8)    In other respects, the procedure for taking and analysing samples,
       recording the results and disposing of the samples is as prescribed or
       specified.
(9)    If, in the course of sampling, goods are destroyed or damaged, without
       negligence or malice, no compensation is payable to the importer or
       exporter of the goods.
(10)   The importer or exporter of a regulated article from which samples are
       taken under subsection (1) must be notified in Writing of the findings in
       respect of the samples as soon as reasonably practicable.



                                     63
       (11) The charges for taking and analysis of samples under this section are as
            prescribed by the Regulations.,


Testing of articles
52.    (1)   A biosecurity officer may test, or cause tests to be conducted on, any
             incoming regulated article, in order to ascertain whether the article
             meets the biOsetutity import requiremehtsin respeCfbf it
       (2)   Following a test of an incoming article, and on payment of the
             prescribed fee, if any, the article must be either released to the importer,
             and biosecurity import clearance granted in respect of it, or it must be
             treated in accordance with section 53 or reconsigned or destroyed.
      (3)    A biosecurity officer may test, or cause tests to be conducted on, any
             outgoing regulated article'that require, biosecurityexport clearance if
             such tests are a condition for importation into the receiving country.
      (4)    Following tests on an outgoing article, biosecurity export clearance must
             either be granted or refused in respect of the article.
      (5)     Section 50(3) to (6) apply to articles detained for testing under this
             section.
      (6)    The importer or exporter of a regulated article which is tested under
             subsection (1) or (3) must be notified in writing of the results of the test
             before the article is released or otherwise disposed of.
      (7)    If a test conducted under subsection (1) or (3) without negligence or
             malice destroys or damages an animal or other article being tested, no
             compensation is payable to the importer of the animal or other article.
      (8)    The charges for testing of an article under this section are as prescribed
             by the Regulations.


Treatment of articles
53.   (1)    If an incoming regulated article requires treatment in order to meet the
             biosecurity import requirements in respect of it, the.article must be


                                           64
      treated before biosecurity import clearance is granted in respect of it.
(2)   If an incoming article is found to be infected, infested or contaminated
      by a regulated pest or disease, the article may be treated to reduce the
      biosecurity risk to an acceptable level, whether or not treatment is a
      specified requirement or a condition of an import permit.
(3)   Section 50(3) to (6) apply to articles detained for treatment under this
      section.
(4)   Once treatment has been administered to the satisfaction of the
      biosecurity officer, and on payment of any applicable charges, the article
      must, subject to subsection (4), be released to the importer and
      biosecurity import clearance granted in respect of it.
(5)   The cost of treatment is to be borne by the importer of the item, but the
      importer may instead opt to have the.article reconsigned or destroyed.
(6)   If an importer fails to have an article which requires treatment under this
      section treated within a reasonable time, the biosecurity officer may
      require the article to be destroyed.
(7)   if-
      (a)   appropriate treatment is not available in Kiribati;
      (b)   in the opinion of a biosecurity officer, there would still be a
            biosecurity risk after treatment; or
      (c)   the importer chooses not to have the article treated,
      the article must be reconsigned or, if the importer chooses, or if section
      54(3) applies, destroyed.
(8)   Notice of action to be taken under subsection (6) or (7) must be given to
      the importer in writing before the action is taken, except for articles in
      passenger baggage which are detained for destruction in the presence of
      the owner or custodian.
(9)   If an outgoing regulated article requires treatment as a condition of
      importation into the receiving country, the article must be treated at the
      expense of the exporter before biosecurity export clearance is granted in


                                    65
                respect of it.

       (0)      if, in the course of treatment, goods are destroyed or damaged, without
               negligence or malice, no compensation is payable to the importer or
               exporter of the goods.

       (J 1)   Treatment of an article -

               (a)    should be the minimum required to remove or adequately reduce
                      the biosecurity risk posed by the article; and
               (b)    may be administered by an appropriately qualified biosecurity
                      officer, or by any other suitably qualified person at the request of
                      the officer or the importer.
      (2)      The charges for treatment of an article under this section are as
               prescribed by the Regulations.



Reconsignment of articles

54.   (1)      if an incoming regulated article which requires an import permit or a
               sanitary or phytosanitary certificate does not have the permit or
               certificate attached to it, a biosecurity officer may, after informing the
               importer, detain the article for reconsignment or destruction.

      (2)      An incoming article that is a prohibited import must be reconsigned or
               destroyed.

      (3)      Reconsignment is at the option and cost of the importer, but -

               (a)    reconsignment must be effected within a time specified by the
                      officer, which must be reasonable in the circumstances;
               (b)    if the biosecurity officer considers that the biosecurity risk of
                      reconsignment is unacceptable, the option is not available.

      (4)      The power to order reconsignment of an article under this section
               applies also to any container, crate, baggage, package or mail which
               carries it.

      (0)      if reconsignment is not effected within the time specified under
               subsection (3)(a), or is not acceptable, the article or consignment must


                                              66
              be destroyed.
       (6)    No compensation is payable to the importer for the cost of
              reconsignment under this section.


Destruction of articles
55.    (1)   Ifthis Act requires or authorizes an article to be destroyed, the
             destruction of the article must be in accordance with this section.
       (2)   If an incoming article is found to be infected, infested or contaminated
             by a regulated pest or disease, and -
             (a)   appropriate treatment is not available in Kiribati;
             (b)   in the opinion of the Director, there would still be a biosecurity
                   risk after treatment; or
             (cl   the importer chooses not to have the article treated,
             the article must be reconsigned or, if the importer chooses, or if section
             54(3) applies, destroyed.
      (3)    The power of destruction of articles in subsection (2) is in addition to
             any other power of destruction in or under this Act.
      (4)    Destruction of an article under this Act may include any container, crate,
             baggage, package or mail which carries it.
      (5)    Packaging of an article may be considered as not part of a consignment
             and may be destroyed, if considered to pose a biosecurity risk, whether
             or not the article is destroyed.
      (6)    If the article to be destroyed appears to be of or above the value of
             $2,000, the Director must obtain the written approval of the
             Secretary before arranging for its destruction.
      (7)    The manner of destruction of articles under this section is as specified or
             approved by the Director and the importer or owner of the article, if
             known, must be invited to witness the destruction.
      (8)    The Director must give notice of an intention to destroy any article to


                                          67
             the importer or owner in writing before the action is taken, if the
             importer or owner is known.

      (9)    No compensation is payable to the importer for destruction of an article
             under this section.

      (10)   The charges for destruction of an article under this section are as
             prescribed by the Regulations.



Post mortem examination of an animal

56.   (1)    If a biosecurity officer examining an animal pursuant to this Act
             suspects that the animal is diseased and considers a post mortem
             examination to be necessary to establish a diagnosis, the officer may,
             on the written authority of the Director, and without the consent of the
             owner ~
             (a)   take or cause to be taken the life of the animal;
             (b)   cause a post mortem examination to be conducted to decide
                   whether the animal is diseased; and
             (e)   obtain specimens from the animal for laboratory examination and
                   diagnosis.
      (2)    If an examination is conducted pursuant to subsection (1), the results of
             the examination and of any laboratory reports resulting from the
             examination must be provided in writing to the Director and to the
             owner of the animal, if the owner can be identified and located.


Powers in relation to people

57.   (1)     If a biosecurity officer is of the opinion that any person -

             (a)   seeking to enter or leave Kiribati;

             (b)   employed at a biosecurity point of entry or departure, in a
                   designated area or quarantine station, or at approved premises; or

             (c)   engaged in importing or exporting regulated articles,

             is in possession or contra! of an article that poses a biosecurity threat to
             Kiribati, the officer may detain and question the person.


                                            68
       (2)    If a biosecurity officer suspects that there may be upon a person seeking
              to enter Kiribati an article that would, if imported, constitute an offence
              under this Act, the officer may cause the person and the person's
              baggage to be searched.
       (3)    If a biosecurity officer suspects that there may be upon a person seeking
              to leave Kiribati an article that WOUld, if exported, constitute an offence
              under this Act, the officer may cause the person and the person's
              baggage to be searched.
       (4)    A search of a person under this section must be carried out by 2
              officers of the same sex as the person searched.
      (5)    A person may be detained under this section only for as long as is
             required to question and search the person and the person's baggage
             and to arrange for biosecurity measures to be taken in respect of it.
      (6)    A persori who refuses -
             (a)    to answer to the best of his or her knowledge and ability questions
                    reasonably put by a biosecurity officer; or
             (b)   to submit to a search reasonably required under this section,
             commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $1,000 or 6 months
             imprisonment or both.
      (7)    In this section, "person" means an individual.


                          PART 8 - BIOSECURITY INTERNAL CONTROL

Pest and disease surveys
58.   (1)    The Minister, on the advice ofthe Director, may order a survey of any
             area of Kiribati to be conducted to ascertain the status of pests and
             diseases in the area and the biosecurity risk of moving animals, plants,
             humans or organisms into, out of, or through the area.
      (2)    An order under this section -
             (a)   must be published as required by section 104(1);


                                             69
      (b)   does not take effect until it has been published and exhibited at
            the. office of the BeretitentL
(3)   For the purposes of a survey under this section, a biosecurity officer
      may, in the area of the survey -
      (a)   inspect premises and equipment;
      (b)   take photographs and films and make drawings;

      (c)   inspect animals and plants and their products;
      (d)   question persons;
      (e)   ccllect specimens and perform tests relating to animals, plants,
            animal and plant products, land, water and the environment.
(4)   Fcr the purposes .of a survey under this section, the Director may direct
      the owners of animals Qrplants.inthe area.of the. survey, or persons whc
      have custody or control of them, tc make them available for inspection
      at places designated by the Director.
(5)   A person who refuses, in the ccurse of a survey under this section -
      (a)   to permit an officer to enter property, ccllect specimens .or
            perform tests as reascnably required;
      (b)   to answer to the best of his or her knowledge and ability .oral or
            written questions reasonably put tc the person by a biosecurity
            officer; or
      (c)    tc make animals or plants in the ownership, custody or control of
            the person available as required under subsecticn (4),
      ccmmits an .offence and shall be liable to a fine .of $1 ,000 or 6 monrhs
      imprisonment or both.
(6)   The Director may provide for the publication and transmission of survey
      results to other interested governments and organisations in compliance
      with international agreements.




                                    70
Entry, search and seizure
59.    (1)    If a biosecurity officer reasonably suspects the presence of a regulated
              pest or disease that is not under official control, the officer may -
             (a)    at any time stop, board and search any conveyance;
             (b)    at any time enter and search any premises, building or area,
                    including a biosecurity holding area, biosecurity quarantine station
                    or biosecurity approved premises and land adjacent to a dwelling
                    house, but not a dwelling house;
             (c)    at any time with the consent of the owner, enter and search a
                    dwelling house for animals, plants and their products; or
             (d)    at any time, on a warrant issued under subsection (2), enter and
                    search a dwelling-house for any regulated article that the officer
                    reasonably suspects to be In it and to pose a biosecurltythreat to
                    Kiribati.
      (2)    If a Magistrate is satisfied on affidavit eVidence by a biosecurity officer
             that-
             (a)   there may be in a dwelling house a regulated article that poses a
                   biosecurity threat to Kiribati; and
             (b)   the consent of the owner or occupier to entry and search of the
                   dwelling house cannot be obtained,
             the Magistrate may issue a warrant authorising the officer to enter and
             search the dwelling house for the article.
      (3)    During a search of premises or a conveyance under this section a
             biosecurity officer may seize anything which -
             (a)   is a regulated article which the officer reasonably suspects poses a
                   biosecurity threat to Kiribati; or
             (b)   may be used as evidence of the commission of an offence under
                   this Act.
      (4)    A biosecurity officer who seizes anything from a person under
             subsection (3) must -


                                           71
             (a)    inform the person of the reason for the seizure;

             (b)   give the person a receipt for the thing seized; and

             (c)   at the expense of the owner, remove the thing to a place of
                   safekeeping and deal with it in accordance with this Act.

      (5)   A biosecurity officer may submit to appropriate biosecurity measures
             any regulated article seized pursuant to this section.



Detention and testing of animals and plants and their products

60.   (l)   If an animal or plant or animal or plant product in Kiribati is suspected of
            being infected or infested by a regulated pest or disease, a biosecurity
            officer may direct the animal, plant or product to be detained and
            confined in a place specified by the Director for tests"to be con?,ucted.
      (2)   Following detention under subsection (1), a biosecurity officer may test,
            or cause to be tested, any animal or plant or animal or plant product.
            Such tests may include -
            (a)    the taking of samples in accordance with section 5 J (replacing
                   references to the importer of an article by references the owner or
                   custodian of it); or
            (b)    conducting a post mortem examination in accordance with section
                   56.
      (3)   If after testing as in subsection (2) the animal, plant or product is
            considered to pose a biosecurity threat to Kiribati, the officer may
            further detain it in the specified place for biosecurity measures to be
            taken in respect of it, but an animal, plant or product may be detained
            only for so long as is required for biosecurity measures to be taken in
            respect of it.

      (4)   If an animal or plant or animal or plant product is to be detained under
            this section, a biosecurity officer may-

            (a)    direct the owner or custodian to remove it to the place specified
                   under subsection (1);



                                           72
             (b)   if necessary (because the owner or custodian refuses to obey the
                   direction, or because of the nature of the biosecurity threat)
                   arrange for the animal, plant or product to be removed to the
                   specified place.
      (5)   If an animal or plant or animal or plant product is detained under this
            section, the owner or custodian must be given a written notice stating
            the reasons for the detention and, if it was removed under subsection (4)
            (b), the specified place.
      (6)   The cost of removal of an article to and its detention in a specified place
            urider this section is to be borne by the Government, and the owner is
            entitled to compensation for damage to or destruction of an article
            (but not consequential loss) caused as a result of any such removal or
            detention.
      (7)   Section 12 applies to places specified under this section as it applies to
            biosecurity holding areas, except that section 40(2) and (3) do not apply.


Treatment or destruction of animals and plants and their products
61.   (1)   If treatment is available to eliminate or reduce to an acceptable level the
            biosecurity threat posed by an animal or plant or animal or plant product
            that has been detained under section 60, a biosecurity officer may -
            (a)    with the consent of the owner or custodian of the animal, plant or
                   product,administer such treatment, or cause it to be administered;
                   and
            (b)    after treatment, release the animal, plant or product to the owner
                   or custodian.
      (2)   If -
            (al    in the opinion of a biosecurity officer, appropriate treatment is not
                   available in Kiribati;
            (b)    in the opinion of a biosecurity officer, there would still be a
                   biosecurity risk after treatment; or
            (c)    the owner or custodian does not consent to the treatment being

                                           73
                   administered,

            a biosecurity officer may order the animal or plant or product to be
            destroyed.

      (3)   Notice of action to be taken under subsection (2) must be given to the
            owner or custodian in writing before the action is taken.

      (4)   Subject to subsection (5), section 55 applies to the destruction of
            animals and plants and their products under this section, replacing
            references to the importer of an article by references to the owner or
            custodian of it.

      (S)   The cost of treatment or destruction under this section is to be borne by
            the Government, and the owner is entitled to compensation (but not
            consequential loss) for destruction of an article under this section.



Infested biosecurity controlled areas
62.   (1)   If

            (a)   an anima! or plant on land or premises in any area of Kiribati is
                  found to be infested by a pest or disease; and

            (b)   the powers in sections 59 to 61 are inadequate to control the
                  outbreak,

            the Minister, on the advice of the Director, may by order declare the land
            or premises to be an infested biosecuritycontrolled area in respect of
            thilt pest or disease.

      (2)   An order under this section -
            (a)   may include an area of adjacent land if necessary to effectively
                  contain the infestation;

                  (i)     must be made as soon as practicable after the finding of the
                          infestation;

                  (ii)    must be published as required by section 104(1);

                  (iii)   comes into effect on the publication and exhibition of the
                          order at the Office of the Beretitenti.

                                            74
      (3)    In an infested biosecurity controlled area, a biosecurity officer may enter
             upon any land at any time in order to ascertain the status of a regulated
             pest or disease.
      (4)    In an infested biosecurity controlled area, pending the making of an
             order under section 63, no animal or animal product, or plant or plant
             product, fodder, fitting or other thing as specified in the declaration,
             may be moved out of, into or within the area except with the permission
             of a biosecurity officer and in accordance with any conditions reasonably
             imposed by the officer.
      (5)    A person who contravenes subsection (4) commits an offence and shall
             be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment or both.


Regulation of infested biosecurity controlled areas
63.   (1)   In an infested biosecurity controlled area, the Director may by order
            direct -
            (aj   the treatment or disposal of diseased animals and plants;
            (b)   the destocking, cleaning, disinfecting or other treatment of land,
                  premises and conveyances;
            (c)   the inspection and treatment of regulated articles in or entering or
                  leaving the area; or
            (d)   any other biosecuritY measures considered necessary to
                  control the infestation.
      (2)   In respect of an infested biosecurity controlled area, the Director may by
            order control -
            (a)   the movement of animals or plants or their products or other
                  regulated articles into, out of or within the area;
            (b)   the movement of humans and conveyances into, out of or within
                  the area; or
            (c)   any other activity the Director considers needs to be controlled to
                  prevent the movement of host material into and out of the area.


                                          75
      (3)   The Regulations may create offences for breaches of subsection (1) or (2)
            it and prescribe maximum penalties not exceeding a fine of $20,000
            for an individual and $10,000 for a corporate body.
      (4)     The Regulations under this section must be published as required by
             section 104(1);
      (5)   Section 62(4) ceases to have effect upon the coming into force of an
            order under this section.
      (6)   The cost of treatment or destruction under this section is to be borne by
            the Government, and the owner is entitled to compensation (but not
            consequential loss) for destruction of an article under this section.

Pest-free biosecurity controlled areas
64.   (l)   The Minister, on the advice of the Director, .may by order declare any.
            area of Kiribati to be a pest-free biosecurity controlled area in respect of
            a specified pest or disease.
      (2)   A pest-free biosecurity controlled area is one where the specified pest or
            disease does not occur, so far as is known, and where incursions of that
            pest or disease should be prevented.
      (3)   An order under this section must be published as required by section
            104(1);
      (4)   Following a further survey conducted under section 58, and on the
            advice of the Director, the Minister may amend or revoke an order made
            under subsection (1).
      (5)   Before advising the Minister under this section, the Director must obtain
            appropriate scientific advice.


Regulation of pest-free biosecurity controlled areas
65.   (1)   In respect of a pest-free biosecurity controlled area the Director may by
            order -
            (a)   control the movement of regulated articles, humans and
                  conveyances into, out of, and within the area;

                                         76
             (b)    direct the inspection and treatment of regu lated articles in or
                    entering or leaving the area; or
             (c)    establish surveillance procedures for the specified pest or disease
                    in the area.
      (2)    (a)   An order under subsection (l) must only be made for the purposes
                   of preventing incursions of the specified pest or disease into the
                   biosecurity controlled area; and
             (b)   The Regulations may create offences for breaches of the order and
                   prescribe maximum penalties not exceeding a fine of $2,000
                   for an individual and $10,000 for a corporate body.
      (3)   An order under this section must be published as required by section
            104(1 );
      (4)   The Director may by administrative means institute other measures to
            keep the biosecurity controlled area free ofthe specified pest or disease.


Destruction of wild animals
66.   (1)   If the Director has reason to suspect that a wild or feral animal is
            carrying a regulated pest or disease, the Director may, in order to
            prevent the pest or disease from being established or spreading in
            Kiribati, after consultation with relevant technical section heads, and
            with the approval of the Secretary, cause the animal to be destroyed.
      (2)   The carcass of an animal destroyed under subsection (1) must be
            disposed of in a manner that will not create the risk of the spread of any
            regulated pest or disease.

Notifiable pests and diseases
67.   (1)   The Director may by order declare -
            (a)    the pests and diseases that are notifiable for purposes of this
                   section; and
            (b)    the manner of notifying such pests and diseases to the Director.


                                           77
       (2)   An order under this section must be published as required by section
             J 04(1).

       (3)   A person who knows of or suspects the occurrence of a notifiable pest or
             disease in Kiribati must as soon as reasonably practicable notify the
             Director in the manner declared under subsection (1), unless the person
             reasonably believes that the Director has already been notified of the
             occurrence.
      (4)    A person who fails to comply with subsection (3) commits an offence
             and shall be liable to.a fine of $J ,000 or 6 months imprisonment or
             both.

      (5)    The master of a vessel or captain of an aircraft in Kiribati who knows of
             or suspects the occurrence of a notifiable pest or disease on board the
             vessel or aircraft must -
             (a)    as soon as reasonably practicable notify the Director in the manner
                    declared under subsection (l); and
             (b)   take such action in relation to the vessel or aircraft as is directed
                   by the Director or a biosecurity officer.
      (6)    A master or captain who fails to comply with subsection (5)(a) or (b)
             commits an offence and shalf be liable to a fine of $ J ,000 or 6 months
             imprisonment or both.
      (7)    The Director must record in the biosecurity register all occurrences of
             notifiable diseases that are notified under this section or that otherwise
             come to the notice of the Director.


Beneficial organisms and biocontrol agents
68.   (l)    The Minister may in writing authorise the release of beneficial organisms
             or biocontrol agents that are necessary or appropriate for the control or
             eradication of a particular pest or disease in Kiribati.
      (2)    Before authorising a release under subsection (J) the Minister must
             obtain the advice of the Director as to the biosecurity risk posed by the
             release and consult as appropriate the officers or authorities responsible


                                            78
              for agriculture, fisheries, environment and natural resources.

       (3)    An authorisation under subsection (l) must identify-
              (a)    the organism or agent;

              (b)   the pest or disease which it is intended to control;
              (c)   the area where it may be released;
              (d)   the period during which it may be released;

              (e)   the person or persons who may release it; and
              (f)   any conditions subject to which the approval is granted.
      (4)     No liability attaches to the Minister, the Director or any public officer in
              respect of the release of organisms or biocontrol agents in accordance
             with this section, except on proof of negligence or malice.
      (5;    . the Director must 'record in the biosecurity register - .
              (a)   the names of any beneficial organisms or biological agents
                    released under this section;
              (b)   the place of and extent of release of such organisms and
                    agent;and

             (c)    the date of release of such organisms and agents
      (6)    In this section, "beneficial organism" and "biocontrol agent" mean a
             natural enemy, antagonist or competitor of a pest or disease, and any
             other self-replicating biotiC entity used for pest and disease control.
      (7)    Before adviSing the Minister under subsection(2), the Director must
             obtain appropriate scientific advice.



                              PART 9 - BIOSECURITY EMERGENCIES


Declaration of a biosecurity emergency area

69.   (J)    On receiving evidence that a biosecurity emergency has arisen in the
             whole or any part of Kiribati, the Minister acting in accordance with the


                                            79
             advice of Cabinet may declare a biosecurity emergency in respect of the
             whole of or that part of Kiribati.

       (2)   Before making a declaration under subsection (l), the Minister
             acting .in accordance with the advice of Cabinet must obtain the
             advice of the Director and consultthe National Disaster
             Committee.

      (3)    A biosecurity emergency area may include an area where an animal or
             plant is found to be infested or infected, and adjacent areas to the
             extent reasonably necessary.

      (4)    Notice of a declaration under this section must be -

             (a)   publlshed as required by section J 04(1); and
             (b)   displayed on noticeboards or similar throughout the biosecurity
                   emergency area:
      (5)    A declaration under subsection (J) must be revoked as soon as the
             biosecurity threat is removed or reduced to an acceptable degree.

      (6)    A declaration under subsection (J) expires on the date stated therein is
             unless it is revoked or extended on or before that date the Minister
             acting on the advice of the Cabinet and subsection (2) applies to such
             revocation or extension as the case may be.
      (7)    An extension of a biosecurity emergency declaration under subsection 6
             may not be for more than 6 months from the date ofthe declaration, but
             may be renewed in the same manner before the end of
             that period.


Response to a biosecurity emergency

70.   (J)    When a biosecurity emergency area is declared under section 69, the
             Director must undertake a detailed survey, using the powers in section
             58, to ascertain the precise extent and severity of the incursion or other
             threat and the most appropriate measures to take in response.

      (2)    In deciding on an appropriate response to a biosecurity emergency, the
             Director should -

                                           80
             (a)    be guided by any Biosecurity Emergency Response Plan that has
                    been devised by the Ministry in consultation with other
                   departments of government and statutory authorities; and
             (b)    as appropriate, consult and liaise with the National Disaster
                    Committee.

Action in a biosecurity emergency area

71.   (1)    In respect of a biosecurity emergency area-
             (a)   the Secretary may request the Commissioner of Police and any
                   department of government or statutory Director to use their
                   powers and resources to assist in the control or eradication of any
                   pest or disease in the area;
             (b)   the Secretary may in writing requisition for the use of the Director
                   any conveyance or equipment which the Director reasonably
                   considers is necessary or useful for preventing, eradicating or
                   limiting the spread of a pest or disease;
            (c)    a biosecurity officer may enter upon any land at any time in order
                   to ascertain the status of a pest or disease; or
            (d)    the Secretary may appoints temporary additional personnel,
                   whether or not having the powers of biosecurity officers, to
                   effectively respond to the biosecurirty emergency.
      (2)   In a biosecurity emergency area, the Director may do or cause to be
            done any of the following -
            (a)    mark the boundaries of the emergency area;
            (b)    set up roadblocks at all exits from the area;
            (c)    set up facilities for the cleansing and disinfection of all persons
                   and conveyances entering or leaving the area and any other thing
                   likely to spread any pest or disease;
            (d)    disinfect all conveyances, crates, packing, animals, plants and
                   other things which are likely to carry pests or diseases and which
                   are being sent out of the area; and
            (e)    inspect and disinfect all persons and their possessions leaving the

                                           81
               area so as to prevent any host material that may be infected from
               leaving the area;
       (f)     for the purposes of paragraphs.(d) and (e), detain persons,
               animals, plants, animal and plant products, goods and vehicles for
               as long as is necessary to minimise or eliminate the biosecurity
               risk presented by them; or
      (g)      perform surveillance activities to ascertain the extent and status of
               the emergency.
(3)   A person who -

      (a)      resists, knowingly obstructs, or knowingly and without reasonable
               excuse fails to comply with a direction of the Director, a
               biosecurity officer or any police officer or other person performing
               duties under this section;
                       . -                        ~.  .
      (b)      knowingly enters or leaves a biosecurity emergency area except
              with and in accordance with the permission of the Director or a
               biosecurityofficer; or
      (c)      knowingly moves any article out of or into a biosecurity
              emergency area, or from one place within the area to another
               place within that area, except with and in accordance with the
             . written permission of the Director or a biosecurity officer,
      commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years
      imprisonment or both.
(4)   Articles moved in contravention of subsection (3)(c) may be seized by a
      biosecurity officer and -

      (a)     held pending criminal proceedings for the contravention; or

      (b)     if necessary to remove a biosecurity threat, destroyed as the
              Director directs, Without a court order.
(5)   In respect of action taken under this section -

      (a)     the cost of treatment or destruction of any article is to be borne by
              the Government; and

      (b)     compensation (but not for consequential loss) is payable to the
              owner of any land, premises, conveyance or article that is used,


                                        82
                   lost, destroyed or damaged.



Biosecurity Emergency Regulations
72.   (1)    The Minister, on the advice of the Director, and acting in accordance
            with the advice of the Cabinet may make Biosecurity Emergency
             Regulations which -
             (a)   supplement the powers given to the Secretary and Director and
                   biosecurity officers by section 71; and
            (b)    take effect upon the declaration of a biosecurity emergency area
                   under section 70.
      (2)   Biosecurity Emergency Regulations may, in respect of a biosecurity
            emergency area-
            (a)    create one or more exclusion zones within the area and control the
                   movement of conveyances, humans, animals and plants and host.
                   material into, out of and within such a zone;
            (b)    prohibit specified o.ctivities in the area;
            (c)    provide for the destruction or treatment of specified goods and
                   the treatment of land in the area;
            (d)    regulate the use of the area for a specified period after the lifting
                   of emergency restrictions; or
            (e)    generally, specify the conditions which apply to the area to control
                   the biosecurity emergency.
      (3)   Biosecurity Emergency Regulations may -
            (a)    confer on the Secretary and Director and on biosecurity officers
                   powErs additional to those conferred by this Act and reasonably
                   needed to deal with the emergency;
            (b)    prescribe the disposal, destruction, trEatment or other measures
                   to be adopted in respect of any item which is infected, infested or
                   contaminated;
            (c)    require the cleansing or disinfecting of soil, conveyances,

                                            83
                   machinery, tools, equipment, clothing, footwear or other things
                   which may have come into contact with those items;
             (d)   prescribe measures to be taken to prevent pests and diseases from
                   spreading, including but not limited to cleansing of homes and
                   utensils, removal of stagnant water and disposal of garbage; or
            (e)    prohibit or restrict the use of any seaport or airport, or of any
                   facilities at any seaport or airport, to the extent specified.
      (4)   Biosecurity Emergency Regulations may create offences for breaches, of
            them and prescribe maximum penalties not exceeding a fine of
            $4,000 for an individual or $20,000 for a corporate body.
      (5)   Biosecurity Emergency Regulations come into force on the day on which
            a biosecu rity emergency declaration takes effect under section 69 and
            lapse upon the expiry of the declaration under that section. They come
            into force again if a further declaration is made under section 69.
      (6)   In respect of action taken under Biosecurity Emergency Regulations -
            (a)    the cost of treatment or destruction of any article is to be borne by
                   the Government; or
            (b)    compensation (out not for consequential loss) is payable to the
                   owner of any land, premises, conveyance or article that is used,
                   lost, destroyed or damaged.


                      PART 10 - THE DIRECTOR OF BIOSECURITY ETC.


Designation of Director of Biosecurity
73.   (l)   The Minister must in writing designate a public officer in the Ministry to
            be the Director of Biosecurity for the purposes of this Act.
      (2)   The Minister may in writing designate a public officer in the Ministry to
            be the Deputy Director of Biosecurity and to perform the functions of the
            Director whenever the Director is unable to do so.
      (3)   The Director and Deputy Director (if any) are by virtue of their office


                                          84
              biosecurity officers for all purposes of this Act.

       (4)    If the Director is temporarily absent from Kiribati, or is temporarily
              unable to perform his or her duties for any other reason, and if no
              Deputy Director has been designated under subsection (2); the Minister
              may designate a suitably qualified public officer to act in the place of the
              Director during that period.

      (5)     The powers of appointment and designation under this section are
              subject to the powers of the Public 5ervice Commission under the
              Constitution and other laws with regard to the appointment and
              designation of public officers.


Designation of biosecurity officers

74.   (1)    The Minister must in writing designate one or more suitably qualified
             public officers as biosecurity officers for the purposes of this Act.
      (2)    The Minister may in writing designate any public officer or employee of
             a statutory authority to be a biosecurity officer for a particular purpose
             or at a particular location.
      (3)     The Minister may in writing designate any suitably qualified
              person or public officer to be a temporary biosecurity officer for a
             period not exceeding 6 months for a particular purpose or at a
             particular location.
      (4)    Before designating a public officer from another Ministry, the Minister
             must consult the relevant Minister, but failure to do so does not
             invalidate the designation.
      (5)    (a)   The powers of a biosecurity officer are as prescribed by or
                   under this Act.
             (b)   A biosecurity officer must perform such duties, not inconsistent
                   with this Act, as are assigned to the officer by the Director.

             (c)   The Director may limit the functions to be performed by a
                   biosecurity officer to those within the officer's technical sphere of
                   competence.


                                             85
              (d)   The functions assigned to an officer designated under subsection·
                    (2) or (3) must be consistent with the terms of the designation.

      (6)     The Director must provide every biosecurity officer with a suitable form
              of identification as such officer.
      (7)     A person who -

              (a)   upon the termination of his or her appointment as a biosecurity
                    officer fails to surrender up any identification issued under
                    subsection (6) within a specified period; or

             (b)    copies, forges or alters a form of identification issued under
                    subsection (6) without the written authority of the Secretary,

             commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $1,000 or 6 months
             imprisonment or both.
      (8)·   A person who is to perform duties as a biosecurity officer under this
             section must be given adequate training in biosecurity control measures
             and in the provisions of this Act before embarking on those duties.
      (9)    The powers of appointment and designation under this section are
             subject to the powers of the Public Service Commission under the
             Constitution and other laws with regard to the appointment and
             designation of public officers.


Functions of the Director
75.   (1)    The Director must -

             (a)    perform the functions assigned to the Director by or under this
                    Act;

             (b)    advise the Minister on matters relating to animal and plant
                    quarantine and biosecurity and liaise with appropriate Ministries
                    and statutory bodies on such matters;

             (c)    report to the Secretary and Minister as required by either of them
                    from time to time;

             (d)    perform any other functions relating to this Act that the Minister or


                                            86
                     Secretary by directions in writing confers on the Director from time
                     to time.

       (2)    Before performing technical functions under this Act, the Director and
              Deputy Director must as appropriate obtain advice from technical section
              heads.



Functions of the Ministry

76.   (1)     The Minister -

             (a)    has the functions assigned to the Minister by or under this Act;

              (b)   may call for reports from the Secretary and Director on any matter
                    pertaining to this Act or the biosecurity functions of the
                    Government;

             (c)    acting in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet, may arrange
                    for Kiribati to be represented internationally in respect of matters
                    relating to biosecurity.

      (2)     The Secretar'l-

             (a)    has the functions assigned to the Secretary by or under this Act;

             (b)    may call for reports from the Director on any matter pertaining to
                    this Act or the functions of the Director;

             (c)    must endeavour to ensure that adequate staff and funds
                    are available to the Director for the performance of the Director's
                    functions under section 75, in accordance with any policy laid
                    down by the Minister.

      (3)    The Ministry must-

             (a)    in consultation with other government departments and statutory
                    authorities and the National Disaster Committee, devise a
                    Biosecurity Emergency Response Plan to deal with an incursion of a
                    regulated pest or disease in Kiribati and keep the plan under
                    review;

             (b)    produce an operations manual for the guidance of


                                               87
                    biosecurity officers in electronic or hard format or both; and
             (c)    to the extent possible, publicise the requirements of this Act
                    and increase public awareness of the importance of
                    biosecu rity.


Directions
77.   (l)    The Minister may give written directions to the Secretary and Director
             concerning administrative action needed to implement this Act and to
             achieve the biosecurity functions of the Government.
      (2)    The Secretary may give written directions to the Director concerning
             administrative action needed to implement this Act and to achieve the
             biosecurity functions of the Government.
      (3)    The Director may give written directions to biosecurity officers as to the
             manner in which their functions are to be performed, consistent with this
             Act and the regulations.


Delegation of functions
78.    (1)   The Minister may in writing delegate any of the Minister's functions,
             powers and duties under this Act to the Secretary or the Director, other
             than any legislative or appellate function or this power to delegate.
      (2)    Subject to subsection (3), the Director may in writing delegate any of the
             Director's functions under this Act or the regulations to the Deputy
             Director or to a named biosecurity officer.
      (3)    The Director may not delegate any legislative, judicial or appellate
             function, the power of giving directions under section 77, or the power
             of delegation under this section, except to the Deputy Director.
      (4)    A delegation under this section may be to a specified person or
             to the holder for the time being of a specified office or to the holders of
             offices of a specified class.
      (S)    A delegation under this section may be made subject to such restrictions


                                           88
             and conditions as the delegator thinks fit, and may be made either
             generally or in rel-ation to any particular case or class of cases.
      (6)    A person purporting to perform any function by virtue of a -delegation
             under this section must, when required to do so, produce evidence of
             the authority to perform the function.
      (7)    A delegation under this section continues in force notwithstanding a
             change in the identity of the delegator, until revoked.


Biosecurity register and records
79.   (1)    The Director must maintain a biosecurity register and other records
             needed for the administration of this Act and the performance of the
             biosecurity functions of the Government.
      (2)    Without limiting the matters to be recorded in the biosecurity register,
             details of the following must be included -
             (a)   regulated pests and diseas~s;
             (b)   prohibited imports;
            (c)    biosecurity points of entry and departure;
            (d)    biosecurity holding areas;
            (e)    biosecurity clearance agents;
            (f)    biosecurity port quarantine areas;
            (g)    biosecurity quarantine stations;
            (h)    biosecurityapproved premises;
            (I)    biosecurity import permits issued, refused and revoked under Part
                   4;
            (j)    exemptions granted under section 31;
            (k)    transit waivers issued under section 32, other than in-transit
                   passenger waivers;
            (I)    biosecurity controlled areas declared under section 62 or 64;
            (m)    occurrences of notifiable pests and diseases notified under section

                                          89
              67;
       (n)   beneficial organisms and biocontrol agents released under section
             68;
       (0)   agreements and me"moranda of understanding with other
             government departments, statutory authorities and overseas
             agencies under section 83(3);

       (p)   compliance agreements entered into by the Director under section
             87;
      (q)    bilateral agreements entered into with potential receiving
             countries under section 89; or

      (r)    any other pUblic biosecurity register required by or under this Act
             or considered by the Director to be necessary or appropriate.

(3)   The biosecurity register must inchldedetails of -

      (a)    specifications for regulated articles made under sections 26 and
             36, including the biosecurity measures appropriate to each type of
             regulated article; and

      (b)    any other form or matter specified by the Director under this Act.

(4)   In respect of the biosecurity requirements of receiving countries, the
      biosecurityregister must include details of-

      (a)    the requirements of those countries for which biosecurity export
             clearance has been granted in the past 12 months; and
      (b)    source material for ascertaining the biosecurity requirements of all
             potential receiving countries.
(5)   The Director must maintain records relating to the biosecurity functions
      of the Government, including, but not limited to-

      (a)    financial and resource management records, with budgets and
             records of expenditure and revenue;

      (b)    personnel records including the identities, duty statements and
             terms and conditions of employment of all biosecurity officers; or

      (c)    operational statistics relating to the biosecurity functions of the

                                      90
                     Government.



Status of biosecurity register and records
80.    (1)   The biosecurity register kept pursuant to section 79(1 )inust be made
              available for inspection and copying by members of the public during
             office hou rs at the office of the Director on payment of the prescribed
             fee.
       (2)   Copies of relevant extracts from the biosecurity register must be made
             available for inspection and copying by members of the public at Island· .
             Council offices on payment of the prescribed fee.
      (3)    Subject to any other Act, the biosecurity register and other records kept
             under section 79 must only be used for the purposes of this Act.
      (4)    A copy of an entry in the biosecurity register which is certified by the
             Director to be an accurate copy may be produced in court as prima facie
             evidence of the entry.
      (5)    The biosecurity register and other records kept under section 79 may be
             in electronic format, provided the information is readily retrievable and
             is protected against unintended loss and unauthorised alteration.
      (6)    The Minister, on the advice of the Director, may by order determine the
             period for which entries in the biosecurity register and other records
             under section 79 must be kept, consistent with any other Act relating to
             public records.


                           PART 11 - ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACT



Financial provisions
81.   (1)    The biosecurity funds of the Ministry consist of-
             (a)    money appropriated by the Maneaba ni Maungatabu and paid to
                    the Ministry in respect of biosecurity functions of the Government;
             (b)    money paid to the Ministry for services rendered to any other

                                           91
                 person or body;

           (c)   money paid to the Ministry by way of grants; or

          (d)    money derived from the disposal, lease or hire of, or other
                 dealing with, any property vested in or acquired by the Minister in
                 respect of the biosecurity functions of the Government.

    (2)   If-

          (a)    there is an incursion of a regulated pest, disease or organism into
                 Kiribati which may threaten the livelihood and environment of the
                 country or any part of it; and

          (b)    a response is immediately required, whether by way of the
                 declaration of a biosecurity emergency area or otherwise, the
                 expenditure shall be met under the Public Finance, Control and
                 Audit Ordinance, Cap 79 pending a supplementary appropriation
                 by the Maneaba ni Maungatabu.

   (3)    Fines, fees and charges payable under this Act are to be paid into the
          Government Account and dealt with in accordance with the Public
          Finance Control and Audit Ordinance, Cap 79.

   (4)    If a fee or charge payable under this Act is not paid -

          (a)    if the service for which the fee or charge is payable has not been
                 provided - it may be withheld until the fee is paid;

          (b)     if the service has been provided - the fee or charge may be
                 recovered as a debt owing to the Government; and

          (c)    if the fee or charge is in respect of an item in quarantine - the
                 item may be sold once it has cleared quarantine, or otherwise be
                 treated as abandoned goods.


Powers of island Councils

82. (1)   Every Island Council may in relation to its area of Jurisdiction·

          (a)    carry out, for the purposes of this Act,           monitoring and
                 surveillance of pests and diseases;


                                           92
               (b)   propose pest and disease management strategies in consultation
                     with the Director;
               (c)   if a pest management strategy proposed by the Island Council
                     has been approved by the Director -
                     (I)     perform the functions of the management agency in respect
                             of the strategy;
                     (ii)    provide for the management or eradication of pests and
                             diseases;
                     (iii)   review, extend or revoke the strategy;
              (d)    advise the Director on the need for and appropriate controls in a
                     biosecurity controlled area;
              (e)    assist the Director in making an appropriate response to a
                     biosecurity emergency; or
              (f)    generally, assist the Director in any action needed under Part 8
                     in respect of its area of jurisdiction.
       (2).   An Island Council in consultation with the Director, may gather
                          •
              information, keep records, undertake research, and do any other similar·
              thing that the Council considers necessary or desirable to enable it to act
              effectively under this Act .
      . (3)   Island Councils may also make by-laws for specific matters of concern
              to their area of jurisdiction in relation to biosecurity.


Consultation and outsourcing
83.    (1)    Before making subsidiary legislation, issuing directions or exercising
              other powers under this Act, the Minister, Secretary and Director must
              each obtain appropriate technical advice and consult relevant interested
              parties, but failure to do so does not invalidate the exercise of the
              relevant powers.
       (2)    Before exercising a power under this Act that will or might affect matters
              within the responsibility of another government department or statutory


                                                93
             authority (including but not limited to human health, natural resources,
             environment, tourism, postal services, shipping, aviation, transport and
             trade) the Minister, Secretary and Director must each consult the
             relevant department, authority or officer, but failure to do so does not
             invalidate the exercise of the power.
      (3)   The Minister, Secretary or Director may for the effective
             implementation of this Act, enter into memoranda of understanding or
            other agreements with other government departments and statutory
            authorities and with official agencies and private organizations in Kiribati
            or elsewhere.

      (4)    The Minister, Secretary or Dircetor may, subject to rules relating to
            procurement, tenders and other matters governing Government
            contracts-

            (a)      hire the seivicesof a laboratory for testing of samples;

            (b)      hire consultants to perform biosecurity risk assessments and to
                  carry out surveys authorised under this Act; or

            (e)      hire any treatment or other service deemed necessary for the

                     effective implementation of this Act.

      (S)   Outsourcing of services under subsection (4) does not confer on any
            person the powers of a biosecurity officer.


Duty to coordinate
84.   (1)    Biosecurity officers and other persons administering this Act must so
            far as possible coordinate their functions with those of officers of other
            government departments and statutory authorities, in respect of border
            control, the movement of vessels and aircraft, human health, biosecurity
            internal control and compliance with the laws of Kiribati generally.

      (2)   Without limiting subsection (1) -

            (a)   biosecurity officers must notify officers of the customs and
            immigration services of any breach of the customs .or immigration
            Acts that comes to their notice;

                                           94
             (b)    officers of the customs and immigration services and of the postal
                    service must -
                    (I)   notify a biosecu rity officer of the importation or proposed
                          exportation of any uncleared regulated article that comes to
                          their notice; and
                   (iil   hand over to a biosecurity officer any such article which
                          comes into their possession for inspection and treatment in
                          accordance with this Act; or
             (c)    police officers, customs officers, immigration officers, postal
                   service officers, environmental officers, agriculture officers,
                   livestock officers, forestry officers and fisheries officers should co-
                   operate with biosecurity officers in the performance of their
                   functions underthis Act and render such assistance as they can
                   lawfully do when called upon by the Director or a biosecurity
                   officer.
      (3)   The Minister or Secretary must seek so far as possible to coordinate the
            biosecurity functions of the Government with those of other government
            departments and statutory authorities dealing with the police, customs,
            immigration, marine, harbours, Civil aviation, health, environment,
            fisheries, natural resources and similar services.


Facilities at biosecurity points of entry or departure
85.   (l)   The operator of every biosecurity point of entry or departure in Kiribati
            must, to the extent pOSSible, provide on the premises, for the purposes
            of this Act and to the satisfaction of the Secretary and Director -
            (a)    an area suitable for use as offices by biosecurity officers stationed
                   at the point;
            (b)    adequate space for the display of notices regarding the biosecurity
                   requirements of this Act;
            (c)    areas for interview and, if necessary, physical examination of
                   incoming passengers and crew, if required;


                                           95
            (d)    biosecurity holding areas as designated under section 11;
            (e)    facilities and suitable containers for garbage collection and
                   incineration or other disposal;
            (f)   facilities for the incineration or other disposal of regulated articles
                  without creating an unacceptable biosecurity risk;
            (g)    fencing of premises in which garbage holding, and disposal
                   equipment is situated; and
            (h)   any other facilities the Secretary or Director reasonably requests in
                  writing as being needed for the performance of biosecurity
                  functions at the' point of entry or departure.
      (2)   The operator of a biosecurity entry or departure point, whether or not a
            public officer, must keep the premises and facilities mentioned in
            subsection (1 )(e),(f) and (g) free from weeds and vermin to tire
            satisfaction of the Director. An operator who fails to do so commits an
            offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years imprisonment
            or both,
      (3)   No charge is payable by the Minister or Director for the faciiities to be
            provided under this section. If an operator fails to provide facilities as
            required by this section they may be provided by the Minister or Director
            and the cost of such provision is a debt owing by the operator to the
            Government.


Safe carriage and safe working environment
86.   (I)   If it is necessary for the purposes of this Act for a biosecurity officer to
            be transported to a conveyance, premises or place, the owner of the
            conveyance, premises or place must ensure that the mode of transport
            provides safe carriage having regard to the conditions of travel.
      (2)   If it is necessary for an officer to undertake inspection duties on a
            conveyance or premises, including a conveyance or premises owned by
            the Government, the person in charge of the conveyance or premises
            must provide -


                                           96
             (a)    a safe working environment for the officer;

             (b)   adequate refreshment every 4 hours; and

             (c)   overnight accommodation, if required

      (3)    The Minister's power to make regulations under section 106 includes
             the power to make regulations, consistent with the health and safety
            Acts of Kiribati, to enforce the obligations stated in subsection (1) and
            (2).



Compliance agreements
87.   (I)   The Director may enter into a written agreement with an importer,
            exporter, producer or any other person in connection with -

            (a)    the application of particular biosecurity measures in respect of any
                   item;

            (b)    the way in which any requirement under this Act can be satisfied
                   by the person; and

            (c)    the supervision, monitoring and testing of the person's compliance
                   with those measures or that reqUirement.
      (2)   A compliance agreement may provide that, in circumstances stated in
            the agreement, the Director may, by written notice, cancel or vary the
            agreement or suspend its operation for a period; the circumstances
            may include, but are not limited to, the person's failure to comply with
            specified measures or meet specified requirements.


      (3)   A biosecurity officer may release an article to which a compliance
            agreement applies, and if it is a regulated article grant biosecurity
            clearance in respect of it, on the basis of a written certificate, given by
            a person authorised under the agreement to give such a certificate, that
            ail the measures to which the agreement refers have been complied
            with in respect of the article.




                                              97
Biosecurity approved premises
88.    (1)    The Director, on written application by the owner or occupier of any
              premises and on payment of the prescribed fee, may in writing -
              (a)     approve the premises as premises where the inspection, testing
                      and treatment of regu lated articles can take place; and
             (b)      approve specified action being taken under this Act in
                      relation to all regulated articles, or specified articles, while
                     they are in the approved premises.
      (2)    In deciding whether to give approval under subsection (1), the Director,
             after inspection of the premises by a biosecurity offker, must take into
             account -
             (a)     whether the specified action can be taken in the premises without
                     an unacceptable biosecurity risk and without contravening this
                   . Act orthe conditions ofany permit;
             (b)     whether the premises and facilities in them are adequate to
                     enable such action to be taken efficiently and safely;
             (c)     whether the location of the premises is appropriate having regard
                     to the nature of the articles, the specified action and the level of
                     biosecurity risk;
             (d)    whether the premises are located in a place where biosecurity
                    officers can conveniently check that this Act and the regulations
                    are being complied with in the premises; and
             (e)    any other matter the Director considers relevant.
      (3)    An approval under this section may be expressed to be subject to
             conditions stated in the approval and is of no effect if the conditions are
             not met.
      (4)    An approval under this section has effect for a period not exceeding 12
             months but may be renewed by following the procedure for a new
             approval.
      (5)    An approval under this section may be cancelled if the Director is
             satisfied -
             (al    that the premises or facilities or action taken do not comply with


                                           98
                    this Act or the regulations; or
             (b)    that the premises are otherwise no longer suitable for approval.
      (6)    The provisions of this Act relating to biosecurity quarantine stations
             (other than section 40) apply to premises approved under this section.


International cooperation

89.   (1)   The Minister acting in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet may,
            enter into bilateral or multilateral agreements with countries and
            international organisations for effective international control in
            biosecurity matters.
      (2)   The Director may pursuant to such agreements -
            (a)    exchange information with other countries and international
                   organisations; and

            (b)    contribute to the development of international sanitary and
                   phytosanitary standards.
      (3)   Agreements under subsection (1) may include agreements on procedures
            for implementing this Act, but not so as to vary the effect of any of its
            provisions except as provided by this Act.
      (4)   The Minister must use his or her best endeavours to implement in
            Kiribati international standards and requirements relating to biosecurity,
            and to that end should -

            (a)    designate one or more officers in the Ministry as the enquiry pOint
                   and notification authority for purposes of the IPPC, the OlE and the
                   PPPO; and

            (b)    seek to ensure that notification and reporting requirements of the
                   IPPC, the OlE, the PPPO and any other international agreement
                   relating to biosecurity imposed on Kiribati are met in a timely
                   manner.




                                           99
Notifications
90.    (1)      The Minister or Secretary on the advice of the Director may at any time
                issue a notice -
             (a)   stating that a specified pest or disease is known to exist in
                   Kiribati;
             (b)   stating that, to the best of the Minister's or Secretary's knowledge,
                   a specified pest or disease does not exist in Kiribati; and
             (c)   specifying the classification, name or identity by which any animal,
                   animal product, plant, plant product, pest or disease is known in
                   Kiribati.
       (2)   A notice issued under subsection (1) is, for the purposes of this Act,
             conclusive until revoked or amended under that subsection and is
             admissible in any court or other proceedings as evidence of the matters
             stated in it.




                             PART i 2 - OFFENCES AND PENALTIES


Dereliction of duty by officers
91.    A biosecurity officer who -
      (a)    fails without reasonable excuse to perform any of his or her duties under
             this Act or the regulations;
      (b)    disposes of a regulated article or other item under the control of the
             officer other than in accordance with this Act;
      (c)    discloses information of a confidential or commercial nature which has
             come into the officer's possession while performing functions under this
             Act, except for purposes of this Act;
      (d)    in the course of performing his or her duties molests or intimidates
             unlawfully assaults any person;
      (e)    in connection with his or her duties solicits or accepts a bribe; or



                                           100
       (f)    knowingly or recklessly makes a false or misleading statement, or issues
              a false or misleading certificate or other document, while purporting to
              perform his or her duties,

       commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $2,000 or 1 year
       imprisonment or both.

Obstruction, false information etc.
92.    A person who -

       (a)   willfully faits to comply with a lawful request made or direction given by
             a biosecurity officer under this Act;
       (b)   knowingly obstructs a biosecurity officer in the performance of his or her
             functions under this Act;
      (c)    assaults, or threatens to assault a bibsecurity officer performing
             functions under this Act;
      (d)    bribes a biosecurity officer in relation to the performance of functions
             under this Act;

      (e)    makes a false or incomplete statement, whether orally or in writing, in
             relation to any matter under this Act, intending to mislead a biosecurity
             officer in the performance of functions under this Act,
      (f)    for purposes of this Act knowingly or recklessly-

             (I)    makes a false or misleading biosecurity declaration; or
             (ii)   issues any false or misleading certificate; or
      (g)    knOWingly or recklessly gives false or misleading information to a
             biosecurity officer while the officer is performing functions under this
             Act,

      commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years
      imprisonment or both.



Fraudulent use of official documents

93.   (1)    A person to Whom a permit or other document is issued under this Act

                                           101
             who -
              (a)    forges or unlawfully alters the document; or
             (b)      allows any other person to use or attempt to use the document for
                    . any purpose of this Act;
             commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years
             imprisonment or both.
      (2)    A person who, for the purposes of this Act, produces a document which
             is false or misleading, knowing it to be so and intending another person
             to rely on it, commits an offence and shall be liable to fine of $5,000 or
             2 years imprisonment or both.
      (3)    A person who uses or affixes an official stamp or seal required under
             this Act, without lawful authority and with intent to defraud or deceive,
             commits an offence and shall be liable to a fine of $5,000 or 2 years·
             imprisonment or both.

Maximum penalties for body corporate
94.   (1)     A body corporate that commits an offence is liable to a maximum fine
              of 5 times the maximum fine for the same offence if committed by an
              individual, as prescribed.


Forfeiture
95.   (1)    A court convicting a person of an offence under this Act or the
             regulations may, in addition to any other penalty imposed, order that
             any article used in committing the offence, or, if the article has been
             sold, the proceeds of the sale, be confiscated.
      (2)    If an articie or proceeds are confiscated under subsection (ll-
             (a)    the article or proceeds are forfeited to the State;
             (b)    a forfeited article may be sold and the proceeds of sale paid into
                    the Consolidated Fund; or
             (el    if the article poses a biosecurity threat it must be destroyed as


                                           102
                    directed by the Director.
      (3)    For the purposes of subsection (1), "article used in committing the
             offence" includes equipment, a conveyance and any other movable thing
             owned by the offender which was used directly in the commission of the
             offence, but does not include land or buildings and fixtures on land.

      (4)    In deciding whether to order confiscation of any article or proceeds
             under this section, a court must have regard to the principle of
             proportionality.



Fixed penalty system

96.   (1)    The Director, in consultation with the Secretary if of the opinion that a
             person has committed an offence under this Act, may as an alternative·
             to prosecuting the person -
             (a)   order the person to pay a fixed penalty as described in subsection
                   (2); and
             (b)   order any goods liable to confiscation in connection with the
                   offence to be forfeited to the Republic or, if they pose a
                   biosecurity threat, to be destroyed.
      (2)   . The fixed penalty referred to in subsection (1) is as set out in the
            Schedule. If no figure is shown in that column, the fixed penalty
            option is not available.
      (3)   The fixed penalty for a body corporate is 5 times that for an individual.
      (4)   Before imposing a fixed penalty order on a person for an offence, the
            Director must notify the person in writing, giving particulars of the
            offence, the maximum penalty that a court could impose, the fixed
            penalty that is proposed, and any item that will be confiscated.
      (5)   If a person on whom a notice is served under subsection (4) -
            (a)    within the time specified in the notice, and in writing, admits the
                   offence, requests the Director to deal with it under this section and
                   consents to the confiscation of the item (if appropriate) - the
                   Director may impose a fixed penalty order on the person; or
            (b)    does not respond as in paragraph (a) within the time specified in
                   the notice - the Director may refer the matter for prosecution.

                                           103
       (6)   A fixed penalty order must -

             (a)   be in writing and specify the offence which the person has
                   committed, the fixed penalty that is imposed, the place where it is
                   to be paid and the date by which it is to be paid; and

             (b)   specify any item that is to be forfeited or destroyed.

      (7)    A person against whom an order is made under this section is not liable
             to any further criminal proceedings in respect of the offence and if in
             custody must be discharged.

      (8)    If a fixed penalty payable under this section, or any part of it, is not paid
             by the date specified in the order, the ~um payable becomes a debt
             owing to the Government and the Director may -
             (a)   request the Director of Immigration to place a stop order on the
                   person leaving the country until the sum is paid; and either -

             (b)   send a copy of the order to a court of competent jurisdiction,
                   which may enforce payment of the sum outstanding as if it were a
                   fine imposed by the court., including imposing costs and
                   confiscation as appropriate; or

             (c)   refer the matter for prosecution.

      (9)    The Minister's power to make regulations under section 106 includes the
             power to make regulations to supplement the provisions of this section
             in relation to fixed penalty notices, including the imposing of stop
             orders to prevent a person leaving the country until the sum is paid.

Offences by corporate bodies

97.   (1)    A corporate body cannot be imprisoned for an offence under this Act or
             the regulations, but the maximum fine for such an offence by a
             corporate body is as stated in section 94.

      (2)    If a corporate body commits an offence against this Act, every person
             who is a board member or director or otherwise concerned in the
             management of the body also commits the offence as an individual,
             unless the person proves -


                                          104
             (a)   that the offence was committed without his or her consent or
                   connivance; and
            (b)    that he or she exercised reasonable diligence to prevent the
            commission of the offence, having regard to the nature of his or her
            functions in the corporate body and to all the circumstances.


                           PART 13 - MISCELlANEOUS PROVISIONS

Civil and criminal proceedings
98;   Notwithstanding any limit on its jurisdiction in any other Act, a
      magistrate's court has jurisdiction to convict and impose any fines or penalties
      or to make any order provided for in or under this Act.


Abandoned goods
99.   (1)   An article may be treated as abandoned and disposed of under this
            section if-
            (a)    any fee or charge payable by a person under this Act or the
                   regulations in respect of the article is not paid within 3 months of
                   the notice of the fee or charge being served on the person;
            (b)    the article is in a biosecurity holding area and is not removed from
                   the area within [14 qays][a time specified in the notice] after
                   biosecurity entry clearance has been granted in respect of it; or
            (c)    the article is in biosecurity quarantine and is not removed from a
                   bosecuirity quarantine station or biosecurity approved premises
                   within a time specified in the notice after the end of the
                   quarantine period in respect of it.
      (2)   An article that has been abandoned may be destroyed, sold or otherwise
            disposed of in the prescribed manner, or, in the absence of regulations,
            in any manner the Director thinks fit that does not present a biosecurity
            risk.
      (3)   The cost of disposal of an abandoned article is a debt due to the

                                         105
            Republic by the person who was the owner of it, and proceeds of any
            sale or disposal of an abandoned article revert to the Republic.

Compensation

100. (1)    Except as otherwise provided in or under this Act, no compensation is
            payable for loss of or damage to any item as a result of any search,
            inspection, examination, sampling, testing, detention, treatment,
            quarantine or other biosecurity measure taken under this Act or the
            regulations, unless negligence or malice on the part of the person taking
            the measure is proved.

      (2)   Compensation is not payable under this Act, or may be reduced
            proportionately, if the biosecurity measures that caused the loss or
            damage were occasioned by a willful or negligent act or omission of the
            person claiming compensation.

      (3}   If this Act provides for payment of compensation in any circumstances,
            the compensation must be -

            (a}   claimed in accordance with a prescribed procedure;

            (b)   if not agreed, determined by the Minister or Director in accordance
                  with the prescribed rates, not exceeding the market value of the
                  item plus consequential loss reflecting contemporary costs; and
            (c)   paid by the Government.

      (4)   An appeal against a determination under subsection (3) lies to the High
            Court.



Appeals from decisions

101. (1)    A person who is aggrieved by a decision of a biosecurity officer under
            this Act made at a biosecurity point of entry or departure, in a
            biosecurity holding area or at a biosecurity quarantine station, may
            within 24 hours appeal to the officer's supervisor at that place or to the
            technical section head.

     (2)    A person Who is aggrieved by any other decision of a biosecurity officer,
            or by the decision of a supervisor technical section head under

                                         106
              subsection (1), may within 7 days appeal in writing to the Director.

       (3)    A person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Director, including a
              decision on an appeal under subsection (2), may within 21 days appeal
              in writing to the Minister, whose decision is final.

       (4)    The lodging of an appeal in respect of an article does not prevent
              biosecurity measures being taken in respect of the article to reduce or
              eliminate the biosecurity risk posed by the article, and section 102
              applies to the taking of such measu res.
       (5)   The person deciding an appeal must give the appellant and the
              respondent the opportunity to be heard, in writing or in person, and to
              produce evidence and call witnesses, and must give reasons for the
              decision on the appeal.
       (6)   If an appeal involves a technical iss.ue, the person hearing the appeal
             must obtain the advice of the relevant technical section head, not being
             the person appealed from.
       (7)   An appeal in respect of compensation is to be dealt with as provided in
             section 100(4).



Limitation of liability
102. (l)     Neither the Minister, the Secretary, the Director nor any biosecurity
             officer or other public officer is personally liable for action taken under
             this Act in good faith and without negligence.
      (2)    A breach of a duty imposed on the Minister, the Secretary, the Director, a
             biosecurity officer or any other public officer by or under this Act does
             not give rise to any civil liability except as provided by or under this Act.



Evidence

103. (l)     In any proceedings under this Act -

             (a)   a document purporting to have been issued by the Minister,
                   Secretary or Director or by a biosecurity officer or other public


                                           107
                  officer for the purposes of this Act is presumed, until the contrary
                  is proved, to have been duly executed or signed by that person;

            (b)   a copy of or extract from a document issued by the Minister,
                  Secretary or Director or by a biosecurity officer or other public
                  officer, and certified by the Director or person to be true and
                  correct is, unless the contrary is proved -

                  (I)     presumed to bea true and correct copy or extract;. and

                  (ii)    on its production in court be prima facie proof of any matter
                          contained in it.

      (2)   In any proceedings under this Act -

            (a)   a certificate, in a form approved by the Director, of the results of
                  any test conducted on an article by the person who conducted the
                  test may be tendered in evidence and is prima facie evidence of
                  the facts stated in it;

            (b)   a certificate of analysis of a sample of any article or thing may be
                  tendered in evidence and is prima facie evidence of the facts
                  stated in it if the procedure prescribed in relation to the sample
                  has been substantially followed.

      (3)   Section 80 governs the evidential status of the biosecurity register
            and records kept under this Act.


Publication of orders and notices

104. (J)     Regulations and legislative orders made under this Act must be
            pu blished -

            Cal   for public exhibition at the office of Te Beretitenti;

            (b)   at the office of the Director and on the Ministry website, if any;

            (e)   on any radio or television station that broadcasts in the affected
                  area;

            (d)   in any newspaper that circulates in the affected area; or

            (el   at any Government or Island Council offices that are in or adjacent


                                             108
                    to the affected area,

              and made available to the public for inspection or purchase.

       (2)    Regulations and legislative orders made under this Act do not take effect
              until published for public exhibition at the Office of Te Beretitenti, or
              unless otherwise provided.

       (3)    Unless otherwise provided, and subject to subsection (4), notice required
              by this Act to be given may be given electronically-

              (a)   by a person to the Director; or

              (b)   by the Director to a person, if the person has given
                    the Director an electronic address for receipt of such
                    notices.

       (4)   If service of a notice or other document on a person is to be proved in a
             court, it must be' effected -

             (a)    by personal service on the person; or

             (b)    by registered post to the address of the person given to the
                    Director, in which case service is presumed to have
                    been effected 2 days after posting.

      (5)    The Director may give instructions and directions to biosecurity officers
             by electronic means.

      (6)    A printed copy 9f an electronic record of a notice, instruction or
             direction given 'or received by electronic means is prima faCie evidence of
             the notice if the record purports to have been made at the time of
             sending or receipt.


SpeCifications

105. (1)     The Director may in writing specify-

             (a)    documents and forms for use in connection with this Act,
                    including the format of documents transmitted by electronic
                    means;

             (b)    the procedures for applying for and issuing permits and other


                                            109
                    documents; and
              (c)   all other matters that can or must be specified, as provided for in
                    this Act.
      (2)     If a matter is prescribed by regulations or an order, the regulations or
              order take precedence over a specification on the same matter.

      (3)     Specifications must be entered in a biosecurity register maintained under
              section 79(2) and do not take effect until so entered.

      (4)      Section 80 governs the evidential status of a specification contained in a
              biosecurity register.

      (5)     Unless otherwise provided, section 104(1) does not apply to
              specifications made underthis Act and entered in a biosecurity register,
              but they must be -

              (a)   published in the biosecurity register and at the offices of the
                    Director;

              (b)   published in any operations manual provided to biosecurity
                    officers pursuant to section 76(3)(b); and

              (c)   made available to the public for inspection or purchase.



Regulations

106. (1)      The Minister may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act for the
              effective implementation of this Act and the performance of the
              biosecurity functions of the Government.

     (2)      Without limiting subsection (1) or affecting any other reg ulation-making
              power in this Act, regulations made by the Minister may-

              (a)   prescribe fees and charges for the biosecurity services provided
                    by the Ministry;

              (b)   prescribe the method of taking and analyzing samples, recording
                    the results and disposing of the samples;

              (c)   prescribe the manner of disposal of abandoned goods under
                    section 99;

                                           110
       (d)   prescribe the procedure for claiming compensation, and the rates
             payable, pursuantto section 100;
       (e)   regulate the procedure on appeals under section 101;
       (f)   provide for the de-ratting of vessels, and the form of de-ratting
             certificate;
      (g)    regulate the disposal of garbage and waste and second-hand
             clothing and bedding so as to minimise any biosecurity risk;
      (h)    provide for the electronic filing of declarations and applications
             required by this Act and the electronic keeping of registers;

      G)     prescribe the language of documents required by this Act;

      G)     prescribe the manner and language of markings on containers of
             incoming and outgoing regulated articles;
      (k)    prescribe the methods of handling, sealing, treating and disposing
             of containers of regulated articles;
      (I)    provide for the placing and use of amnesty bins or other
             containers for regulated articles at points of entry;
      (m)    subject to the approval of the civil aviation and maritime
             authorities, require a video film about biosecurity to be shown on
             all aircraft and vessels arriving in Kiribati and carrying passengers;
      (n)    require treatment to be applied in respect of a vessel or aircraft
             before it arrives in Kiribati;

      (0)    prescribe additional measures, consistent with this Act, to
             implement in Kiribati the standards and requirements relating to
             biosecurity of the IPPC, the OlE and the PPPO; or
      (p)    prescribe any other matter which this Act requires to be prescribed
             or which is necessary for carrying out or giving effect to this Act.
(3)   Before making regulations under this section, the Minister may -

      (a)    obtain the advice of the Director; and
      (b)    consult other government departments and statutory authorities
             as appropriate.

                                      111
     (4)   Regulations made under this section may create·offences for breaches of
           them and prescribe maximum penalties not exceeding a fine of
            $2,000 for an individual or $10,000 for a corporate body.



Repeals and savings

107. (1)   The following Acts and items of subsidiary legislation made under them
           are repealed -

           (a)    Importation of Animals Ordinance (Cap.43); and

           (bl    Plants Ordinance (Cap.72).

     (2)   Subsidiary legislation repealed by subsection (1) that could be made
           under this Act continues in force as if made under this Act until
           amended, replaced or repealed under this Act, unless and to the extent
           that -

           (al   the matter is provided for in this Act;

           (b)   the subsidiary legislation is inconsistent with the provisions of
                 this Act or any other Act.

     (3)   Provisions of regulations made under the repealed laws dealing with the
           treatment of animals, plants and their products on arrival in and export
           from Kiribati -

           (al   are deemed to have been made by the Director as specifications
                 under section 26 or 36 respectively;

           (b)   may be varied by the Director under that section; or

           (c)   if included in a biosecurity register are governed by section 80 as
                 to their evidential status.

     (4)   Delegations, directions, notices, agreements and other administrative
           actions or decisions of the Minister, the Secretary and Inspectors issued
           or made under the repealed laws which could be issued or made by
           eqUivalent officers under this Act continue to have effect as if issued or
           made under this Act until varied or revoked under this Act.




                                         112
Transitional provisions
108. (1)    Permits equivalent to import permits issued under any provision of the
            repealed laws remain in force until they expire in accordance with their
            terms, or until revoked under this Act.
      (2)   Any bond, agreement, instrument or arrangement to whi.ch the
            Government is a party subSisting immediately before the commencement
            of this Act and relating to the biosecurity functions of the Government
            continues to have effect after that date and is enforceable by or against
            the Government as if it had been entered into under the provisions of
            this Act.
      (3)   Subject to subsection (4), any action, arbitration, proceeding or cause of
            action that relates to a biosecurity function of the Government and that
            immediately before the commencement of this Act is pending or existing
            by, against, or in favour of the Government, or to which the Government
            is a party, may be continued and enforced under the provisions of this
            Act.
      (4)   A prosecution for an offence committed against a repealed law must be
            brought and continued under that law.


Consequential amendments
109. (1)    A reference in another Act to any of the repealed laws is, to the extent
            possible, to be read as a reference to this Act.
     (2)    A reference in another Act to an inspector, a quarantine officer or plant
            protection officer or animal health officer is, to the extent possible, to
            be read as a reference to the Director or a biosecurity officer exercising
            equivalent functions under this Act.


Amendment of Schedule
110. (l)    The Minister, after consultation with the Director,and acting in
            accordance with the advice of the Cabinet may by order amend the
            Schedule.


                                         113
114
                                SCHEDULE
                                (Section 96)


                              FIXED PENALTIES

Item Section        Offence                           Fixed Penalty

1.     8(2) - Import prohibited pest/disease               1000

2.     8(3) - Import regulated pest/disease                1000

3.     9(5) - Import a prohibited article                  1000

4.     9(6) - Own or possess a prohibited article          1000

5.    10(2) - Landing except at point of entry             1000

6.    10(3) - Import except at point of entry               400

7.    10(5) - Depart except at point of departure          1000

8.    10(6) -Export except at point of departure            400

9.    12(4) - Interference with holding area                200

10.   12(6) - Import without clearance                     2000

11. 14(3) - Fail to make arrival declaration               1000

12. 15(5) - Fail to comply on arrival                      1000

13. 15(6) - Master fail to obtain landing clearance        1600

14. 15(7) - Crew or passenger unlawful landing              400

15. 17(2) - Interference with port quarantine area          800


                                   115
16. 17(5) - Removing a port quarantine notice                      200

17. 18(4) - Fail to conform to port quarantine                     1000

18. 20(2)(a) - Fail to allow search of vessel/aircraft             1000

19. 20(2)(b) - Fail comply with request etc.                       1000

20. 21 (1 lea) - Fail to secure animal                              800

21. 21 (l )(b) -Fail to secure hatches                              800

22. 21(2)(a) - Discharge garbage                                   1200

23. 21(2)(b) - Discharge baJlast/bUge                              2000

24. 21(3) - Fail to control garbage                                800

25. 2l(4) - Release of ships' stores                               800

26. 22(6)(a) - Passenger fail to declare                           200

27. 22(7)(b) -FairFaiJ to submit incoming baggage for inspection 200

28. 22(8) - Fail to submit outgoing articles for inspection etc.   200

29. 23(2) - FaiJ to make incoming goods available 10,000           200

30. 24(5) - Fail to allow import clearance inspection              200

31.30(4) - Fail to surrender revoked permit                         100

32. 32(4) - Contravene transit waiver                              400

33. 32(8) - Fail allow inspection in transit                       400

34. 33(2) - Fail to make outgoing goods available                   200


                                     116
35. 34(2) - Export withou~ clearance               1000

36. 39(3) - Refusal to move to quarantine          400

37. 42(3) - Interference with quarantine station   400

38. 43(4) - Unlawful release from quarantine       800

39. 44(2) - Removing a quarantine notice            100

40. 45(3) - Unlawfully release animal etc.         400

41.47(6) - Fail to make premises available         200

42. 49(4) - Fail to open container etc.            200

43. 51(3) - Refusal to provide samples             400

44. 57(6) - Person refusing to answer etc.         200

45. 58(5) - Fail to cooperate with survey          200

46. 62(5) - Movement in infested controlled area   800

47. 67(4) - Fail to notify occurrence              200

48. 71 (3) - Breach of emergency directions        1000

49. 74(7)(a) - Officer fail surrender ID

50. 74(7)(b) - Forge etc. officer's ID

5l. 91 - Dereliction of duty by officer

52. 92 - Obstruction etc. of an ~ffjcer              400

53. 93(1) - Forgery etc. of a document



                                    117
54. 93(2) - Producing a false document

55. 93(3) - Unlawful use of official stamp or seal




                                  118
                             BIOSECURITY ACT 2011


                         EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM


Background

      Biosecurity means the control of the movement of plants and animals
and their products in order to prevent the establishment and spread of animal
and plant pests and diseases that can harm human health and the agricultural
economy of a country. It involves the control of agricultural and food imports
and exports, the establishment of a quarantine regime for animals and plants
and the control of the movement of animals and plants within the country.

        In many countries In the Pacific region, a review of the plant and animal
quarantine Acts is long overdue, given the international trend towards freedom
of trade and the movement of goods and people. It is also desirable that the
Acts on biosecurity of the countries of the Pacific Forum be harmonised as far
as possible. This Act has therefore been drafted with the assistance of the
Secretariat of the Pacific Community, as part of a project that aims to
modernize and harmonise biosecurity legislation across the region and bring it
into line with international obligations of participating countries

       This Act is intended to replace the existing Acts and subsidiary
legislation governing animal and plant imports and quarantine. It will bring
together Acts relating to both animals and plants, and provide Kiribati with a
legislative foundation for action to protect it from the introduction of animal
and plant pests and diseases The Act if enacted will also enable the country to
comply with its obligations to ensure that animal and plant, pests or diseases
are not exported from Kiribati into neighbouring countries.

Main features

       The Act establishes a regime to control the import and export of
regulated pests and diseases (Parts 2,3,4 and 5). It also provides powers to
control outbreaks of regulated pests and disease within Kiribati (Parts 8 and 9).
The biosecurity functions of the Government are set out in section 6. The key
administrative feature is the provision in Part 10 for the designation of a




                                      119
Director of Biosecurity and biosecurity officers for Kiribati. These will be
existing public officers in the Ministry of Agriculture. The Director will have the
functions set out in section 75. The powers of biosecurity officers are set out in
Parts 6 and 7. Parts 11,12 and 13 contain miscellaneous and legal provisions,
including enforcement procedures.

       A key definition in section 2 is that of 'regulated article' which includes
animals, plants and their products and other articles that pose a biosecurity
risk. Under section 12(6), incoming regulated articles must not be removed
from a biosecurity holding area without biosecurity import clearance, except
for having, biosecurity measures applied to them. Certain categories of
outgoing regulated articles also require biosecurity export clearance - section
34.

Contents of the Act

The scope of the Act is stated in the Long Title.

      The Act is divided into 13 Parts, the first of which deals with preliminary
matters, including definitions in section 2.

       Section 3 and 4 make it clear that the Act will apply to everyone in
Kiribati, including the Government.

       Section 5 and 6 allocate responsibit ities and set out the biosecurity
functions of the Government.

       Section 7 makes it clear that other obligations relating to bringing in of
items into Kiribati are not displaced.

       Part 2 sets out the principles of biosecurity border control. There will be
prohibitions and restrictions on the importation of pests and diseases (section
8). Importation of any regulated article considered an unacceptable risk to
Kiribati will be prohibited (section 9). The concept of regulated pests and
diseases is central to the scheme of the Act.

       Points of entry and departure, such as seaports and airports will be
designated and importation or exportation elsewhere will be an offence
(section 10).

      Holding areas at ports, airports and post offices will be designated for




                                       120
biosecurity clearance inspection of incoming and outgoing regulated articles .
(section 11). Holding areas will be strictly managed to prevent animals and
plants leaving the area until they have been cleared (section 12.).
      Importers and exporters of regulated articles must appoint an agent if
they will not be present at the time of importation or exportation (section 13.)
       Part 3 sets out the rules for incoming and outgoing vessels and aircraft.
Every arriving vessel and aircraft must make an arrival declaration on or before
arrival(section 14.)
      Vessels and aircraft must obtain landing clearance on arrival (section
15.) If ordered into quarantine an incoming vessel or aircraft must proceed to
port quarantine (section 16 to 18). it must then obtain quarantine clearance
before landing passengers or cargo (section 19.)
      Section 20 requires masters and captains of outgoing vessels and
aircraft to cooperate with a biosecurity officer who has reason to suspect that
there might be on board uncleared regulated articles that require clearance.
       Section 21 imposes on masters and captains of all vessels and aircraft
that come into the country obligations with regard to securing the vessel to
prevent biosecurity risks. There are also limitations on the discharge of
garbage and ballast water from vessels within Kiribati waters.
      Section 22 sets out the procedure for incoming passengers and
crewmembers. They must make a passenger declaration and submit their
baggage to inspection. Regulated articles in their baggage will require
biosecurity import clearance like any other cargo.
       Part 4 establishes a regime for the control of incoming goods once they
have been landed from a vessel or aircraft. All incoming goods will be liable to
entry inspection at the point of entry to ascertain whether they are regulated
(section 23).
       Incoming regulated articles will require biosecurity import clearance
(section 24). They will be liable to biosecurity inspection at a holding area and
their import must be declared.
       Section 25 sets out the matters on which a biosecurity officer must be
satisfied before biosecurity import clearance can be granted. The

                                   121
requirements may include a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate issued by the
country of origin, or treatment of a regulated article on arrival. Biosecurity
import clearance will only be granted if all the requirements for import are
satisfied, but may be granted conditionally in order to allow the article to be
sent for treatment or to quarantine.
       The requirements for importing regulated articles will be contained in
specifications made by the Director under section 26. If.there are no
specifications relating to a proposed import, the intending importer must
apply by way of an access arrangement under section 27 before importing the
article,

     . If the specifications for an article include the requirement for a
biosecurity import permit, it must be obtained in accordance with section 28
and 29. Section 30 deals with revocation and refusal of a permit,
       The Director will have the power to exempt certain classes ofregulated
articles from the requirement for an import permit (section 31). Articles in
transit are governed by section 32, which enables the requirement for a permit
to be waived, if there-is no biosecurity threat to Kiribati,
      Part 5 sets out the controls over articles intended for export, Under
section 33 all outgoing regulated articles are liable to biosecurity export
inspection to ascertain whether they require biosecurity export clearance.
      Under section 34, articles will require biosecurity export clearance if a
sanitary or phytdsanitary certificate is required by the receiving country, or if
biosecurity measures need to be applied before the article is exported.
      Section 35 sets out how a sanitary or phytosanitary (SPS) certificate can
be obtained. It also requires the Director to keep a record of the SPS
requirements of receiving countries.
      The decision whether additional biosecurity measures need to be applied
to an outgoing article will be made by the Director and contained in
specifications under section 36. The requirement can only relate to animals or
plants or their products, not to regulated articles generally, and must be in fine
with any international obligations of Kiribati.
      Once these matters are resolved, sections 37 and 38 say how biosecurity


                                    122
 export clearance can be applied for and obtained for regulated articles that
 require it.

      Part 6 sets out the rules relating to animals, plants or other articles in
biosecurity quarantine for observation or treatment. Section 39 states the
general requirement and section 40 provides for the establishment of
biosecurity quarantine stations.

       Movement in and management of quarantine stations is controlled
(sections 41 and 42) and items must n'ot be taken out of quarantine until
quarantine clearance is granted (section 43.)
      Notices must not be removed (section 44) and imported animals must
not be allowed at large without authority (section 45.)
      Part 7 defines the general powers of biosecurity officers under the Bill.
Section 46 sets out certain general rules and section 47 deals with entry and
search of premises, and conveyances.
      Section 48 regulates the inspection of documents, and section 49
regulates the inspection of articles. Under section 50, biosecurity officers will
have power to detain articles for testing and treatment. Testing and taking of
samples are governed by sections 51 and 52.
     An article may need to be treated to remove the bioseturity risk, or
reconsigned or destroyed because it poses an unacceptable risk; sections 53,
54 and 55 give the necessary powers.
     Section 56 permits the killing of an animal in order to conduct a post
mortem examination.
    Section 57 defines the powers of biosecurity officers in relation to people
      Part 8 sets out the powers of the Director and biosecurity officers to
control pests and diseases within Kiribati. Surveys can be conducted (section
58), and biosecurity officers are given power to enter, search and inspect
premises (section 59.)

      Under section 60 an officer may order animals to be penned for testing
and under section 61 animals and plants may be treated and destroyed if
necessary. Compensation will be payable when such action is necessary.


                                   123
        The Part provides for areas to be declared biosecurity controlled areas,
  with restrictions imposed over the movement into and out of such are~s.
, Sections 62 and 63 deal with infested controlled areas, and section 64 and 65
  deal with pest-free controlled areas.
      Section 66 enables wile animals to be destroyed if they pose a
biosecurity threat.
      Under section 67, all persons in Kiribati will have a duty to report an
outbreak of certain pests and diseases.
      Under section 68, the Min ister will 'have the power to authorise the
release of biological control agents in order to control or eradicate pests and
diseases.
      Part 9 provides power~ to deal with biosecurity emergencies in Kiribati
which cannot be dealt with under Part 8. If an emergency is declared under
section 68, the 5ecretary and Director are given extensive powers to deal 'with
the emergency, if necessary with the assistance of the police and other
Government personnel (sections 70 and 71.).
      Special regulations can be promulgated under section 72 to give
additional powers to the Secretary, Director and other persons. These
regulations would only remain in force for as long as the emergency lasts.
      Part 10 sets out the administrative framework for implementing the Act.
      Section 73 provides for designation of the Director and Deputy Director.
      Section 74 provides for designation of biosecurity officers, including
temporary ones. Officers can be designated from other departments and can
be given specific functions.
      Section 75 sets out the fu nctions of the Director in relation to the
Minister and Secretary, while section 76 sets out the functions ofthe Ministry
in respect of biosecurity.
      Section 77 empowers the Minister to give directions to the Secretary and
Director and the Director to give directions to biosecurity officers.
     Section 78 enables various powers to be delegated and sets limits on the
power of delegation.

                                   124
      Section 79 requ ires the Director to keep extensive registers of all
biosecurity decisions and activities. Under section 80, entries in a register will
be admissible as evidence in court.
      Part 11 sets out some ancillary administrative provisions needed to allow
the Act to function effectively.
     Section 81 specifies the blosecurity funds available to the Ministry and
empowers the Minister to seek additional finance for implementing the Act if
necessary. It also specifies the destination of fines, fees and charges.
      Section 82 confers on Island Councils certain powers in relation to
biosecurity surveys and strategies.
      Section 83 requires the Minister, Secretary and Director to consult other
Government departments, and empowers the Ministry to outsource aspects of
biosecurity work jf needed, subject to rules about Govern ment. contracts.
     Section 84 seeks to encourage coordination between different
departments of the Government and other statutory authorities.
       Section 85 requires operators of points of entry and departure (i.e.
ports, airports and post offices) to provide facilities for biosecurity inspection
or incoming and outgoing articles.
      Section 86 requires owners of ships and aircraft and warehouses to
ensure that biosecurity officers have safe transport and adequate
accommodation for performing their inspection functions.
      The Part proVides mechanisms to facilitate thebiosecurity inspection
process. Under section 87 the Director can enter into compliance agreements
with persons who regularly import or export regulated articles; and under
section 88, private premises can be approved as places for the inspection and
treatment of regulated articles.
       The Part also provides for cooperation with the international community
in international activities in the field of biosecurity. Under section 89, the
Minister can enter into bilateral or multilateral agreements on biosecurity
matters; under section 90, the Minister may issue international advisory
notices about the status of pests and diseases in Kiribati.



                                    125
     Part 12 is concerned with enforcement ofthe Act and specifies·offences
and penalties.
       Section 91 creates the offence of dereliction of duty by biosecurity
officers. Sections 92 and 93 create various ancillary offences that might be
committed by
importers and passengers relating to information, documents etc.
      Section 94 prescribes the fixed penalties for all the offences in the Act.
These are listed in the Schedule. Corporations will not be liable to
imprisonment but will be liable to higher penalties (section 97 ana 94(3».
    Section 9S provides for forfeiture of items connected with the
commission of offences.
      Section 96 establishes a system of fixed penalties, to simplify the
processing of offences at the seaport and airport and limit the number of
matters ending up in court.
        Section 97 specifies higher maximum penalties for corporate bodies.
      Part J 3 contains a number of miscellaneous provisions for implementing.
the Act.
      Section 98 extends the jurisdiction of the Magistrates Court to deal with
offences under the Act. Section 99 says how abandoned goods will be dealt
with.
      Section 100 says how compensation, if provided for, will be calculated.
Clause 10J says how appeals from decisions made under the Act are to be
dealt with.
       Section 102 says that public officers taking action under the Act in good
faith are not liable, and the Government and Director are not liable for things
done under the Act except as provided.
     Section 103 provides for the evidentiary status of certificates and other
documents created or used under the Act.
      Section 104 states the rules about publication of regulations and orders
made under the Act; they should be given wide publicity in the areas affected
by them, and must also be published and exhibited at the office of the

                                   126
Beretitenti.

       Section 105 defines the status of specifications made by the Director;
they are not strictly legislative but must be entered in the biosecurity register
and given due pUblicity.

Section 106 enables the Minister to make regulations to supplement the
provisions of the Act. These can include fees and charges for biosecurity
services.

      Section 107 provides for the repeal of the Importation of Animals
Ordinance (Cap.43) and the Plants Ordinance (Cap.72).

       Section 108 makes transitional provisions for the smooth introduction of
the Act, and section 109 makes consequential amendments to other Acts as a
result of the enactment of the Act ..

       Section 110 provides that the Schedule can be amended by the Minister
acting in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet

      The Schedule sets out the fixed penalty for those offences that can be
dealt with by way of fixed penalty under section 96.




                                Titabu Tabane
                               Attorney General




                                      127
     CERTIFICATE OF THE CLERK OF THE MANEABA NI
                    MAUNGATABU


This printed impression of the Bill has been carefully examined by me
with the Bill which passed the Maneaba ni Maungatabu on the 25 th
August 2011 and is found by me to be a true and correctly printed copy of
the said Bill.



                       ...   ~......... .
                            Eni Tekanene
                Clerk of the Maneaba ni Maungatabu




                                                             -
Published by exhibition at the Maneaba ni Maungatabu this ..~ .... day
of September 2011.




                             Eni Tekanene
                 Clerk of the Maneaba ni Maungatabu
