   and
  Animal
Quarantine
Regulations


  Republic of the Marshall Islands
     Majuro, Marshall Islands
                     REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS


                                   CERTIFICATION OF AOOPTION OF
                            PLANT AND ANIMAL QUARANTINE REGULATIONS



      In accordance with the provisions ofMIRC Title 8, Chapter 3, Animal and P\ant Inspection A2t s.3 as
      well as MIRC Title 6, Chapter I, Administrative Procedure Act, s.6, the Cabinet hereby approves the
      attached regulations relating to plant and animal quarantine.



    0J,;J,µ Q/Ld.&Li
    \ Pr     nt
      For Cabinet

      Pursuant to the authority vested in me under MIRC Title 8, Chapter 3, Animal and Plant Inspection
      Act s.3 the attached regulations relating to plar1t and animai quarantine, whicJl have been approved by
      the Cabinet of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and having met 311 the requirements contained in
      the MJRC Title 6, Chapter I. Administrative Procedures Ag. are hereby adopted




kt.f:Jp_
     Department of Resourees and Development
     Republic of the Marshall Islands
                                                          Date:   ~ . f , 1-Do-v




      The provisions of these regulations have been reviewed by the Office of the Attorney General a~d are
      found to be in proper legal fonn.                 ·




f    A
       a     General
                      Aitit7M1A,1"'"1
     Republic of the Marshall Islands
                                         G,k~




                                                                                                       2
AMENDMENT SHEET - Quarantine Staf/Distribution Only

This regulaiion is for distribution to active quaranline .,raff only. Due to the regular amendments
necessary to mainJain effective quarantine legislation each copy fa issued on an individUf!lly
controlled basis. Amendments will be distributed to all holders of manuals and amendments must be
recorded below.

Copies will be conJrolle4 and audited annually.

CONTROLLED COPY NUMBER:

This copy bas been issued to: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __




RECORD OF AME@MENTS
          Number          Date .        Initials         . =---== °' SubjECt

               .. .
                      ·- ·                                     -----             - ....
                                                                       .....-. ... .....__.,   ___   ....... __




                .


                            -          ·-                         ·-----                             --


                                                                                      •
                                                                                                     ·-




                                                                                                             3
          PLANT and ANIMAL QUARANTINE REGULATIONS

                            TABLE OF PROVISIONS




PART I-PRELIMINARY


     l . Short Tide
    2. Authority
    3. Effective Date
    4. Purpose
    5. Definitions
    6. Codes of practice to be recognised



PART II - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS (Plant a~d Aainual)


    7. Points of entry
    &_ Requirements of all per.sons. entering. the RMI
    9. Notification oftbe arrival of rq~ulatro tnah:rials ~ the RMI
   10. A ~ Qf @=ems, tmnifi:sts-and conv;cyaoo: tDQvcmcnt infonnsion
   11. Powers of the Chief of Agriculture
   12 t angnag,: of docummts and labelling I'\{ goods
   13. Inspection, c:oroinatino and trcatmmt of any oonveyancc arriving from ovaseas
   14. ·Dispostd Qf garoage
   15. Placement into quarantine
   16. Security of qmu:a:ariuc an:a.
   17. Removal from quarantine
   18. ~ testing.
  19. Release of plants, plant material, animals, animal products or goods
  20. Plan.tand.Animal.Qmu:autinc Enny Pcanits
  21. Any goods may be ordacd back into quarantine
  22. &imre -and desuuction
  23. Disposal of regulated material canying or suspected to be canying a pest
  24. Qum:antine fur::ms.anddoouneots
  25. Official importations by Goveanmcut
  26. Appro'VC4~ fut q,nn Old~ to be pcrfonncd
  27. Quarantine seal
  28. Official stuup(s)
  29. Quaasotinc screening of live plants and live animals
  30. TIQtment
   31. Transport, storage, unpacking, treatment - Importer's expense
  32. In-transitmovc:mcntofregnlated material and.goods.
  33 Dcclandion of national quarantine cmergcocy
  34 &ncrgcney measures fur t h e ~ l 1>fa q,m,mtinc pest
  35. Expenses, fees and charges for importers and exporters
  36. Exclusion of l.iahility



                                                                                       4
PART ID -APPOINTMENT & POWERS OF INSPECTORS


  37. Appointments
  38. Search and examine
  39. Access to documents
  40. Power to open shipment
  41. Inspector may employ asmstmts



PART IV - PLANT .QUARANTINE - REGULATIONS and QUARANTINES (General)


  42. Quarantines Plant - General

          QP 1 For the entry of fresh fruit and vegetables
          QP 2 Entiy of live plants oc paits thereof (0th.ct than seeds or tissue. cultures) for propagat;inn
          QP 3 Imponation of seed
          QP 4 Cut tlQWa'S and foliage
          QP 5 Timber
          QP 6 ~ bamboo,. cane,. palm fronds and.goods. W1t??11fact,wrt from~ ro,teri,:d<-
          QP 7 Soil, Sand and Gravel. etc.
          QP 8 Stored div4 food prodJJcts
          QP 9 Packing marerial, dwmage and second-hand bags
          QP 10 Hancliaafts madc.frntn.plmtt materiaJ
          QP 11 Badma, ~ vaccin~ cu1tures and organisms



PART V - SPECIFIC PLANT PROHIBIDONS


  43. Plant Quarantines - Specific plant prohibitions



PART VI - ANIMAL QUARANTINE - REGULATIONS and QUARANTINES (General)


  44. Animal Quar.mtine - General

          QA l    Minimum conditions to be applied to live animal imports
          QA 2    Bofldmg of animals (ship's pets)


PART VII - SPECIFIC CONDITIONS FOR THE ENTRY OF ANIMAI.S a n d ~
PRODUCTS


  45. Quarantine Animals - Specific Conditions for the Entiy of Animals and Animal Products

          QA 3    Importation o f ~


                                                                                                         5
          QA 4 Importation of cats
          QA 5 Importation of cattle
          QA 6 Importation of small nrmirumts (sheep and goats)
          QA 7 Importation of domestic equines
          QA 8 Importation of domestic pigs
          QA 9 Importation of birds
          QA 10 Importation of day old chicles
          QAil lmportationofhatcbmgegg.s
          QA 12 .Importation of domestic rodents and rabbits
          QA ·lJ Importation of embryos/ova of domestic ~ t s and p~
          QA J4 Importation of semen of domestic nuninaots
          QA l 5 (mpomltion of.semen of pigs
          QA 16 Importation of non-commercial consignments of food products of animal orig4t being
                 imported as acoompanied passengers' bagga~ and for personal use
          QA 17 Importation of amstcnliz.ed meat and m~ products derived from domestic ruminants
          QA 18 Importation o f ~ meat and meat products derived from pigs
          QA 19 Importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from poultry
          QA 20 Importation o f ~ and egg products for consumption and prooes.sing
          QA 21 Importation of milk and milk products
          QA22 Importation of honey bees and apiary equipment
          QA 23 Importation of all other animal products and other related articles



PART VIII - SPECIFIC ANIMAL PROHIBIDONS

  46. Animal Quarantine - Specific animal prohibitions
  4 7. lmportatum fut spc:ial purpoSC$


PART ix·- EXPORT REQUIREMENTS


  48. Power to examine and certify export consignments of plants and plant products
  49. Phytowiitaty certificates and other d()Clttnentatfon relatiag. to plmts a.ad pl.mt products
  50. F.xmnination of exports - Animals JJDd animal products
  51. ~ ofpbnts and pwit matcri.ais, llllitm.ls • ammal r,roducts


PART IX-PENALTIES


  .52. Penalties




                                                                                                    6
PART I - PRELIMINARY


J. Short Title

       These regu]ario.ns may be cited as the Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations.


2. AuthoritY

       ln pw-suance of the powers conferred by the MIRC Title 8, Chapter 3, Animal and Plant Inspection A~
       s.3 the Chief of Agriodb&re, Ministry of Rcsourocs and Dc.vdopmeot tnaka the following.regulations;

       All the previously is.sued Plant and Animal Qwnnt.incs and Rcgu]atiot\S are rc:pcaJed.


3. Effective Date

       The Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations, shall come into effect pursuant to the provisi,ons of
       MTRC Title 6 Chapter l. Admiois:trati'fe Procedure Act.. and immcdiafdy upon ce!ti.fica.tiQQ of
       prmnulgation by Cabinet, signed by the President or his designee.


4 . Purpose

       The pwp(?se of the Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations is to protect the agricultural activities and
       general well being. of the people of the Republic of the Mai:sban Islands Tbcsc rq;nJations are
       proroulgated as a method of preventing the introduction and fuJ1her spread of injurious msccts, pests,
       and. disatses inm -and within the Rqmblic of the M:mball W:ands., to prowie pmccdt,res 3Dd. conditions
       to ensure the safe movement of plants and animals and plant and animal products into and out of the
       Republic of the Mar:sbaJI Islands: and. to fulfill intemational ohlig,rioos tn ~ the. movcmcot. of.
       pesls in intffllational trade and traffic.



5. Definitions

       Unless the context othet'Wise requires, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
       enforcement of the provisions. of tb.cy. regulations~

   "Agent" includes any person pc:rfonning functions oo behalf of or instead of an ownc:r or impo,-tcr" in rclalion
      to 11:D. impo~ oc 1m. -c:xpodlC[ tti " lnrir,Q tn t h e . ~ of a li,re ~ plant matciaJ, l i v e ~ animal
      product or goods which include plant or animal product in their composition.

   ..Agricultural Quarantine Facility" means a certified government facility. equipped and specifically designed
       md. 3Ct aside fur holding Ot fur gtowUJg. imp<rdai pbmts (){ ,ilant ~ ot fut ~ imported
       animals.




                                                                                                              7
"AI Centre" means a facility for the production of semen approved by the veterinary administration of the
   exporting country and used exclusively for donor animals and conforming with intemationaJly ~
    stmdards.

"Animal" means any living stage of the animal kingdom except human beings; and, in the case of any
   mammal, bird, insect, fish, crustacean or reptile, includes the egg, larva, semen or the carcas.s thereof

..Animal Product" means any part of an animal (including ~ flesh. wool, hair, skin, hide, bones, horns,
    boov.es, &!8tbets aQd other parts of the carcass), .aud .any product that is wholly or partly derived from an
    animal or any part of an animal, being part of any animal ·or a product d1at has not been treated or
    sterilized to the stag.e where it is rendered free from any disease and from canyi.og any disease

..Approved Place for the Petfonnance of Quarantine" means a place other than an agriadtural quarantine
    facility whac &e quarantine o f ~ animals or ~oods may mke place.

"Approved treatment" means any treatment approved by the Chief of Agriculture.

..As Prescribed" means any procedure or treatment specified by the Chief of Agriculture or inoorporated ill a
    rofflltlal or <,fficiat fmltment scbedHJe promwgated in accordance with MIRC Title 6, Admjnisrntjve
     Procedure Act Chapter l.                                                                               '

"Authorized Official" means the Chief of Agriculture, Inspectors, or any other person designated by the
   Secretary of the Depamnent of Resow-res and Developmmt.

"Cllief of AgriculbR" means Chiefof Agriadturc, Division of the Ministty of Resources and Development

"Contaminate" means infestation or infection by plant or animal ~1S or having in association with it
   animaJs, animal products. unauthorized plant material or soil adhering to or in oompauy with the goods..

"Contraband Goods" means any goods imported into or transported within the RMI by any ~ in
   oontraveotion ofthese regulations.

"Conveyance" means any carrier such as a vessel, aircraft, lighter, barge, truck. van, vehicle, and transport or
   shipping container.

"Cutting up establishment"' means a slaugbtemouse, export cutting plant. export cold ston:, butchery,
   ~ . or poultry plant~ meat is eut mto smaller alts than ha l f ~ cut into dm,e wholesale
   cuts, prepared for retail sale or totally deboned.

"Culture" means any plant or animal tismie or any planting material or parts thereof on nutrient media.

"Declaration" refers to a written or oral statement certifying as to plants, plant material, animals, and animal
   products or other prohibited or restricted goods under these rq,Jilatious whicll acrompanied a person on
   their mrival fto.m overseas or as their cargo.

"Disease" in relation to animals, means any d i ~ parasite or pest declared by the President by
   proclamation to be a disease affecting animals. For the purposes of dsese regulations, goods of animal
   origin shall be decmC'AI to be diseased if they are in a deteriorated or abnormal condition, whether or not
   that condition is dtl'(nda,t oo ~ presa,oe of: or is.due to the o p e r a t i o n , ~ !,Jowth or-effect
    of a disease.




                                                                                                           8
"Disease" in relation to plants, means any disease, pest or plant declared by the Preside1,1t by proclamation,
   to be a disease or pest affecting plants, or a noxious plant For the pwpo~ s of these regulatio~ goods
   of plant origin shall be deemed to be diseased if they are in a deteriom.ed or abnormal cooditipn,
   whether or not that condition is dependent on die presence of, or is due to the operation, devdopmco1>
   growth or effect of a disease.

"Dunn.age" mean_s any timber used in the stowage of goods in conveyances s.uch as vessels or cargo
   containers.

"Examination" includes inspection and shall include the inspection of any docwneot, the taking of any
   sample, the ~ t of any test or otfter procedure used to determine the conformity or otherwise with
   the conditions under which an importation of plants, pJant materials, an,imal or animal material oc other
   regulated goods ha.5 been approved.

"Export" means to take a thing or cause it to be sent out of the counny by any means of ooavcyance.

''Export Inspection" means the inspection or examination of agricultural produce and animaJs, conveyances,
    vessels. aircraft or goods, for the purpose of ensuring that the goods comply with the country of
    destination sanitary and or phytosanitary quarantine requimments.

"Fish" means any aquatic animal whether piscine or not, and includes any mfllJu_c;r,_ crnstBce::iu. mr9},
    sponge, holothurian (bcche-de-mer). and reptile and their young and ~

"Free zone" means a clearly defined territory within a cowmy in which oo case of a specified ooase has
    been rq>ol1Cd during a .defined period for such (MQl9C'., ed within winch snd at die borders of Mich
    official veterinary control is effectively applied for animals and animal products, and their
    transportation.

"Fruit and Vegetables" means the edible portion of any plant, whether attached to the plant or not, and
    incht<fes- my pcd. skin. shell or scod, whether ~ or not. including ~cgdahles. in the raw or
    unprocessed state.

"Garbage" means mixc:d refuse waste material derived in whole or in part from plants, fruits, vegetables,
   meats or other plant or animal material. or other refuse of any character whatsoever that has been
   associak:d with any fiuits, vegetables. meats or other plant or animal material and includes vessel or
   1liroraft galley scraps.

"Goods" means any movable property and includes plants and plant material, animaJs and animal products.

"Haud.iaafts" shall include native artifacts, ckcorative goods or adornments made from or oomnining plant
   material mcluding but not limited to seeds. vines, bvcs., wood, ~ gum. dried flowers; animal
   materials including but not limited to untreated feathers, skin, hair, fur. wool. dried flesh. teeth, bones;
   sea shells and other items such as the cxtaual sbelJs of animals,. coral and like materials.

"Import" means to bring a thing or cause it to be brought into the RMI from any place outside of the RMI. or
   moved within the RMI by any oonveyance.

"Infected" means a condition caused by a plsnt or animaJ disease pathogen.

'1nfcsted" means the presence of plant or animal ~ other than a plant or animal disease pathogen.




                                                                                                          9
"Inspection" means the examination of plants or plant material. animals or animal products, goods or other
    regulated material for the pwpose of determin,ing conformity with RMI entry requirements.. IDspect;ion
    shall include lhe examinalion of any conveyance. oootainet- or packaging of any kind on which 0t in
    which web goods have been carried or stored or on or in which it is intended to cany or store such
    goods and any place where such -goods, conveyance or packaging h~ve been or are being held prior to
    clearance by an Inspector.

ulnspcctor" means an Inspector appointed by the or Minister to enforce the provisions of the Plant and
    Animal Qu8Qfl~ Regulations., quarantines and .colltrols. lnspc-4or also includes tcm.porary inspectors
    appointed by the Secretary.
                       I
"Inteoncdiate Quarantine" in the case of plants, means the growing of plants intended for consignment to the
    RMI in a place approved by the Secretary for where the plants are screeom for plant pests. iocl11ding
    disease, and certified by the plant bcaJth awhority to the effect that the plants have bec:o grown in the
    ~ .place ad t i f.ar as .can he ddcimined are mx of plant pests. In the case of animals,
    intermediate quarantine means the performance of prescribed quarantine conditions by animals or animal
    products intended for import into the RMI in a place approved for~ purpose by~ Secretary.

" lnb:mational Animal Health Certificate., means a certificate ~ed by an official veterinarian of the
     -exporting .country, .ocrtifyiBg the state of f,00(1 llealth of the animal. and giving partioolars where
    applicable of any tests to which the animal has been s-ubjected, the vaccinations carried out on the animal
    which is the subject of the certificate and g i v i n g ~ of the measures taken to prevent the spread
    ofdisease.

''International Health Certificate" means a certificate issued by an official veterinarian of the exporting
     country, certifying the wholesomeness of animal products, and giving particulars wbar. applicabk ofthe
     mc:asurc:s takm to prevent the spread o f ~.

"In Transit'' means the importation into the RMI, storage, transfer or movement within the RMl of plants,
    plant material, animals or animal products, goods or n:~ulaterl ar.e not intended for importatioo into RMI
    and which are intended to be on forwarded tc. a destination outside of the RMl itr~1:ive of the
    ~ ofthe temporary stay in the RMI.

''Land"' includes any surface area, building, wharf or port facility.

"Noxious weed"' means any plant declared by the Secretary to be a noxious weed

"O.I.E." means the Office International des Epizooties.

"Official Veterinarian" means a civil service veterinarian or a vet.erinarian appointed or authoriz.ed by the
    YCtoioa,y administration of the cx:porting country.

..Owner'' means the person responsible for plants, plant materials, animals, animal products or any goods, or
    regulated material, and may include the owm.:r, owner's agmt. the pc:soo to whom the goods are
    coosigncd or by whom 1hey arc being exported or the pmoo in charge of any oonveyaoc;e in which
   .plants, plant rnato:ial, .goodsMC being camed or have been carried into the RMI.

"Person" means both singular and plural and shall include individuals, corporations, companies, associations,
    societies, partnerships and natuf3l pa500S.

"Part of the territory of a country" means a geographical or administrative mtity posscsstng an autborisc:d
   admioisttati~ w.teriruay arganisa(ioo capable of.tak.iog.aod oontmlling the appropriate tntZUrcs.


                                                                                                        10
"Phytosanitary Certificate" means an official certificate issued by a plant pro~on ~uthority, substantially
   in the format of the current Model Certificate of the International Plant Protection Convention.

"Plant" includes a dead plant and any part ofa plant

"Plant and Animal Quarantine Pennit"' means a 'written authorization for the purpose of facilitating the
    movement of any plants, plant materials, animals,-animal products or gooc;is as designated in these
    regulations ~ -requiring a permit for such movement and wbe.-e such plants. plaot materials, animals,
    animal .products or odla regulated goods are intended for°importation from overseas issued by the Chief
    of Agriculture. 1

"Plant Material" means all goods of plant origin and shall include but not be limited to, timber, wooden
    articles, and other items manufactured or not, wholly or in part from material of plant origin.

" Plant Pest" means m organism of animal or plant origin that can directly oc indirectly cause injury or
    damage to 1)1ants.and includesaiy li\'ing ~ of insect, Dllfc, ocmatode, ">D8il, slug or otha- inwitebtate
    animal, bacteria, fungi, virus or similar organism, and noxious weeds known. or suspected to be harmful
    to plants and any other organism not known to occur in any part of the RMl

"Point Of Entry" IDC3lS lhc designated, official seaport, airport or post office in the RMI through which any
   conveyance or goods mU& first -enter the RMI.

' Quarantine" means a restriction or other controi method imposed upon the producnon, movemem or
    existence of plants, plant material, animals, .animal products or any oches- goods; or measures which are
    put in place to prevcot, or limit the introduction or spread of a quanmtinc: pest

"Quarantine Arca" means any land which has been declared by the Secrewy to be a quarantine area on
   accowit of the presence or suspected preseooe of a quarantine pest or in or on which measures are ro be
   taken to prevent the entry to, exit from or spread of a quarantine pest

"Quarantine Pest" means a pest of potential national economic importance to the endangered country and is
   not yet present th.ere or is present but not widc:ly distributed and being .actively controlled.

"Quarantine Station" includes a temporary quarantine station, a quanmtine chcclc point, a pro-enny or post-
   eony quarantine $l3UOn, a ptacc .approw:d by .the Secmary for intennediate quarantine and all facilities
    and services related to a quarantine station or check point.

"Regulated Material" means garbage. soil. pest and other materials. substances or goods, including but not
   specific to. plant or plaot makriaJ, aoimek or .animal products, the tmportation or movement of which is
   controlled under these regulations.

"Re-ship or Re-export" in relation to any imported plant. piant material. animal or animal product, or
   regulated materiaJ. means to remove or to take .a thing or cause it to be sent out of the RMI by any
   conveyance.

"RMI" means Republic of the Marshall Islands.

"Seaetary' means the Secretary of the Ministry of Rcsour~ and Development. RMI.




                                                                                                       11
     "Soil" means the loose surface material of the earth in which plants grow and whi<:h may serve to harbor
        plant pests, in most cases consisting of disintegrated rock with an admixture of organic material and
        soluble salts including among otbc:r thin~ gravel, rock aggregak\ compost, clay, sand or sift

     "Timber" includes Jogs, poles, dunnage, branchwood, firewood and all wood, which has been split, hewn,
        sawn or dressed or otherwise manufactured and includes furruture partly or wholly manufactured with
        timber, prc~.fabricated building wuts. shakes, s!Jmgles, wooden cases or boxes and the like.

     "Tissue Culture" means plants in a clear aseptic medium in a sealed, transparent container.

     "'Treatmcut" means the use of remedial measures to ensure the removal of injurious or ob~ooable
         mataials, or the elimiuarioo, sterilization or destruction of any plant or animal pest or comarnioation
         including among other measw-es the fumigation, cleaning, incineration, disinfection, disinfestation of
         plants. plant material or other goods or regu)akd materials aod in the case of animals trcabDc>t rneaps
         the use of remedial measures to ensure the removal of injurious animal pest oontamioatinn, IJJY
         immuei?Brion, rnatication, ~nation, ios«Jicidal dipping or spraying or any other practice carried out
         for the removal of such pest or contamination including destruction and disposal of affected animals or
         animal products.

     "Vegetables and Fruit"' means the cdJl>le portion of any plant, whether attached to the plau,t o r not, and
        includes any .peel. skin, .shell or .seed, whether edible or DOl includm! vegdahJ~ it't rb.- r;aw ~
         unprocessed st.ate.

     •·;:e1.C1inarian· means a qualified veterinanan resident in tlle RMI and approved by the Secretary for the
                   1



          purposes of these regulations.


6.   Codes of practice to be_recognised
         Except in so far as the same are contrary to the provisions of these Regulations, the following shall be
         adopted dS <..Odes uf practice m10 their provisions shalJ generaUy ~ applied in the RM) :

         (a) The: International Animal Health Code of the Office JntemationaJ des Epizooties;

         (b) The Manual of the lnt.cmational Embryo Transfer Society;

         (c) The lntemational Air Transport Association Live Animal Regulations.


                       PART II - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS (Plant and Animal)


7. Points of egtJy

         No plant, plant material, animal, animal product or other regulated material may be imported into the
         RMI except through a designated official point of c:ntxy. Th.e following. ar.e designatin official points of
         eotty:

                  Airports:       Majuro           Amata Kabua International Airport
                                  Kwajelein        Usak.aAirport




                                                                                                              12
                Seaports:        Majuro            Majur.o Harbor
                                 Kwajelein         Ebeye Harbor

                Post Offices: . Majw-o            RMI Post Office
                                 Kwajelein        ~ e Post Office


8. Reguirements of-all persons entering the RMI

        (a) Every person on entering lhc RMI shall be required to make a written or oral declaration with respect
        to plants, pl.ant material. animals, animal products, soil. cultures or any other thing that is the subject of
        these regulations.

        (b) No person may introduce into the RMJ any plant, plant material, animal. animal product, or any othieT"
        thing that is the subject of these regulations unless the provisions of these regulations have been duly
        complied with in respc:ct of such plants, plmt material, animal, animal product. or otha- rqulated
        material.

        (c} Every person who makes any false declaration or gives false certification shall be guilty of a criminal
        act


9   Notification of lhc arrival ofregulatgl materials into the RMI

        It is the duty of the importer, agent, Customs Officials, Harber Master, Postmaster and/or Airport
        Manager to notify the Chief of Agriculture or his delegate of the intended anival of re~dlated material
        unda these rcgulatioos and provide such information as the Ouefof Agriadture may ft)(JUUC.


JO. AvailabilitY of documqits. manifests and conveyance movement infonnation

        The master or agent of any conveyance aatcring or moving wi~ the RMI shall on lhc request of an
        Inspector provide cargo manifests, ship•s logs, crew lists and such otha documents as are considered ,
        necessary to determine the quarantine status of such conveyance.


11. Powers of the Chief of Agria,dture

        In addition to any powers granted under these Regulations:

        (a) the Chief of Agriculture may in writing delegate specific powers design'1Cd in these Regulations to
        authoriJlCd officials and ihC9C ~ will rcmain-dJectivc until ta'Oked in writing;

        (b) the Chief of Agriculture cannot delegate bis power of delegation;

        ( c) 1he Ouefof AgricuJture shall detmnine appropriate oonditioos for the mtry of plants, plBDt products,
        animals, -animal products and goods !IO as to prevent the introduction of plant and animal diseases and
        quarantine pests into the RMI as far M is reasonably practicable and desirable for the benefit of public.
        plant and animal health, and livestock production generally and to preserve the Oora and fauna.


12. Language ofdocuments and labeling of goods


                                                                                                               13
       (a) All documents and certificates accompanying imports made under these regulations ~shall be
       presented in the English language;

       (b) No goods may be imported into the RMI under these regulations unless evideoce of origin and
       contents is presc::nted in the English language.

       (c) No perso~ shall import or offer for entry any plant, plant ma!erial; animal product or othe,r regula,ted
       material unless ·the case, box, package, crate, container is -plainly and correctly marked to indicate the
       coonuy oforigin,,name and address of shipper and name and address o f ~-

13. Inspection. gaminatjon and treatment of any conveyance arriving from overseas

       (a) lmmcctiatcly on the arrival of any convc::yaocc: from any overseas country the conveyance. together
       with its cargo, baggffge, garl)age and provisions may be inspected, examined and ordered for treatment
       by an Inspector for the purpose of enforcing these regulations and no person shall enter the conveyance
       or remove any baggage or cargo from the conveyance without the autlrulity of the htspCX.tor until sach
       inspeaion. examination or lreafmcnt is complet.ed.

        (bj inspection, examination and treaonent of a conveyance may include:

               (~J inspect.ion cf 1he oonveyan~. t:-!: carg-e, and !7£:c.!: !:.!l _...e?l ~ ~~~ t!' ~ss...;, ~ ili~
               expcmc of the owner or agent of the conveyance;

               (ii) spraying or fumigation of every compartment of the conveyance;

               (tii) inspection of a document certifying that a treatment has been carried out or is purported to
               have bcon carried out in. tclation to the convcyam:;c for 1hc control of pests in any conveyance;
               IInd

               (iv) any other inspection or examination deemed by an Inspector to be necessaiy to prevent the
               introduction or spread of pests into or within the RM1 .

       (c) In the case of a conveyance catering an unofficial port of entry, all costs associated with the
       (plSJantine mspcction arc to be met by the owner or agent of the conyeyance.


14. Disposal of Garbage

       (a) It is prohibited to land any garbage m the RMI from any conveyance without the express
       authorization of an Inspector.

       (b) All garbage arriving on board conveyances_ including vessels and aircraft must be retained on the
       couveyance in lcakproot: oovcn:,d c.oatainas and in the case of sea v ~ kept inside the vessel's
       railing.

       (c) Garbage must not be dumped at sea within the area which extends from the outer reef of any island or
       atoll within the RMI and a distance of twelve (12) miles beyond such outer reef (If atoll of any island
       within the RMI.




                                                                                                            14
        (d) All costs associated with the supervision, treatment or destruction of garbage shall be at the expense
        of the importer.                                                                                        ·


15. Placement into Quarantine ·

       Where an _Inspector is not satisfied that the 'imported plants, plant material, animals, animal products
       and/or goods are free of disease or quanmtmc pests, which in hi~ upiniou wastitate a risk. to~ RMI. he-
       shall advise, where appropriate. the impom:r or his agent. the Controller of Customs., the Harbor MISer
       amb'urtht Pootmasla that thephmts. -phmt mataial, annttais, -miumt p r o d u c t s ~ goods are
       to be held und~ quarantine and not released to the importer or his agent until such time as an Inspector
       or authorized offim is satisfied that the disease or qaatantine pest bu been elimi1talcd


16. Security of mianmtinc area

        (a) No person shall enter a quarantine area or quarantine station without the permission of the Inspector
        in charge.

       (b) Any person damaging, interfering with or in any Wa'j reducing the effectiveness of any measures
       "taken -m ~ -e qaaxantim: i!r'CZ o:- quw:inlm'" station, e;;1' cf an;· pimrts.. plant material, animufa, ::uimcl
        products and related articles therein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor under these regulations.

       (c) An Inspector may lock. seal or otherwise preycnt the entry to and exit from any quar81ltine ar\:a or
       qaa,.auline station, 1egaidless of-1ht uwOCiship of soch quarantine area or quaaantine s1ation.


17. Removal from qyarantine
             -
        (a) No plants, plant material, animals or animal products or other regulated goods may be removed from
        any quarantine arQ, quaiantine station or other place where qaaxautiue d=utiw v• ~ent is or has
        been performed without written permission from an J..nspecto-r.

        (b) Any person who removes any plant, plant material, animal. animal products or other regulated
        material in contravention of these regulati.ons or who takes from the control of an Inspector any plant.
        plant material. animal, animal products or other regulated material under- these regulations shall be guilty
        of a misdemeanor


18. Samples, testi.og.

        An Inspector or authorized official may take any sample, make m1y test. fumigate, disinfect, or in any
        wey treat any p ~ aniroals, or goo(k subject to quarantine and any convcy8SliCQ caaying tbe same at
        any time that such plants, animals or goods are subject to quarantine control or may order that such
        action is taken, and shall give written notification of such action to the owner or agent.


19. Release of plants, plant material, ooimals,, animal products or goods.

        Provided llil requirements of these regulations for the import and clearance of plants, plant matcrial.s,
        ~ s , animal products or goods have been met and subsequent to satisfactory inspection or
        satisfactory conclusion of a treatment, an Inspector shall advise the imponer or his agent, the Controller

                                                                                                                 15
        of Customs, the Harbor Master and/or Postmaster, as the case may be, that such imported plants, plant
        materials, animals, animal products or goods may be rele.ased to the importer or die owner.


20. Plant and Animal Quarantine Entxy Permits.
                                                        ,
        (a) It shall be unlawful to import into the RMI any plants, plant material, animals, anwial products or
        other regulated material except in conformity with the conditions of a permit issued for such .moveiocnt.

       (b) Applications for Plant and Animal Quarantine Ently Permits shall provide specific information
       including:       I



                {i) Full name, residential and postal address of the importer;

                (ii) Name and address of the exporter ofthe goods;

                {iii) The origin of the goods;

                (iv) The quantity, the common and scientific name (where applicable) of dle goods proposed to
                be imported;

               (vi) The mode of transport, point of entry, and the approximate date of arrival; and

                (vii) Such information as the Chief of Agriculture may from time to time specify.

       (c) Applications for Plant and Animal Quarantine Entty Permits shall be made prior to importation.

       (d) In the granting of any Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Pennit the Chief of Agriculture may
       specify such conditions as he considers necessary to take into account the risks of importing plant
       disease., animal disease and quarantine pests.

       (e) Plant and Animal Quarantine Entty Permits may be issued for single or multiple importations and the
       alternative shall be indicated on the permit

       (t) The Chief of Agriculture may grant or authorise the granting of general import permjts valid for
       unlimited impor1ations of a specified commodity by unspecified importers where it is in his opinion
       expedient so to do providing at all times d1at such permits do not result in an increased quarantine risk.

       (g) The following items may be imported witho\11 a pennit

                (i) fully manufactured foods, hermetically sealed and n'ot requiring refrigeration for permanent
                storage. but excluding foods derived from animals and preserved only by drying;

                (ri) fully manufactured pc:rsonal clothing and footwear,

                (iii) fully tanned or processed leather, feather, fleece and hair goods except used ~dlery,
                harnesses and other equipment used with animals;

               (iv) all fish and fish products with the excq>tion of live fi~

       (h) Where the animal or plant disease or pest status of the exporting country has changed or has been
       reported to have changed since the issue of a Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Permit or if any other


                                                                                                          16
        condition prevails whereby the entry of the plants, plant material, animals, animal products or other
        regulated goods would constitute a quarantine risk such petmits may be cancelled at any time without
        notice. whether or not the importer has a pre-existing contraciDal obligation to import.


21. Any goods may be ordered back into quarantine.

        (a} An Inspector may examine any imported plant, pliµit material, animal, animal products, goods or
        regulated material that bas been released from quarantine.

        (b) Where, after examination of any imported plant. plant mat~al, animals, animal products, goods or
        regulated material that has been rclcascd from quarantine the Inspector is of the opinion that there is a
        danger of spreading pests and/or diseases, the Inspector may or~ such plant, plant material. animal,
        animal product, goods or regulated material back into qw,rantine for tests or treatment as prescribed and
        the owner shall be responsible for all costs.


22. Seizure and destruction.

       (a) Any plants, plant material, animals, animal products, or other regulated material introduced or
       attempted to be introduced into the RMI without a peon.it may be se~ by an Inspector and destroyed
       by order of the Iospcctor provided the declared value of such goods does not ex.ceed two hundred
       dollM.s. Wbere the value of Sll&h goods exceed~ twc hundred dol~ the i;o~ may be destroyed Ir;
        order of the-Chief of Agriculture and such destruction shall be at the owner' s expense.

       {b) Any person who imports plants, plant material. animals, animal products or otha regulated material
       in comr.aveotion ofthese regnlations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.


23. Disposal of regulated material canying or sus.pected to be canying a pest.

        (a) Any plant, plant material, animal., animal product or goods imported in acoordance with chesc
        regulations whu:h oo :eum.ination or re-cxmnioation by an Inspector is shown to be or is suspected to be
        canying a pest which in his opinion cannot be effectively treated shall:

                (i) in the case of an animal infected or believed to be infected with an OIE List A disease or
                fliha disease u prCSICDt at that time in the RMl be ordered ~ .an Inspector to be dcs1royed
                immediately; and

                (ii) in all other cases the importer oi owner shall be ordered by an Inspector to re-export or
                destroy the plants, p1ant material, animal. animal product or other regulated goods within a
                specified period and in default of such order. such plants, plant material, animal. animal product
                or other regul8fed !OO(ls ~ be destroyed at die importer's expense.

        (b) Where the importer or owner of goods which have been ordered for destruction in accordance with
        clause (a) fails to take action to destroy the goods within the prescribed time an Inspector may arrange
        for such goods to be destroyed and to ru:ovcr the costs of such dcsuuctioo through action in a cowt of
        oom.peteut jurisdiction as a debt due to the Government of the RMI.

        (c) The importer or owner of goods which have been ordered for destruction in accordance with clause
        (a) shall have no legal proceeding of any nature in respect of such d~truction.



                                                                                                            17
24. Quarantine fonns and docwnents.

        (a) The Chief of Agriculture may introduce forms at any time to facilitate the safe import into-the RMI
        and export from the RM1 of plants, plant material, animals, animal products and goods..

        (b) The Secretary may impose fees for the iSSUB;DCC of any forms.


25. Official importation's by Government.

       (a) Official importations of plants, plant material, animals, animal products, or goods by the Government
       of the RMI are exempt from the prohibitions and restrictions hereafter in these regnlations. Su,cb
       impol13tioos shall be made subject to the conditions set out in a permit issued by tl!e Chief ,of
       Agriculture.

       (b) Official importations of organisms of plant or animal origin, including any living stage of insect,
       mite, nematode. snail, slug. or other invcrtebr.atr. animal, bacteria. fungi. virus or other organism or plant
       or aoimaJ may be imported under permit ~ by the Chief of Agriculture.




       ,'i) The Ouef of Agricuilllle may. in writmg, approve a !)taOP. omer man ,. 1Ullf8!1tule smtiv:n .is 1 pfoo::
       where the quarantine of any plant, plant marerial., animal, animal product or other rcgulat,cd material may
       take place and any quarantine action as an Inspector may direct may be undertaken at such approved
       place.

       (ti) ApplicatiODi for registration of a place as an approved place for the performance of quarantine shall
       be made in writing on the approved form and submitted to the Chief of Agriculhlre.

       (iii) The Chief of Agriculture may apply such oonditions or require such facilities as he deems necessary
       for the proper perfonnance of quarantine related activities and when satisfied that such conditions have:
       been met or arc being met and that such required facilities ~ available he sbaJ1 approve such place: as a
       place for .the pc:rfnnnana of qnarantinc subject to .such ronditions or restrictions.as he deems ncccssary.

        (iv) On payment of the prescribed fee the owner or operator of a place which bas been approved for the
        performance of quarantine shall be issued with a certificate of registration. ,

       (v) A certificate of registration of an approved place for the performance of quarantine shall remain
       am:r:nt for .a paiod of one yar .from .the date of registration unless previously canceled by the Chief of
       Agriculture or there is a change in the ownership of such approved place or such approved place ceases
       to operate.


27. Quarantine seal.

        (a) At any time after the arrival of a conveyance or goods in the RMI an Inspector may place a
        quarantine seal on any container or package of imported goods or on any cabin or locker in any
       conveyanoe from outside of the RMI. either for subsequent quarantine inspection, or for the holding of
       .goods .under qnaranrine wkilc Jbe .ro.n~ remains in the territorial waters of the RMI.



                                                                                                              18
        (b) An Inspector may place a quarantine seal or lock on any container or package of imported goods
        which has been discharged from any conveyance arriving fro,m outside of the RMI. c\ther for subsequent
        quarantine inspection, treatment or detention prior to release or re>e>ep0rt of goods as the case may be.

        (c) Any person who interferes with or removes a quarantine seal or Jock without the permission of an
        Inspector shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.


28. Official smmJ)(s).

        (a) The official, quarantine stamps shall be used in conjunction with the signature of an authorized officer
        to authenticate documents issued under these ~ons.

        (b) Any pcnon other than ao audlorm:d official who uses m official quarantine smmp for any purpose
        shall be guilty of a misdemc:anor.


29. Oua@ntj.ne sgccning ofliye plants and live animals.

        (i) The Chief of Agriculture may prescribe as a condition of ~mpor1atioo into the RMI a period of
        quarantine at an approved quarantine station or quarantine area where live plants or live animals are to be
        detained and undergo any inspection or examination or treatment as prescribed. Animals or plaqts
        detained msucli quaranti.n~ shall ~ reJeased wbett ~_n !nspecti:-r i," satisfied th ~ plan 01 animal i£ free
        from pest and disc-ase.

        (ii) The Chief of Agriculture may prescribe as a condition of entry into the RMI completion of a
        specified period of quarantine at an approved quarantine facility located outside of the RMI where plants
        or animals are saecocd for prcscnocd pests and diseases prior to entry into the RMI.


::;c_ Treatment

        Where tmported plants, plant material, animals, animal products, regulated material or goods have been
        detained in quarantine on the evidence of infection. infestation of a pest. or suspected infec&ion or
        infestation of a pest an Inspector may order a treatmmt as prcscnbcd to be carried out at the importer's
        expense.


31. Transport, storage. unpgakigg, treatment growth in gyarantine - Importer's expense.

        (i) Prior to the rdease from quarantine dc:tcation of my imported plants, plant material, animal, animal
        product and/or goods, the impotUr or owner shall pay the prescribed fees including the cost of baospost,
        examination, unpaclciog. security, stontge, treatment. cleaning, sorting, and in the case of live plants,
        growth and care in post-entry quarantine. and in the~ of live animals in post.entry quarantine, care
        and feeding of sucb -,imals

        (ii) Upon notification by an Inspector of the release from quarantine detention of imported plants, plant
         material, animals, animal product and/or goods such imported plants, plant material, animals, animal
        product and/or goods must be removed &om the place of detention withm five womng days and in
        .debult shall be subject to the payment of prcscnocd fees for each additional day or part thenlof during
         which the imported plants, plant material, animals, animal product aod/or goods remain at the place of
         quarantine.


                                                                                                             19
        (iii) Notwithstanding the provisions of (ii) the owner of importer of any live animal which has been
        released fro~ post-enb'y quarantine but which has not been removed immediately following re~ sbaU
        be responsible for meeting the cost of all food provided to such animal/s until they are removed ftom
        quarantine.


32. In-transit movement of regulated material and goods.

        Any plants, plaoi mataial, animals, animal products, or goods in transit through the RMI to another
        COIDltty may be su}>jcct to quarantine safeguard measures and permission to transit shall be required.




33. Declaration of national quarantine emergency.

        The Minister, on lhc advice of the Chief of Agriculture, may declare a state of national quarantine
        emergency for the eradication or control of a quarantine pest of economic, public health or
        environmental importance.


34. Ecpergcpcy measures for the eradication/control of a quarantine pe5t.

        Owing a declared state of national quarantine emerge,icy the Secretary may take such actions as are
        deemed ucce3sary to tuntroI r,; eradicate & pe~t c ru~   a.Tc..."i:i1,g µlir.lrii~, "1illWlS o.· 8oWi wa~ sud,
        measures may include but not be lintited to:

        (a) Declaring specific pests including noxious weeds to be a quarantine pest;

        (b) ~ a geographic ~ within the RMI as a quarantine area;

        (~} Controlling th~ movement rd persons, plnnt:,, animals, ronv~ ,an~~c or good:;, ill.ti} ,x aut af il.
        quarantine area;

        (d) Notifying the owner or occupier of the land, in writing, of them~ to be taken to eradicate or
        control any quarantine pest; and

        (e) Undertaking or arranging to undertake measures to eradicate or control any quarantine pest if the
        owner or occupier of land on which the quarantine pest occurs. or is believed to occur, cannot be
        contacted.

        (f) Where it is deemed necessary for an Inspector to cany out control measures or destruction or to
        arrange to carry out control measures or destraction of plants, plant mau:rial, animals or animal matmia1
        iu the abscoce of the owner the oost of sucJi oontrol measures or destruction may be mooveml through
       .action in a .court of .competent jurisdiction as a debt due to the Government ofthe RMl


35. EXJ)enses, fees and charges for importers and exporters.
        {a) All costs and expenses ot: and attendant upon, any importation or cxportatioo including any
        documentation, tests, iaspections, treatments, detention in quarantine, destruction or rc--export, or of any
        other procedure or action taken or brought about under the provisions of these regulations shall be borne


                                                                                                               20
        by the importer or exl)Orter as the case may be and no compensation shall be payable by the Government
        of the RMI for any Joss or reduction in value caused by such action.

        (b) If any plants, plant tnaterials, animaJ, animal products o_r goods arc required by these Regulations to
        be.inspected, cxmnined,".trcatoi, destroyed or held in quarantine. the importer or consignee in the case ~f
        imports and, in the case of Part IX of these Regulations the exporter, shall pay the appropriate fee as
        determined by the Secretmy.


36. Exclusion of liability.
                       l



        Neither the Department of Resources and Development nor the Chief of Agriculture, Authoriz.ed
        Officers or Inspectors shall be liable for any loss or damage resulting from the exercise of their ~ority
        under tbe5e regulations unless the loss or damage was caused otherwise than in the reasoaab1e exercise of
        their authority.


PART m- APPOINTMENT & POWERS OF INSPECTORS

        Regulation

3 7. Appointments.

        The Minister may appoint such inspectors or temporary inspectors as may be necessary for the PUIJ>OSCS
        of this ~datiou


38. ~ EµmipBfions and Seizures.

        (a) An ID.spector may enter any conveyance. land or building other th,m a dwelling house to se.arch for
        an.cl examine plants.,. plant materials, aoiroaJs, animal. products or any othec goo<k the subject of these
        regulations which he reasonably believes may be infested with 8 quarantine pest or disease or is likely to
        have come into contact with a quarantine pest or disease.

        (b) An Inspector may only enter a dwelling house for the purpose of conducting an inspection where be
        has the expressed permission of the owner- or under the authority of 11- 5C31'Ch warrant issued for such
        inspection by an official authorized to issue such warrant under MIRC Title 32. Chapter I, Qjmipl
        Procedure Act, s.2S.
        (c) When requested to do so an Inspector shall present written evidence of his appoi n ~ as an
        Inspector.


39. Access to documents.

        An Inspector may examine any log, manifest., cargo stowage plan, passenger list, crew list or other
        necessary document in carxyiog out his fuoctions under these regulations


40. Power to QpeD shipment.




                                                                                                            21
        An Inspector may require the importer or the agent to open any mail, box, case, receptacle, space, or
        container and when the importer or agent fails to do so, the Inspector may arrange for the opening of
        such mail. box, case. receptacle, space. or oontaincr at the impom:r's expense.


41. Inspector ro<JY employ assistants.
                                                        ,
        An Inspector may. whenever necessary for the purposes of these regulations and as may be approved by
        the Secretary, employ any person or persons to assist him temporanly and such person shall h,ave the
        authority of'an Inspector until the cessation of such tempoouy appoiJl1meut


       PART IV - PLANT QUARANTINE - REGULATIONS and QUARANTINES (General)



42.     Quarantines Plant -General.

QP.1    For the cntly of fresh fiuits and vcgdables

        (a) Th~ entry of fresh fruit 1md ,:egetab!~ mto the RMI ie ~rcl!.ibztetl ~cq?t tmder penrtit is.."1!..~ by ilie
        Chi.cf of Agrialltme prior to the importation.

        (b) AD impo11ations of ftcsh fruits and vegetables from a place outside the RMI shall be accompanied by
        a phytosanitmy cer:tilkatc issued by the exporting country.

        (c) All fresh fruits and vegetables must be imported in new, clean packages which must s,ate the country
        of origm aud a description ofthe produce.

        (d) 11ic catty of ftuit fly susceptible species of fruits and vegetables is prolnbited from all countries
        where fruit flies ex9tic to the RMI are kno'Wn to occur unless such ma.its -or vegetables uve been
        subjected to an approved quarantine treatment and/or conditions.

        (e) It is prohibited to import into the RMI any ftuits or vegetables afta they have uansiUcd through areas
        known to be ~ wi1h '8f1'J wit fly species other than Bactrocera fraumfeldi (Ca-oline or mango
        fly), Oryctes rhinoceros (rhinoceros beetle), or other quarantine p~ not established within the RMI,
        unless such fruiti and vegetables ere maintamcd in the origioal packaw= and that liUdi packalJCC\ ba\'C Q()t
        been exposed to any quarantine pc:s1S between the point oforigin and the'may point into the RMI.

        (f) All imported fresh fruits and vegetables shall be examined by an Inspector on arrival and if a pest is
        dctcca:d, a treatment as prescribed sba11 be applied before tile (;OOsipm.cut is relca£ed to tJ,.c importcc. In
        the absence of a suitable treatment die fruits and/or vegetables shall be directed to be destroyed or re-
        exported at the importer.s expense.

        (g) Fruits and vegctabl~ which have hem cooked, hermetically canned, froz.cn, dried or candied,
        p~ed 0r othctwise proc;css.cd iA 5uch a mlPP« 8i to ~ a pest ri5k md to iea.dcl:' the product
        non-viable may be exempt from the provisions of this Regulation.

QP 2     Entry of live plants or parts thqeof (Qther than seeds) for propagation.



                                                                                                                22
       (a) The importation of plants or planting material which can be propagated, other than seed. ~ be
       limited to the smallest quantity of propagating material consistent with saandard horticu1turaJ ?"actk~ to
       enable the satisfsw-Jory cstahlisbmcnt Sid ~ of the introduced cultivar.

       (b) All imported plants ·shall be free from soil.

       (c) An approved padcing rnatcriaJ may be used around the roots of imported planis. Approved paclcing
       matttiaJ mi,; amsist of !ffliJe ptai 1116:SS, spmtpU1D IDOSS, -pedite, vermiculite, sawdust, shredded paper
       or other inert materials..

       (d) All importations of live plants and planting material from a place outside the RMJ shall be
       accompanied by a pbytosanitary certificate issued by the exporting ..:ouutry and sueb- certificate !ihall
       state decai1s of ,my tmmnent giVffl to the ptams or planting material in the place of origin and indude
       any other cndorscmems required as a condition ofthe impoltation.

       (e) Plant tissue cultures may be imported in ~tic, sealed flasks in a sterile ~um such as agar. They
       shall be subject to inspection on auinl and any coataminatcd- flmb and- their comam shall- be
       dcslroyed.

QP 3   Importation of seed

       (a) Small connnercial packets of flowers and vegetable seeds excepts beans, cabbage. cauliflower and
       other ~ cifers. maiz.e and tomato seeds may be i.mpot1e& withem c permit at !he EHSCfetioo of the Chlef
       of .Agri<;u1tmc:.                ·

       (b) With the exception of seeds imported without a pennit under QP 3 (a), all seeds shall be
       acoompanicd by a pbytosaoitmy certificate. The Chief of Agricukure moy also- ,equire 8ft official- seed
       analysis   n:port.
       (c) Upon arrival. samples of seed may be drawn for examination and i f ~ . in the opinion of the
       Inspector, treatment shall he applied.

       (d) All seeds shall be pure and free from injurious exmmeous matta, including soil, noxious weed
       seeds. insects mtd 4isc:a9m and shall he lllbjed to sudt Ctlftditions as are determined by the Chief of
       Agriculture.                                                                                                     .

QP 4   Cut flowm and fotiagtt.
       (a) Subject to other relevant provisions of these regulations any cut flower, excluding members of die
       family Helicomaceae (which are prohibited),. inchMliag foliage may be impofted. if ott iBspection at the
       point of entry the alt flowers are free from pests and contain no material capable ofpropagalion.

       (b) Any cut flower that can be propagated shall be treated es prescribed to prevent propagation.

       (c) Subject to rcleYmt provisi<ms of dlCSC rcgula6oos any i;mported dried flower IDd/cr foliage shall be
       sabject to iespec1jon at die point of amy and if found to contain pests or viable seeds shall be subject to
       treatment as prescribed to remove any quarantine pest or viable seeds before release.

QP5    T.imber.

       (a) Notwithstanding the provisions ofQP S (d) all consignments of timber imported ftom o v ~ shall
       be subject t(I inspectioa OIi arrival aad- l'lalll CIC;Xlt IS p&eSUibat if m:assax:,. If sm:h pcsaibed trcata::aem

                                                                                                                  23
        is not available the consignment may be ordered· to be re-shipped · or destroyed. If treatments or re-
        shipment are not performed within 30 days of the order the consignment shall be destroyed.

        (b) The importatioo of bark and timbc£ with bade atiached is prom"bited.

        (c) The importation of previously used timber shall be subject to mandatory treatment for pests before
        release.

        ( cl) Imported #mbcr that has bcco. subjcacd co an approved treatment fo,- the prevmtion of insect auack
        pool'. to entty to the RMI may be impom,d subject to the provision of an official =titicatc of tmdlnent
        and inspection ofthe I
                                timber on arrival to verify the efficacy of the treatment.



        (a) Grass, bamboo, cane and palm fronds. including wall and roof thatching materWs. are prohibited
        entry into the RMI.

        (b) Maoufaccurcd bamboo and cane furniture may be imported subject to inspccticm on arrival aid
        treatment if nccessmy.

QP 7    Soil sand and gmvel

        (e) The importatio of soil. sand or gravel int th RMI is p hibited ucept by ~ t is!'1ed pria! tc
        sudl importmi0D by tlae Chief of Agriculture.
                                                          -
       (b) Soil used as ballast ill my conveyance ·shall not be discharged within the RM( or within the territorial
       waters ofthe RMI.

QP 8    Stored dtjed food products.
        if 011 ii\.Spectiou St:01(:(1 clried food producls including polished rice, spiet.-s, and otner cirico fooo products
        arc found to be: infested. ~ith pccs&s or CLJD1mni11#oi in flll'; way m Iospoctor may mlc::r'that adl infested
        goods be tmded, descroyed o r ~ on. the expense ofthe owner or agent

QP 9    Packing materw, dunnge and second-hand bags.

        (a) Importing into the RMI of any packing materials other than an 8P?'°ved paclring maaaial is
        prohibited.

        (b) Approved packing materials shall include wood shavings, sawdust. sphagnum moss. sterile peat
        moss. wood woo~ ground cxu,. ~ sbrcddcd paper. p l ~ pcditc, vamimlim, ncm•plaat and
        oon-animal based mataiak and any oda- tnamial approved by the Clricf of Agriculture as a priing
       malaial.

        (c) No second-hand bags, sacks. containers. wrapping or Packins materials which has previously been
        med far tile transpon ofplaat ·« aDima1 matma1 or whicll wa, rneavfadw:ed to b: used far tlaat pmpar.c:
        shall be used for the importation ofany kind ofgoods.

        (d) Any imported timber dtmnage, including skids, pallets, racks, stickers, etc. is subject to inspection
        and trcatmcat as prcsaibcd, re-shipment or destnlCtioa ~ the c:,cpcnsc of1lac impona-«agcnt',

QP 10 Handic;gtfts mgdc from plant nyrtqial,


                                                                                                                     24
        Provided luwdicrafts do not contain any material prohibited or restricted under these regulations sucl
        handicrafts may enter subject to inspection and treatment as required.

QP 11 Bacteria, yuusq. yactjncs., cultures aod organisms.

         (a) It is prohibited to import, any living culture or organism including parasites, arachnids. molluscs
        nematode5; fungi, bacteria, virus. viroids, vaccine, mycopiasma, parasitic plant organisms, plant pests 01
        other invertebrate animals uobs a permit has ~ issued for sudi importation by the Chlef ol
        .Agriadture prior 1o .sucb import,tiOI\ of the consignment .and .only in rompliaoo, with the coeditioru
         imposed by such permit.

        (b) The importation into the RMI of commercial y~ and yoghurt Cl,lltures shall be exempt from all
        provisions ofQP I I (a).


                            PART V - SPECIFIC PLANT PROHIBfflONS

        Regulation




        (a) The importation into the RMI from a. place outside the RMI of the plants listed in the fim ooiumn (lt
        the First Sdiodule to these ~ is subjc,ct to the speg&prohibitions shown in~ tbird (:()NIDO.

      PART VI- ANIMAL QUARANTINE - REGULATIONS and QUARANTINES (General)


44.     Animal Ouanmtige- Gmaal.

QA 1    Minimum condjtions to be glied to live animal iroportatiops.

        (1) For the imponation of live animals gco.enlly, including embryos and ova, the cooditioos spo.ified
        stwt include, but sbal1 not be limited to, CM following miuimwn n:q\liranents:

                (a) the first port of entry into the RMI shall be specified in the import permit and shall be a
                designated, official point of CDlly,                        •

                (b) the time and date of anbarkiog. lhe estimated time and date of arrival in lhe RMI md the
                tlirlindflight mu:uber or ship/voyage twmbcr shall be cxi,um~ to the Chief 9f Agm:ulture
                at the earliest possible time and no later than one weekday working day befo~ embarkation of
                tbr. animals for the RMI~

                (c) all animals shall be oonsir,,c,d to the RMI as manifested cage> unless otbawisc specified in
                the import pcnnit;

                (d) the facilities for the transport of animafs shall conform with internationally ac.ocptcd codes
                of practice as appropriate~

                (e) all importations of animals are to be aocompeu.icd by:




                                                                                                           25
              (i) the import permit issued for that importation;

              (li) a declaration signed by the owner or c:xporter of the animals providing such
              worm.at.ion .and ~ ~ may be required regarding the identification, history and
              origin of the animals; and

             . (iii) an international animal health certificate signed and stamped by an official
               veterinarian of the exporting cowmy certifyiug .the state of good ~ of the animals ~
              gi\llllg particuJars where applicable of the biological tests to which the animal have been
              wbjectcd and the vaccinations carried out on the animals which are the subject of the
               certificate and of any measures taken to prevent the spread of disease;

        {f) all animals shall be transported directJy without tnms.-sbipmcm. off.loading or contact widl
        animals not Jbe subject of Jhc same import permit or animals not of equivaleat .certified health
        status from the port of departure to the port of arrival in the RMI wtless other provisiQI\S have
        been made in the import~

       (g) notioe of the death. loss or- siclmcss of any animals <huing the voyage shall be given to an
        Inspector iDDJ)Miatc1y on arrival in the RMI by the pcnon in charge of the vessel or aircraft;

        (h) all foodstuffs. litter, manure. straw or bedding and packing material. crates, C<>nta.iner~ or any
        other related articles shall be off-loaded only on the instructions of an Inspector or veterinarian.
        whc may o.rder their deaning. disinfcctiort, destructior.., incineratioc o:- other mearu;, ofdisposal;

        (i) all animals and documents shall be inspected on arrival by an Inspector;

        (J) no animal shall be released from quarantine unless chc veterinary officer, or his delegate is
        satisfied, following the inspection that the import is in accordance with the provisions of these
        r_eguJations. that all conditions of the import permit have been met up to the time of arrival in the
        RMI and that no period of quarantine detention, treatments or tests are required~

       (k) unless an imported animal is released .from quarantine following its arrival in the RMI it shalt
       be detained tmda quar3lltme .control until further ootia and may be subjected to any test or
        treatment required to satisfy the conditions of entry for such animal;

        (I) any import permit granted is not transferable;
                                                                                •
        (m) any import permit may be canceled or amended at any time after issue and before arrival of
        the animal/s in the RMI should the animal health and/or quarantine status of the coumry of
        origin change or be reported to have chaog~ prior to anival;

        (n) all costs and expenses ot: and attmdant upon, any importation including any documentation.
        tests, inspection.,, treatments, detention in quaraminc. destru.ctioDs or re-c:,q>Ort. or of auy other-
        procedure or action taken or brought about uoda the provisions of these .n=guJations shall be
        home by the importa- .md no coo>pcosabon shall be payable by RMI for any Joss or reduction in
        value caused by such action;

(2) In the case of any OIE List A or List B disease or for any communicable disease which is considered
to be of socio-economic or public health importance or which is significant in the inrematiooal trade of
livestock and livcstoclc products or for any comro,micable diseases with important socio-economic or
sanitary influaice at the national level and which .affect live animals and for which export health
certification conditions have not been prescribed in these regulations; either


                                                                                                        26
                 (i) that the exporting country is free from such disease and that no case of such disease was
                officially reported during the six months immediately preceding the importation of the animals
                concancd; or

                 (ii) in the case where the country of export is not free from any such disease referred to in the
                 prc:croing ~b-Regulation and for which export hc-.altb certification conditions have not been
                 prescribed in fhcse regulations, the Orief of Agriaallure shalt attacli such conditions ou the
                 import pmnit .suf:ficimt in his opinion to safcg,.ranJ .against the introduction of such disease.
               · Such conditions shall not be less than those recommended in the International Animal Health
                 Code of the O.I.E.
                   I


QA 2    Bonding of pimals {ship's pets).

        The master of every conveyance aniving iil the RMI shall be required to enter into a bond with the
        Government of the RMI whereby any animal on board such conveyance may not be introduced into the
        RMI while such oooveyance remains in the RMI ~ pcmritted by an Inspector and subjected to
        quarantine safeguards.


      PAR'f' VU - SPECIFIC CONDIDONS FOR THE ENTRY OF ANIMALS and ANIMAL
                                                  PRODUCTS


45.     Animfl - Specific Conditions for lhe F.n11y of Animal;;; and Aoim,1 Pr(Xluds.
QA 3    IJru,ortation of Dogs.

        (a) f or the importation of dogs the presentation of an international animal health certificate is required,
        attesting that the animals:

                (i) were exm:u:iued within 48 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and showed no sigr.i
                of any infcctious disease;

                (ii) have been effectively vaccinated against distemper, hepatitis and canine parvovirus at least
                one mouth and not more than three months before shipment;

                (iii) have bc:c:n cffcctivdy 1reaud agaimt cchinoooccosis-¥dosis. round. hook and whip
                worms wi1hio three days of shipment;

                (iv) have been effectively treated against. and found on examination to be visibly free o( all
                cctoparasitcs within three day~ of shipment.

                (v) dloW\'Xl no clinical sign oftabies on 1hc day of smpmcot, and were kept from birth or for six
                months prior to shipment in the exporting countiy, or a part of the taritory of the exporting
                country where no case of rabies was officially reported during the two years ~ately
                preceding the importation of the animak ~ and

                (vi) have been vacrinattd with an inactivated rabies virus more than thirty days prior to cnuy
                into the RMI.



                                                                                                              27
               (vii) animals originating from a country or a part of a country where rabies oc.curs or is reported
               to occur or whr-re rabies vaccination is routinely practiced must undergo a period of noJ less than
               120 days in an approved quarantine facility in a t.enitory or part of a toritory recognised by the
               RMI as rabies free ~ prior to entry to the RMI. or

               (viii) must meet the enuy requirements of the State of Hawaii or the Territory of Guam.

       (b) As soon as the animals arrive in the RMI they shalt immediately be taken under the oontroJ of ao
       Inspector to the quarantine prcmiiCS previously approved by the Chief of Agricultwe, whereat the
       animals shall remain until they are released by by an Inspector.
                             '
QA 4   Importation of Cats

       (a) For the importation of cats the presentation of an intemational animal health certificate is required
       attesting that the animals-

               (i) were examined within 48 hours of shipment, fouod to be in good beallh and showed no sign
               of any infectious disease;

               (ii) have been effectively vaccinated against Feline Panleucopaenia at leMt one month and not
               more than twelve Dl()Dths before sbipmrot, 81.1.d Feline Viral Rhl.nottacht»iti! / C2lid vL~ 2t !e:?.rt
               one month and not more than six months before shipment;

               tili) have been effectively treated against echinococcosis-hydatidosis, round, hook and whip
               worms within three days of shipment;

               (iv) have been effectively lreated ag,aiost, and found on cxanlination to be visibly free o( alt
               ectoparasites within three days of shipment;

               (v) showed no clinical sign of rabies on the day of shipment, and were kept from birth or for six
               months prior to shipment in the exporting country, or a part of the territory of the exporting
               countiy where no case of rabies was officiaJly reported during the two yean- immediately
               preceding the importation of the animals concerned; and

               (vi) have been vaccinated with an inactivated rabies virus more than thirty days prior to enuy
               into the RMI.

               (vii) animals origjoaring ftom a country or a part of a coumry where rabies occurs or is reported
               to occur or where rabies vaccination is routinely practiced must undctgo a paiod of not Jess than
                120 days in an approved quarantine facility in a tenitory or part of a territory recognised by the
               RMI as rabies free area prior to cntiy to the RMI, or

               (viii) must meet Che cutry requiranmts ofthe State of Hawaii or the Tcmtory of Guam.

       (b) As soon as the animals arrive in the RMI they shall immediately be taken under the control of an
       Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of Agriculture. whereat the
       animsJs shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.

QA 5   Tmpgrtation of caqle.

       (a) For the importation of cattle the presentation of an international animal health certificate is required
       attesting that the cattle:

                                                                                                              28
        (i) were examined in daylight within 24 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and
        showed no clinical sign of any disease. including wn diseases and cxternaJ para~

        (Li) were kept since birth or for at least the six months prior to shipment in the exporting country,
        or part of .the ,taritmy -0f.dr. exporting "-OUDlly wmch is iskfflarinoally rcrognj,ecf as free from
         rabies and all OIE List A diseases which affect cattle or may be carri.ed by cattle and rabies and
       . where these disca,es .are notifiahl('~

       (tii) In the case of any OIE List A or List 8 disease or for any oommunialble d\sease ~ is
       roosidered to he o f ~ or public llmlth impommoe or which is significant in the
       intc,;natiooal trade of livestock and livestock products or for any communicable diseases wi,th
       important socio-economic or sanitary jnflueou: at lhe national level and which affect live
       animals and for which export beabh certification conditions have not been p,mibed ia these
       iq;,dations; -either

             (1) that the exporting COWltry is free from such disease and that no case of such disease
             was officially reposted during the six months i.mimdiattJy pre<"aling the impor1ation of
             themimaJs~or

             (2) in the case where the country of export is not free from any such disease referred to in
             the p r ~ sub•Jlegulatioo and for which cxpott heahb certifu:ation conclirioos bave not
             been prescribed in these regu)ations., the Chief of Agriculture shall attacla such conditions
             00 .the.import pmni1 snfficien« in .his ~ to SBfq,urrd .apinst Jhr mtroducti<m ~r such
             disease. Such conditions sbalJ not be less than those recommended in the International
             Animal Health Code of the O.1.E.

       (iv) have undergone dipping or spraying with an effective insecticide on two occasions at seven
       day intervals, the Id being within ~ houB ofshipment.

       (v) have been treated with an effectiv~ smthelmintir. no t'W9 OCQ.Jsit:-uc;: M ? , ,fity i11t~ls tl,~ la.,;t
       being within 4-8 hooli of sbipme,u::

       (vi) have for the thirty days prior to shipment been hdd in an approved establishment during
       whiob Jime .die animaJs ~ maietainoo in oomp1efe \SOlation, subjmm to regular veterinary,
       observation and at no time during which did either they or any other animals in the same
       quarantine estab1ishmem show any sign of disease;

       (vii) come from a herd in which no clinical sign of bovine brucdlosis was officiaDy reported
       during the six months prior to shipment;

       (viii) come from a country or part of the territory of a country free from bovine brucellosis, and
       showed negative rcspoose to effective tests for bovine bm~J.lmis dur.iDg .the thiny days prior to
       shipment;

       (ix) come from a country or part of the territory of a countty officially free from bovine
       tuberculosis, and showed negative ~ to an effid;Y.e test for bovine tuberculosis dm:iltg .the
       thirty days prior to shipment; and

(b) As soon as the animals arrive in the RMI they shall immediately be taken under the control of an
Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of ~ . whereat the
animals w1I remain until they arc released by an Inspector.

                                                                                                            29
QA 6   Importation of small ruminants (sheep and goats)

       (a) For the importation of small ruminants the presentation of.an in.rcmatiooaJ animal health catificate is
       required attesting that the aniµials:

               (i) were examined in daylight within 24, hours of shipment, found to be in good health and
               showed no clinical sign of any disease, including skin diSC&'es and ext.crnal ~

               (Ii) were kept since birth or for at kast the six months prior to shipment in the exporting country
               or part of .the ta:ritofy of.the aporting oo.untry which is internationally recognised as free from
                            1
               rabies and all OIE List A diseases which affect small ruminants or which may be carried by
               small nuninants and where these diseases are notifiab~

               (ill) In the case of any OIE List A or List B disease or for any communicable disease which is
               J'.:ODsidtted to be of socio-ccouom.ic or public health .importance or which is significant in the
               international trade of livestock and livestock products or for any communicable diseases with
               important socio-«<>nornic or saniwy influax:e at the national level and which affect live
               animaJs and for whidt export hallth cenificatioo conditions have not been prescribed in these
               regulations; either

                     ( l) that the exporting cotmtry is free from such disease and that no case of such disease
                     was. officially reported during th~ six !llOJ'th~ immcd.iately preceding the- jro()')rtatioo !'f
                     the animals coooemcci; ur

                     (2) in the case where the counny of export is not free from any such disease referred to in
                     the preceding sub-Regulation and for which export bcllJh certification conditions have not
                     been prcscn'bcd in these ttgulat.ions, the Cllief of Agriculmn, sba,U attach such oonditions
                     on the import .permit sufficient in his opinion to safeguard against dJe introduction of such
                     disease. Such conditions shall not be less than those recommended in the International
                     Animai H~ih Code of lhc O.LE.

               (iv) have uodecgone dipping or spraying with an effective insecticide on two occasions at seven
               day inlelVals, the last being within forty-aght hours of shipment

               (v) have been treated with an effective anthelmintic on two occasions at 21 day intervals, the last
               being within 48 hours o f ~

               (vi) have for the thirty days prior to sb.ipmm1 been bc1d in an approved quarantine establishment
               during whiclJ time the animals w.crc maiot<sined in complete isolation. subjected to regular
               veterinary observation and at no time during which did either they or any other animals in the
               same quarantine establishment show any sign of disease; and either

                     (I) come from a CODDtty or part ofa country free from caprioc or ovine brucellosis; or

                     (2) come from a sheep or goat flock free from caprine or ovine brucellosis.

       (b) As soon as the animals anivc in the RMI they shall immediately be taken under the control of an
       Inspector to the qnmmtine .pirmiscs previously approved by the Chief of Agriculture, whereat the
       animals shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.

QA 7   Importation of domestic horses. mules and donkeys.


                                                                                                             30
       (a) For the importation of domestic horses, mules and donkeys an international animal health ~catc
       is requir~ attesting that the animals:                                                          ·

               (i) were examined in daylight within 24 hours of shipment, found to be in good health m,d
               showed no clink3l sign ofmy disease, including·skin diseases., mange and atrnJal paragms;
                                                  ,
             · (ii) were kept since birth or for the six months prior to shipment in tbe exporting countJy, or part
               of the territory of the exportiDg countJy, which is intemationally recognised as free from OIE
              ·List A diseases which affect horses, mules and ~eys or may be carried by horses, mules and
               donkeys and rabies, whctc mbies is a notifiabfo disease .and DO 01se of mhics was officially
               repbrtcd during the past two years;

               (iii) have undccgone dipping or s:prayiog with at eff'ective insecticide on two occasions at scvm
               day intervals, the wt being within forty-eight hOUl5 of shipment

               (iv) have been treated with an effective anthelmin'tic on two occasions at 21 day intervals, the
               last being within 48 hours of sbipmeot; and

               (v) have for the thirty prior to shipment been held in an approved quarantine, establishment
               .during which time the animaL<: WQ"C maimainc:d itt oomplcfe jsof9tim,. ~bp;tr.tJ to r* ~
                veterinary observation and at no time during which did either they or any other animals in the
                same quaranti:nc establishment show any sign of disease

       (b) As soon as the animals arrive in the RMI they shall .immediatdy be takeo under the control of an
       Inspector to the q.mwnioe premises pr.eviously approwd by the Clii.ef of Agricwturc, whereat the
       animals shall remain until they arc released by an lnspc:ctor.

QA 8   hup;,dation ofdgmcstic pigs.

       (a} For the importation of domestic pigs the presentation of an international animal health certificate is
       req_uired attesting that the animal.!: ·

               (i} were examined in daylight within 24 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and
               showed no cliniatl sign of any disease. including skin diseases. mange 1md external parasites;

               (ii) were kept since birth or for the six months prior to shipment in the exporting oountJy which
               is intematiooally recognised as free from rah~ and :Ill OIE List A discliic:S which affittpig$" or
               which may be carried by pigs and where cbe.,e diseases arc notifiable and no case of any of these
               diseases was officially tq>Ol1ed during the past two years;

               (iii) have for the thirty days prior to shipment been held in an approved quarantine
               cstDblisbmeut during which time the aaimsk Wm'! troJDJQlim,d in oomplde isobtion, subjecll,d to
               regular vetainary observation and at no time during which did eilher they or any other animals
               in the same qllllA8tinc establishment show any sign ofdisease.

               (iv) have 1D1dergone dipping or spraying with an effective insecticide on two occasioJlS at seven
               day intervals, the last being within 48 houB of wpmcnt,

               (v) have been treated with an effective antbelmiotfo oo two occasions at 21 day intervals, the last
               being within 48 hours of shipment~


                                                                                                            31
               (vi) In the case of any OIE List A or List B disease or for any communicable disease which is
               considered to be of socio-economic or public health importance or which is significant in the
               int.ematiooal trade of livestock and livestock products or for any communicable diseases with
               important socio-economic or sanitary influence .at .the .national level and which affect Jive
               animals and for which export health certification·conditions have not been prescribed in these
               regulations; either

                      (l) that the exporting oountry is free from such disease and daat no case of such disease
                      was officially rq,orted during the six months immediafely preceding the importation of
                      the animals concerned; or
                           I


                      (2) in the case where the counby of export is not .free from any such disease referred to in
                      the preceding sub-Regulation and for which export health certification conditions have not
                      heal presaibed in these regulations. the Ouef of Agriculture shall attach such conditions
                      on the import permit sufficialt in his opinion to ~ d against the introduction of such
                      ~ - Such conditions shall not be 1~ than those recommended in the International
                      Animal Health Code ofthe-0.1.E.

       (b) As soon as the animals arrive in the RMI they shall i.mmcdialely be taken under the cootroJ of an
       Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of .Agriculture, whemu the
       animals shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.

QA 9   Importation of birru:.

       (a) Birds shall be identified in their scientific name by genus and species in both the appUcation to
       import and in the international animal health certificate;

       (b) For the importation of domestic birds the presentation of an international animal health certificate is
       required attesting that the birds:

               (1 showea no clinical sign ot disease on the day of shipment;

               (ii) come from establishments which are tegularty inspect.ed by the official government
               veterinary authority of the counby of export;

               (iii) have been kept in a country, or a part of the territory of the exporting counby which is
               internationally recognised as free- from OlE List A diseases which ltffect domestic birds or may
               be carried by domestic birds since they were batdltd or for at least the past twenty-ooc days
               prior t o ~ and either

                      (1) have not been vaccinated against Newcastle disease (ND), highly virulent avian
                      influenza; or

                      (2) have been vaccinated against Newcastle disease (ND), highly virulent avian influenza,
                      using a vaccine complying with internationally acoopb:d standards, the nature of the
                      vaccine used and the date of vaccination to be stated in the international mimal health
                      certificak;

               (iv) if they have not been vaccinated against infectious bwsaJ disea~ come from an
               establishment fu:e from infectious_bursa} disease;




                                                                                                           32
                (v) come from establishments free from avian infectious bronchitis. infectious laryngotracheitis
                (ILT) and fowl cholera;

               (vi) come from establishments free from pullonun-typhoid disease, and have been tested
               ncgativ.e to puitoo,m.ty.pboid disease JlDd have been kept in an approved quarantine smtion for
                less than twenty-one days prior to $pment;

               (vii) if of the psittacidac: family showed no clinical sign of psittacosis-omithosis oo the day of
               shipmmt ad were kept .under \ldCrinaty .supcmsion fur the 4.5 .days prior to shipment and were
                effectively treated against psittacosis--omithosis and a permit has been issued by the office of
                Pbblre Health .and;

       (c) As soon as the birds arrive in the RMI they shall iromedi~ be taken under the c.omrol of ,m
       lraspcctor to .the qimantine·pmnises pnMOUS1y.approv.ed .by .the Chief of Agri.cullllr:e, whrtt.at the birds
       shall remain until they arc released by an Inspector.

QA 10 Importation of day-old chicks.-

       For the importation of day-old chicks, turkey, poultry and other newly-batched avian species an
       international animal health certificate is required ~ that the.newly hatcbed ~

       (a) come from establishmatts which are regularly inspected by lhe official veterinary authority of the
       ce!ntryaf~

       (b) come from hatcheries situated in a country which is internationally recognised as OIE List A
       diseases which affect domestic poultry or may be carried by domestic poultry;

       (c) either-

                (i) c.ome from hl\tchcri~ situated in 14 001mn.y fre(: from i.nfcctiov hnrS9J di~se (Cmmboro
                disease), or

               (Ii) come from csmblishmc:uts which are recognized as being free from infectious bursal disease
               following tests for the detection of precipitating antibodies aod in which vaccination against
               infectious bursal disease is not practiced on the parent stock and have not been vaccinated
               against infectious bursa! disease; or

               (iii) were vaccinated against infectioos bursal disease using a vaccine complying with
               internationally acccptlCld standards, ~ nature of the vaccine used and the dare of vaccination to
               be stated in the international animal health certificate; or

               (iv) come from a flock in whiclt "3COnarioo against infectious bursaJ disease is practia,d oo tbc
               parent stock;

        (d) were vaccinated again.st Marek's disease, the nature of the vaccine to be stated in the international
        animal health certificate;

       (e) eitber-

                (i) come from establislnnents or hatcheries which are recognized as being free from pullorum-
                typhoid disease, m-ian infectiatlS· lwouchitif., avian inkdwa.t ~ (lL1} and fowl
                cholera; or


                                                                                                            33
               (ii) come from establishments or hatcheries in which vaccination against avian i!t[ectious
               bronchitis, ILT and fowl cholera is not practiced on the parent stock or have not been vaccinated
               against avian infectipus broocbitis, ILT and fowl ~lera; or

               (iii) were vaccinated against avian infections bronchitis, ILT and fowl cholera, the nature of the
               vaccine used and the date of vaccination to be stated in tbl! iotfmatiooal animal health certificate;
               or

               (iv) comeI from establishment; or hatcheries in which vaccination against avian infectious
               bronchitis. ILT and fowl cholera is practiced on the parent stock.

       (f) come from establishments or hatcheries which are recognised as being free from avian tuberculosis;

       (g) showed no sign of mycoplasmosis on the day of shipment, originate exclusively from eggs produced
       by birds from establishments free from mycoplasmosis. and are shipped in clean, not previously used
       ~-
QA 1 I hnportation of Hatching Eggs.

       For the importation of batching eggs the presentation of I.ID intemationlll animal health certific:~tr: i~
       required attesting that the hatching eggs:

       (a) come from hatcheries situated in a country which is ineem.anooally n,cognised as OIE List A diseases
       which affect domestic poultly or may be carried by domestic pouluy;

       (b) come from establishments or hatcheries which are regularly inspected by the veterinary authority;

       (c) come lrom esblblisbments in which vamnatinn against Mardt's disease is practiced, the naaure of the
       vaccine used shall also be stated in the certificate;

       (d) originate exclusively from birds kept in establishments free from mycoplasmosis:

       (e) oome from cstahlish1DC21ts and/or~ which are certified as being free from pullo~-typhoid
       disease 1111d avian tuberculosis; and

       (t) have been disinfected in accordance with accepted international standard~ are correctly identified and
       are shipped in clean and unused packages.

QA 12 Importation of Domestic Rodcats and Rabbits.

       (a) For the importation of domestic rodents and rabbits the presentation of an international animal health
           certificate is reqnired attesting that the rodems o, rabbits:

               (i) were c:xaminod within 24 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and showed no sign
               ofany infecti()IJ$ disease:

               (ii) have been effectively treated against endoparasites within three days of shipment;

               (iii) have bcc:o effectively treated against, and found on examination to be visibly fi-ee o( all
               ectoparasites within three days of shipment;



                                                                                                             34
               (iv) have been tteated with an effective anthelmintic on two occasions at 21 day intervals, the
               last being within 48 hours of shipment;

               (v) were kept since birth or for at least the six months prior to shipment in the exporting COWJtry,
               or part of the territory of the exporting country which is intematiooally recognised as free from
               rabies and all OIE List A diseases -which may be carried by rodents or rabbits.

       (b) As sooo as the animals arrive in the RMI' they shall umnediatety be taken under the control of an
       losprrtO( to the quarantine ~ previously approved by the Chief of Agriculture. whereat the
       animals shall r.emain until they are released by an Inspect(!r.

QA 13 Importation of embo'.oslova ofdomestic ruminants and pigs.

       (a) For the importation of embryos/ova of domestic ruminants and pigs, the presentation of an
       international mimal health certificate is required attesting that:

               (i) the donor females and all other- animals in the herd of origin showed no clinical sign of
               disease during the twenty-four hours prior to dcpartme to the a>Ucction unit 1111d for the
               following thirty days;

               (ii) the donor females were kept in a co\Dlby or part of the territory of a countty internationally
               recognised as free from OIE Llst A diseases affecting domestic ruminants and pip since birth
               or for the preceding 2 years and were kept in the same herd for 8t I~ the forty days prior t
               departure to the collection uni ,

               (iii) the donor females were fertilized with semen meeting the requirements for the importation
               of semen into the RMI; and

               (iv) the collection unit remained ftee from OIE List A diseases affecting domestic ruminants and
             - pigs during the forty days following collection;                 ·

       (b) embryos/ova must be collected, washed, treated, examined for intact zona pcllucida, otherwise
       handled and transported ac:c:ording to lmcmational Codes of .Practice.

QA 14 Importation of semen ofdomestic nmtinaots.

       For the importation of the semen of domestic ruminwits the presentation of an international animal
       health certificate is requin:d attesting that the donor animals;

       (a) showed no clinical sign of disease on the day of collection and. except for fresh sc:mcn, for the
       following thirty days;

       (b) were kept in a counby internationally recognised as free from OIE List A diseases which affect
       domestic nuninants and pigs., since birth or for not less six months prior to collediau;

       (c) for bovine semen the following additional oonditions apply:

               ( 1) were kept in the exporting country for the thirty days prior to collection. in an establishment
               or artificial insernioatinn ccutrc where all anit:oal~ are officially free from bovine tuben:ulosis;
               and

               (2) either -


                                                                                                            35
                       (i) when the semen comes from an artificial insemination centre, the testing _programme
                       includes appropriate and effective tests for bovine bruceUosis; or

                       (ii) whm die· semeo does not come from -an artificial iosmrioarion centre, the donor
                       mrimaJs .come 1inm a country or l)3rt of .the territory of a ro.untry free from bovine
                       brucellosis;                       '

QA 15 Impqrtation of semen of pigs.

        For the importation of the semen of domestic pigs the presentation of an international animal health
        certificate is required attesting that the donor animals·

        (a) showed no clinicaJ sign of disease on the day of collection and. except for ~ semen. for lhe
        following thirty days; and

        (b) were kept in a countty internationally recognised as free from OIE List A diseases affecting domestic
        nmrinaots and pjg.s since birth or for not less than six months prior to collection.

QA 16 Jmporqrtioo of noo-commaciaJ consigprnents of food products of animal origin being imported as
accompanied ~ • haggagt! and for personal use.

        The importation of non-commercial consignments of food products of animal origin being imported as
        ~ ompaoiro passengcm' baggage mid for persona! us~ i.s s-Jbject to the follo mag ~~ditioll.!:

       (a) all food products of animal origin imported by a passenger must be commerciaJty produced.,
       packaged and scaled. and nmst be labelled in English by the manufacturer clearly stating the contents
        and countty of origin;

        (b) under the provisions of this Regulation the total quantity of food products of animal origin which
        may be imported by a passenger on any single occasion shall not exceed ! 0 kg per adult passenger; and

        c) produas imported wider the provisions of this Regulation must not be resold.

QA 17 Importation of unsterilged meat and meat products derived from domestic ruminants.

        For the importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from domestic nuninaots the
        ptesc11tation of an international health certificate or other approved ocrtification. Where required ~
        international health certificate shall ~ that the entire consignment of meat comes from animals:

       (a) which have been kept in the oountty intanationaDy recognised as free from OIE List A diseases
       affecting ~ c nnniuants and pigs since~ and

        (b) which were slaughtered in an abattoir, found to be healthy before and after slaughter, cut up in a
        cutting-up establishment under Government supervision, and considered to be fir for human
        consumption.

QA 18 Importation ofunst.criliz.ed meat and meat products (jerivcd from pigs:

       For the importation of unstailized meat imd meat products derived .from.p;igs the ~ of an
       international health certificate or other approved certificatioo. Where required the international health
       certificate shall attest that the entire consignment of meat comes from animals:

                                                                                                          36
        (a) which have been kept in the country since birth, or have been imported from a coWttJy internationally
        recognised as frc:e from OIE List A diseases affecting domestic pigs since birth; and

        (b) which were slaughtered in an abattoir. found to be healthy before and after sJaughfa', cut up in a
        ptepaxation ~            -and considered to be fit for hmnao consumption.

QA 19 Importation.of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from poultJy:

        For the importation ofunsteriliz.ed meat and m e a t ~ derived from poultiy the presc:otation of an
        international health oertificate or other approved certification.. Where required the international health
        certificate shall attest that the entire consigmncnt of meat comes from birds:

        (a) which have been kept in establishment free &om NewcastJe disease and highly padaogcnic avian
        influenza .and.oot sittmtd in an infeett:d zone of dtese diseases;

        (b) which were slaughtered in an abattoir not situated in an infected ~one of Newcastle disease and
        highly pathogenic avian influenza, found to be healthy before mid after slaughter. cut up in a preparatioo
        establishment, and considm:d to be fit for human consumption.

QA 20 Importation of eggs and egg products for consumption and processing.

        Eggs imported in the embtyonic stages, (such as Balot), are totally prolnl>ited into the RMI. For the
        i.mportatioo. of ~ and egg p!"oducts the ptesmtation of an inm'national health oertificatc o: other-
        approved certification. Where required the internationaJ health certificate shall attest that the entire
        consignment comes from birds:

       (a) which have been kq,t in an establishment free from Newcastle disease sod b.ighJy pathogc:aic avian
       influenza and not situated in an infected zooe of dltJSC diseases;

        (b) for eggs, the certificate must attest that the eggs have been disinfected in accordance wid1 O.I.E.
        standards, are correctly identified, and~ shipped ~ clean and unused packages.

       (c) for egg products. the catificat.c must attest that the cw were stailiud by oonvc:nrional beat
       treatment regimes during the manufacturing process.

QA 21 Importation of millc ancl milk products.

        (I) Unl~ odlawise varied by die ~ of a general import permit under Regulation 20 (f) an
        international animal health certificate or other approved form of oertificatioo is required for the
        importation of milk and milk products. Where required the international health certificate shall attest that
        the animals from which the-milk and milk products were derived:

                (a) wen, kept since birth. or for at mt 12 months prior to the collection of milk which was used
                in the manufacture of this shipment in the exporting oountry whidl is free from foot and mouth
                disease where this disease is notifiable;

                (b) that vaccination against foot and mouth disease is not practiced; and

                (c) that the milk and milk products were pasteuriz.ed or stmliz.ed at conventional beat treatment
                regimes during the manufacturing process.



                                                                                                             37
        (2) Passengers with infants shall be exempt from the provisions of subparagraph ( l) with respect to a
        liquid milk or milk containing formula, in which case a maximum of one litre l1l8>' be allowed fur each
        acoompanied child under two years of age. In case of a powdel'ed milk or milk containing fonnula a
        maximum of oru: kilogram sh;all be permitted for each acco~pani<Xi child tmdef-two years of age.

QA 22 Importation of Honey Bees and apiary egµjpment. ,

        For the importation of honey bees (Apis mellifera) the presentation of an international animal health
        certificate is required attesting that:
        (a) the honey bees iii the consignment come from apiaries which are regularly inspected by government
        officers empowered for that purpose by the exporting countty;

        (b) the exporting cououy or part of the territory of the exporting country is free from Varroasis and
        Acariasis;

        (c) the exporting counuy or part of the tenitoty of the exporting countty is free from American Foul
        Brood, European Foul Brood and Chalk Brood;

        (d) that lhe exporting country or part of the territory of the exporting country is free from evidence of
        A.fricanized bees: and

        (e) the entiy of used bee keeping equipment including hives, frames, and tools, is prohibited.

QA 23 Importation of all othei: animal products and other related articles..

        For the importation of all other animal products and other related articles:

        {a) the first port ofentry in the RMI shall be specified in the import permit;

        (b) all animal products shall be consigned to the RMI as manifested cargo unless specific provision has
        been made in the import permit otherwise;

        (c) all importanoos ofanimal products and rdated goods are to be accompanied by;

                 (i) the import permit issued for that importation; and

                 (ri) an intc:mational health certificate signed and &oped by ao official vetainarian of the
                 exporting oounay certifying the state of good health of the animal products and related articles
                 and giving particulars where applicable of any measures taken to prevent the spread of disease;

        (d) all animal products shall be .inspcctcd on arrival by an Inspector;

        (c) only when the inspector is satisfied. foUowing the inspection prescribed in [d] above, that the import
        is in accordance with the provisions of any regulations made that all conditions of the import pennit have
        been met up to the time of impor1ation and that no period of qwnotine detention, treatmeats or tests are
        required shall a Quarantine Release b e ~

        (f) unless a Quarantine Release is issued according to the provisions of [eJ above, all animal products
        and related articles will be detained under quarantiDc control Wttil further notice and be subjected to any
        test, treatment, disinfectioo or fumigation requiR,d;




                                                                                                            38
        (g) notwithstanding the provisions of Regulations 8 and 20 (f), an inspector may order animal products
        that are imported or introduced into the RMI in contravention of the provisions of any regulation made
        hereunder, or of aoy conditions of the import permit, to be seized, dcmoyed, disposed of or ~
        at the owner's expense;

        (h) any import permit granted may be cancelled or amended at any time after issue and before arrival of
        the animal products and related articles in the RMI should the animal health and/or quarantine status of
        the cowioy of origin change or be reported to have changed in the  meantime.

                           PART VIII - SPECIFIC ANIMAL PROHIBITIONS


46. Animal Ouaraotines - Specific animal prob.tl>itions.

        The importation into the RMI from a pla¢e outside the RM1 of the animals listed in the Second Schedule
        to these Regulations is prolnllitcd.


47. fgtportation for special purJX>SeS.

        Notwithstanding the provisions of Regulation 46, a pennit may be issued under the pro,risions af thes~
        Regulations in respect of any aaimal required to be imported or introduced into RMI for -

        (a) the purpose of rcsc:accb. or experiment to improve the quality of animals in RMI aod die products to
        be derived therefrom; or

        (b) the purpose of any zoological garden or display approved by the Minister.


                                   Part IX - EXPORT REQUIREMENTS


48. Power to examine and certify export consignmmts of plants and plant products.

        (a) An Inspector, at the request of an exporter, may sample Md inspect any'plants or plant produas
        intended for export from the RMI.

        (b) An Inspector may withhold or detain any plants or plant products intended for export until such time
        as he is satisfied that plants or plant products meet wi1h any and all tams mid cooditioos of che
        importing cowuy and are of sufficieot quality and wholcso~

        (c) An Inspector may apply official seals to any packages on the completion of any inspection of plants
        or plant prodncts intended for ex.port from the RMI.

        (d) An Inspector may issue a a:rtificafe or other docummtatioo 9CUing out the result of his inspection or
        ocrtifying as 1o the origin of1hc plants or plant products, provide details ofany treatments applied to the
        plants or plant products or any other matter of which he is aware in relation to the plants or plant
        products.




                                                                                                            39
49. Phytosanitary certificates and other documentation relating to plants and plant products.

        (a) An Inspector may issue a phytosanitary certificate for plants or plant products produced in the
        Republic of l\Aarsball Islands where such ~ is a conditioµ of importation into the country of
        destination and where he believes that such plants or plant products conform with the import
        requimnents of~ importing country.

        (b) 'The ~ certificate ~ is to be substantially based on the Model adopted by the
        Jotcmatianal Plant Pfotection Conv.cmion of 195 l~ ai: 3DM"Ddoo fi:om time to time.
                               I
        (c) The issuance of a phytosanitary certificate shall not release the importer or exporter frpm compliance
        with any quarantine import regulations of the co.unny to which the plants or plant material are consigned.


50. Animals pd animal products.

        (i) The Secretary may require that any animals, animal products, and related goods being exported be
        inspected by an Inspector or veterin.ari.an priw to export.

         (ii) An Inspector or veterinarian may withhold or detain any animals or animal products being exported
        .ootil .such time as he is satisfied that they moot \\1th any and all tmns and C3nditions of the importing
         country and are of sufficient quality and wholesomeness.


51. Re::c;xport of plants and plant roaterials. aninulls §Dd animal products.

        All plants and plant materials, animals and animal products intended for re-export from the RMI must
        clearly be i~tified as such and the country of origin stated on the acoompanying certi&ation. •

                 (i) An Inspector may issue a Re-export Phytosanitary Certificate for plants and plant products
                 which .have arrivl:d in .the RMI but which are .not .intmd:.d for importation into tht: RMI.

                 (ii) An Inspector shall only issue a re-export Phyto58Ilitary Certificate where he is satisfied that
                 such plants, plant product:S or other regnlal:ed materials are accompanied by a Pbytoscmitary
                 Catificate issued by the plant health authority of the oountry of origin and that such goods
                 comply generally with the goods dcscnl>cd on suclJ certificate.

                 {iii) An Inspector or veterinarian may issue a re-export IntemationaJ Animal Health Certificate in
                 the case of a live animal or a ·re-export lnrcmariooa1 Hcallh Certificate in the C8!e of an animal
                 product wbc:re such animal or animal product as the case may be has arrived in the RMI but is
                 not intended for imponati.on into the RMI.

                 (iv) An Inspector or veterinarian may is.we a re-export International Animal Health Certificate in
                 the case of a live animal 01 a ro-expo.rt International Health Certificate in the case of an animal
                 product where he is satisfied that such animal or animal product as the case may is acoompanied
                 by an lntmlational Animal Health C-ertificate in the case of.an .animal or an lntcmational Health
                 Certificate in the case of an animaJ product issued by the animal health authority of the country
                 of origin and that such animal or animal product ronfnnns fPJerally with the description printed
                 OD such certificate.




                                                                                                              40
                                              Part IX- PENALTIES


52. Penalties.

         (a) Pursuant to MIRC Title 8, Chapter 3, Animal and Plant Inspection Act, s.11 the RMI Code any
         person who violates any provision of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemcaoor ao.d upoa
         conviction' thc:Rof shall be liable for imprisoomc:ot for -a tam not exceeding one year or a fine of not
         more than $1,000.00. or both.

         (b) Each plant, class of plant product or animal or class of animal product imported, held, useA
         transported in violation of these regulations shall coostitute a scpm:mc offense under this provision.




                                             FIRST SCHEDULE

Importation of plants and plant materials of the foJlowing species is prohibited as stated

Common name               Scimtifk Name                     Planes or lant autmal robibiud
Banana, Abaca. and        Musaceae family ,md Heliconiaceoe Plants. oo.rms and cut flowers cxoept tissue
Heliconia                 family                            culture ccnificd fice fiom bunclry top di~.
                                                            mosaic virus. Panama disease and bactaial
                                                            dilC8scs including moko disease, black leaf
                                                            sttQkaadSi           diseac
Citrus                    Citrus species and the foDowing   All except fiuit and seeds. Fruit fiom an:as
                          genera: Citropsis. CIIIUs,               where citrus canker (XanJhomonas campeslris
                          Eremocitrus, Fortunella,                 p. v. citri (Hasse) Dye) occurs. All of Murrayo
                          Microcltrus., Monanthocitrus.            spp.
                          Pleurocitrus and Poncirus
                          aama 'SL
All palms including                                                All except seeds nuts and pollal from an:ti
C.ooonut aod Betel Nut                                                   :vcd the Ouef of ·
p
Sweet potato                                                       All except patb()scn tested tissue adtures and
                                                                   seed
Tapioca/cassava

Taro and edible aroids                                             All except seed and twuc culture



Tomato                                                                        mrit and seed
Yams                                                                          seed and tissue culture




                                                                                                             41
                                  SECOND SCHEDULE

Importation of annnals ofthe following species is prohibited as stated (Regulation 46)

        (i) any snake of any species;
        (ii) any living stage of any venomous reptile., venomous amphi~ venomous fish or venomous
       ,investdxatc;
        (iii) any red.vented bulbul (Molpastcr cafer L.) or Mynah bird (Acriodothercs fuscus)
        (iv) any American grey squirrel (Sciurus carolensis gmelin);
        ( v) any monkey;
        (vi) any lllOllgOOSC (Herpestcs sp. );
        (vii) any mink; (Mustcla vison);
        (viii) any parrot;
        ( viii) such otheL animal which the Minister may specify as likely to become a nniSBQC% or to
        cause injury oc danage




                                                                                              42
