Import permits

Biosecurity
vessel arrival
declaration

the biosecurity risk or guidance about the biosecurity risk presented by
the article or consignment changes.

(6) Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an
article should be given to intending importers as soon as practicable but
no liability arises from a failure to do so.

(7) Subsection (3) applies to the changing of a specification as it
applies to the making of a specification.

(8) Specifications made under this section, and any change in a
specification, must be published in the manner set out in section 50(2).

(9) The Chief Biosecurity Officer may specify as a condition of entry
into the Pitcairn Islands a period of quarantine at an approved quarantine
facility located outside the Pitcairn Islands where plants or animals are
screened for invasive species, pests and diseases prior to entry into the
Pitcairn Islands.

(10) A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is
not the subject of a biosecurity import specification must apply for a
biosecurity import permit in respect of the article.

17. -(1) If a biosecurity import permit for a regulated article or
consignment of regulated articles is specified as a requirement under
section 16(1), or is required by section 16(10), an application for a permit
must be made to the Chief Biosecurity Officer, in a form approved by the
Chief Biosecurity Officer, before the article or consignment leaves the
country or area of origin.

(2) An application for a biosecurity import permit must -

(a) include evidence of the country or area of origin of the article
or consignment;

(b) state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;
(c) state the expected date of arrival in the Pitcairn Islands; and

(d) give any other information the Chief Biosecurity Officer
reasonably requires to make a biosecurity risk assessment.

(3) If satisfied of the matters set out in subsections (1) and (2), and
that the proposed importation would not pose an unacceptable biosecurity
tisk, the Chief Biosecurity Officer must as soon as practicable issue a
biosecurity import permit.

(4) A biosecurity import permit must set out any conditions on which
it is issued and failure to comply with them will render the permit invalid.

18. -(1) In order to obtain biosecurity landing clearance for a vessel, and
if requested by the Chief Biosecurity Officer, the master must —
