(c) facilitate sampling,
when required to do so under this subclause, commits an offence under section 35(2)(c).

(6) When exercising powers under subclause (1) or (2), a biosecurity officer must,
if reasonably practicable, give the importer or person seeking intra-island biosecurity
clearance a written notice, identifying the quantity of the sample and the place where
the sample is to be analysed.

(7) __Inother respects, the procedure for taking and analysing samples, recording the
results and disposing of the samples is as determined by the Chief Biosecurity Officer
in consultation with relevant experts, according to the type of sample

(8) __If, while sampling, goods are destroyed or damaged, without negligence or
malice, no compensation is payable to the importer or owner of the goods.

(9) __ The importer or owner of a regulated article from which samples are taken under
this subclause must be notified in writing of the findings in respect of the samples as
soon as reasonably practicable.

A Treatment of articles

(1) __Ifan incoming article is found to be or to contain a prohibited or restricted
non-native species, or to be infected, infested or contaminated by a prohibited or
restricted pest or disease, the article may be treated to reduce the biosecurity risk to an
acceptable level, whether or not treatment is a specified requirement or a condition of
an import permit.

(2) Once treatment has been administered to the satisfaction of the biosecurity
officer, the article must, subject to subclause (5), be released to the importer or owner
and biosecurity import clearance granted in respect of it.

(3) If an article requires treatment as a condition of an intra-island biosecurity
clearance, the article must be treated at the expense of the owner before biosecurity
clearance is granted in respect of it.

(4) If treatment is available to eliminate or reduce to an acceptable level the
biosecurity threat posed by an animal or plant or animal or plant product that has been
detained under clause 4, a biosecurity officer may —
() with the consent of the owner or custodian of the animal, plant or product,
administer such treatment, or cause it to be administered:
(b) after treatment, release the animal, plant or product to the owner or
custodian.

(5) __ The cost of treatment is to be borne by the importer or owner of the item, but
the importer or owner may instead opt to have the article reconsigned or destroyed.

(6) _ fan importer or owner fails to have an article which requires treatment under
this clause treated within a reasonable time, the biosecurity officer may require the
article to be destroyed.

( if-
