5. Testing of articles

(1) A biosecurity officer may test, or cause tests to be conducted on, any incoming
regulated article, in order to ascertain whether the article meets the biosecurity import
requirements in respect of it.

Q) Following a test of an incoming article, the article must be either released to the
importer, and biosecurity import clearance granted in respect of it, or it must be treated,
reconsigned or destroyed.

(3) Forthe purpose of considering whether to grant intra-island biosecurity landing
clearance under section 24 a biosecurity officer may test, or cause tests to be conducted
on, any regulated article that would, if it were not already on Pitcairn Island, require a
biosecurity import permit where such tests would be a condition for importing that
article into the Pitcairn Islands.

(4) Tests conducted under this subclause may include —
(a) the taking of samples in accordance with clause 6;
(b) conducting a postmortem examination in accordance with clause 10.

(5) Ifa test conducted under this subclause without negligence or malice destroys

or damages an animal or other article being tested, no compensation is payable to the
importer or owner of the animal or other article.

6. Taking of samples
(1) A biosecurity officer may, with the consent of the importer, owner or custodian,
take samples from any ~
(a) part of an incoming vessel or aircraft that has on board regulated articles;
(b) warehouse containing regulated articles intended for importation;
(©) consignment of incoming regulated articles, wherever located;
(@ incoming container, baggage or thing that the officer reasonably suspects to
be or include a regulated article,
if the taking of a sample is necessary for the grant of biosecurity import clearance for
the article.

(2) Abiosecurity officer may, with the consent of the person in charge of the article,
take samples of any outgoing regulated article if the taking of a sample is necessary for
the grant of intra-island biosecurity clearance for the article.

(3) Ifthe person in charge of a regulated article refuses consent under subclause (1)
or (2) respectively, the biosecurity officer may require the person to provide a sample,
failing which biosecurity import or intra-island biosecurity clearance, as the case may
be, will not be granted.

(4) A biosecurity officer may request the importer of a consignment to unpack it or
break it up to facilitate sampling, at the risk and expense of the importer.

(5) A person who refuses to —
(a) allow samples to be taken ;
(b) provide samples; or
