(a) appropriate treatment is not available in the Pitcairn Islands;
(b) in the opinion of a biosecurity officer, there would still be a biosecurity risk
after treatment; or
(o)the importer or owner chooses not to have the article treated,
the article must be destroyed, subject to subclause (8).

(8) If subclause (7) applies in the case of an incoming article, and if the importer
chooses, the article may be reconsigned rather than destroyed, but subject to clause 8.

(9) If, during treatment, goods are destroyed or damaged, without negligence or
malice, no compensation is payable to the importer or owner of the goods.

(10) Treatment of an article —
(a) should be the minimum required to remove or adequately reduce the
biosecurity risk posed by the article;
(b) may be administered by an appropriately qualified biosecurity officer, or by
any other suitably qualified person at the request of the officer or the importer.

8. Reconsignment of articles

(1) Ifan incoming regulated article which requires biosecurity documentation is not
accompanied by the necessary documentation, a biosecurity officer may, after
informing the importer, detain the article for reconsignment or destruction.

2) An incoming article that is a prohibited import must be reconsigned or
destroyed.

(3) Reconsignment is at the option and cost of the importer, but —
(a) reconsignment must be effected within a time specified by the officer,
which must be reasonable in the circumstances;
() if the biosecurity officer considers that the biosecurity risk of
reconsignment is unacceptable, the option is not available.

(4) The power to order reconsignment of an article under this clause applies also to
any container, crate, baggage, package or mail which carries it.

(5) _ If reconsignment is not effected within the time specified under subclause
(3)(a), or is not acceptable, the article or consignment must be destroyed.

(6) Nocompensation is payable to the importer for the cost of reconsignment under
this clause.

9. Destruction of articles
(i) Ifan incoming article is found to be or contain a prohibited or restricted non-
native species, or to be infected, infested or contaminated by a prohibited or restricted
pest or disease, and —

(2) appropriate treatment is not available in the Pitcairn Islands;

(b) __ in the opinion of the Chief Biosecurity Officer there would still be a

biosecurity risk after treatment; or
(c) _ the importer chooses not to have the article treated,
