Application

Ordinance
binds the
Crown

Biosecurity
functions of
Government

(h) any clothing, machinery or other article that contains or has,
adhering to it anything mentioned in subsections (a), (b), (c),
or (d);

(garbage;

() any other article, substance, goods, or thing declared by order
under section 12 to be a prohibited import or a controlled
import.

5. -(1) This Ordinance applies to every person in the Pitcairn Islands,
irrespective of the person’s nationality or citizenship.

(2) This Ordinance applies to persons, conveyances, containers and
goods outside the Pitcairn Islands to the extent needed for its effective
enforcement.

6. This Ordinance binds the Crown in right of the Government of Pitcairn
(“the Government”), but nothing in this Ordinance renders the Crown
liable to prosecution for an offence under this Ordinance or to proceedings
under the fixed penalty provisions for offences.

7. (1) The biosecurity functions of the Government of Pitcairn are to ~

(a) protect the Piteaim Islands against the entry and spread of
non-native species and of pests and diseases adversely
affecting the economy, human health and the environment;

(b) prevent the establishment and spread of non-native species
and of pests and diseases and the release of organisms that
might adversely affect the economy, human health and the
environment.

(2) The Government must seek to implement in the Pitcairn Islands
the international obligations that apply to the Pitcairn Islands in respect of,
biosecurity and biodiversity.

(3) Ifa full risk assessment is not possible in any situation requiring
an assessment of a biosecurity risk or threat, the precautionary approach
may be taken.

(4) Action to contain a biosecurity threat must be taken as speedily as
practicable, having regard to any requirement for technical advice or
consultation contemplated by this Ordinance.

(5) In implementing this Ordinance, the Government must have
regard to—

(a) Part 2 of the Pitcaim Constitution, and in particular section
19 (the right to protection of the environment);

(b) the precautionary approach; and
