Prohibition and
control of
imports

Biosecurity
import
exemptions

Prohibited imports

13. —(1) A person may not import a prohibited import unless a biosecurity
import exemption has been granted to that person in respect of that article.

(2) A person may not import an article that is a controlled import
otherwise than in accordance with the specified conditions for that article,
unless a biosecurity import exemption has been granted to that person in
respect of that article.

14. -(1) The Chief Biosecurity Officer may in writing exempt any article
or class of articles from any or all of the biosecurity import requirements
that would otherwise apply to that article or class of articles.

(2) A request for a biosecurity import exemption must be accompanied
by relevant documents and made in writing to the Chief Biosecurity
Officer, in sufficient time to allow the Chief Biosecurity Officer to give
due consideration to the request.

(3) An exemption under subsection (1) may specify the conditions on
which the article or class of articles is exempt. If the conditions are not
met the exemption ceases to apply.

(4) The Chief Biosecurity Officer may only grant an exemption under
subsection (1) if satisfied that the biosecurity risk to the Pitcairn Islands
is not increased as a result.

(5) An exemption under subsection (1) applies only to a single
importation.

(6) Articles exempted from biosecurity import requirement under this
section are not exempt from the requirement for biosecurity import
clearance.

(7) Official importations of regulated articles by the Government are
subject to any biosecurity import conditions imposed under section 16,
but any fee payable may be waived in respect of a regulated article to be
imported or introduced for the purpose of —

(a) research or experiment to improve the quality of plants or
animals in the Pitcairn Islands and the products to be derived
from them; or

(b) any botanical or zoological garden or display approved by
the Governor.
