PITCAIRN, HENDERSON,
DUCIE & OENO ISLANDS                                                   No 1 of 2024


                               BIOSECURITY ORDINANCE

                                    EXPLANATORY NOTE

This Ordinance provides for a biosecurity regime for the Pitcairn Islands. It is adapted for
Pitcairn circumstances from a model ordinance supplied to British Overseas Territories. Part I
sets out the purpose of the Ordinance and other preliminary matters. Part II provides for a Chief
Biosecurity Officer, and other Biosecurity Officers, to be appointed by the Governor.

Part III deals with three categories of goods. First, prohibited imports, which should never be
allowed into Pitcairn save when an import exemption is obtained for the article. Second,
controlled imports, which may be imported only if they comply with conditions that are
imposed for that class of import. Third, all other items remain subject to the need for a
declaration and inspection process by biosecurity officers upon arrival. Articles will not be
admitted into Pitcairn if they are a biosecurity risk.

The Ordinance applies to vessels and their masters and crew, as well as to passengers. It applies
to articles being imported (see Part IV) as well as to articles in the possession of passengers
and crew. The Ordinance requires arrival declarations by masters of vessels and by passengers
and crew. It contains powers of enforcement for biosecurity officers, who may call upon Police
constables to assist. There is also the power to order biosecurity quarantine of articles if needed
(Part V).

The Chief Biosecurity Officer must maintain appropriate records and may publish certain
information (Part VI).

The Ordinance contains offences (Part VII) for non-compliance which are generally within the
jurisdiction of the Magistrates’ Court. When coming before the Island Magistrate, the available
penalties would be limited to those that are within the power of the Island Magistrate ($5,000
fine or 100 days imprisonment). There is also a provision for “fixed penalties”, which may be
administratively imposed for offences. Under this provision, a person who admits an offence
may agree to pay the fixed penalty as an alternative to being prosecuted.

A prosecution under the Ordinance does not preclude a civil claim against a person for damages
caused by the person’s importation, release, sale or breeding of an animal or plant produce that
contravenes the Ordinance.

The Ordinance applies to goods brought into any of the islands that make up the Pitcairn
Islands. Masters of vessels must advise the Chief Biosecurity Officer of their intention to land
at or near any of those Islands. The Chief Biosecurity Officer may require a vessel to proceed
first to Pitcairn Island for inspection.

The Ordinance also applies to “intra-Island” travel – that is, to travel between Pitcairn,
Henderson, Ducie and Oeno Islands. A master of a vessel intending to leave Pitcairn Island for
any of the other three islands, as well as intending passengers and crew, must make biosecurity
declarations. The biosecurity officers have the same powers of questioning and inspection as
relate to vessels and passengers entering the Pitcairn Islands. There is an offence that may be
committed by a master or a passenger for landing without having been granted appropriate
clearance to do so. These provisions are in the interests of preventing the spread to other islands
of biosecurity risks including those that are already present on Pitcairn Island.

Consistency with the Constitution

Section 19 of the Constitution provides that everyone has the right to have the environment
protected, for the benefit of present and future generations, including through laws to prevent
pollution and ecological degradation.
This Ordinance is an important step in ensuring compliance with s 19, establishing a biosecurity
control regime to protect each of the islands making up the Pitcairn Islands against the entry of
non-native species, pests, and diseases.
In order to achieve its purpose, the Ordinance provides biosecurity officers with a broad range
of powers, including powers of detention, entry, search, seizure, and inspection. Specific
powers include:
   -   Power to require biosecurity measures to be taken, including disinfestation or
       disinfection of the vessel and cargo (s 18(4));
   -   Power to search and inspect incoming vessels (s 19);
   -   Power to declare a vessel to be in biosecurity port quarantine and give written directions
       as to the movement of the vessel, passengers, crew and cargo, and treatment and
       biosecurity measures to be applied to the vessel (s 20);
   -   Power to direct a vessel which poses a serious biosecurity threat to leave the Pitcairn
       Islands (s 21(4));
   -   Power to question passengers and crew members and inspect their baggage (s 23(5));
   -   Power to detain passengers and crew members for further questioning and search, and
       their baggage for further inspection and application of other biosecurity measures (s
       23(6));
   -   Power to open containers, inspect imported goods, take samples, and conduct tests (s
       26(4));
   -   Power to order incoming articles into biosecurity quarantine (s 28);
   -   Power to search any conveyance, premises, building etc (schedule 2, clause 1);
   -   Power to enter and search a dwelling house on a warrant issued by a Magistrate
       (schedule 2, clauses 1 and 2);
   -   Power to open and inspect any incoming document in order to ascertain whether the
       document contains or relates to a regulated article (schedule 2, clause 3);
   -   Power to detain incoming regulated articles for biosecurity measures to be taken and to
       detain animals or plants (or animal or plant products) for testing or treatment (schedule
       2, clause 4);
   -   Power to test regulated articles (schedule 2, clause 5);
   -   Power to take samples (schedule 2, clause 6);
   -   Power to treat incoming articles (schedule 2, clause 7);
   -   Power to order reconsignment of articles (schedule 2, clause 8);
   -   Power to destroy articles (schedule 2, clause 9);
   -   Power to detain and question people (schedule 2, clause 12(1));
   -   Power to search persons seeking to enter the Pitacirn Islands, employed in connection
       with biosecurity control or engaged in importing articles and their baggage (schedule
       2, clause 12(2))
Section 7 Constitution – right to liberty and security
The powers of detention in s 23(6) and schedule 2, clause 12 of the Ordinance involve the
temporary deprivation of the liberty of the subject person whilst they are being questioned,
searched and (if applicable) biosecurity measures are being taken in respect of any articles
found.
The powers of detention, search, and inspection in s 23(6) are confined to passengers and crew
members who are seeking biosecurity entry clearance. The first step for a biosecurity officer
is to review the passenger arrival declaration form. They then have a discretion as to whether
to question the person (and, if necessary, a spouse or family member included on the
declaration) and/or inspect their baggage before deciding whether to grant biosecurity entry
clearance. It is only if the biosecurity officer is not prepared to grant biosecurity entry clearance
after these steps that the power to detain the passenger or crew member for further questioning
and search and to detain their baggage for further inspection and application of biosecurity
measures is triggered. It is anticipated that these powers will not be routinely required. Persons
may only be detained for as long as is required to question and search the person and to conduct
the further inspection and application of biosecurity measures.
The powers of detention in schedule 2, clause 12 only apply to persons seeking to enter the
Pitcairn Islands, employed in connection with biosecurity control or engaged in importing
articles. There are reasonable restrictions on the exercise of these powers. Before a biosecurity
officer may exercise the power of detention and questioning, they must be of the opinion that
the person is in possession or control of an article that poses a biosecurity threat to the Pitcairn
Islands. Before a biosecurity officer may exercise the power to search a person and their
baggage, they must suspect that the person may have on them an article the importation of
which would constitute an offence. Persons may only be detained for as long as is required to
question and search, and to arrange for biosecurity measures to be taken in respect of any article
found.
The Chief Biosecurity Officer also has the power to give written directions as to the movement
of passengers and crew whilst their vessel is in biosecurity port quarantine (s 20(2)). Any such
direction would likely involve an interference with the liberty of those persons. This power
can only be exercised if a biosecurity officer reasonably suspects that the vessel poses a
biosecurity threat to the Pitcairn Islands (including having on board a prohibited import or
prohibited or controlled non-native species or being infected or infested with a prohibited or
controlled pest or disease).
Section 7(1)(b) Constitution provides that “[n]o one shall be deprived of his or her liberty save
in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law – (b) the lawful…
detention of a person …. In order to secure the fulfilment of any obligation prescribed by law”.
I am satisfied that the detention of individuals as outlined above is authorised by s 7(1)(b). The
Ordinance prescribes procedures for the detention, and the reason for the detention is to secure
the fulfilment of the obligations prescribed by the Ordinance.
The powers of detention may only be exercised to achieve the biosecurity functions of the
Government (s 11(2)). They are important and necessary powers to ensure that the purpose of
the Ordinance in s 3(2) is fulfilled.
Section 11 Constitution – right to respect for private and family life
The s 11(1) right to respect for private and family life, home and correspondence is engaged
by the powers of search, seizure, and inspection.
I am satisfied that the interference with this right is authorised by s 11(2) Constitution. The
powers of search, seizure, and inspection are in accordance with the law and necessary in a
democratic society in the interests of the economic well-being of Pitcairn (the Ordinance
specifically refers to Pitcairn’s economy in outlining the biosecurity functions of the
Government of Pitcairn) and for the prevention of crime (in particular the unlawful importation
of prohibited or controlled imports).
The powers are not overly broad and are proportionate. They can only be exercised to achieve
the biosecurity functions of the Government.
The power to inspect and search incoming vessels (s 19) is necessary to inform the biosecurity
officer’s decision on whether to grant biosecurity landing clearance to the vessel.
The power to inspect or further inspect baggage (s 23(5) and s 23(6)(b)) is necessary to inform
the biosecurity officer’s decision on whether to grant biosecurity entry clearance to the
passengers and crew members.
The power to search a passenger or crew member under s 23(6)(a) is only triggered where a
biosecurity officer is not prepared to grant biosecurity entry clearance after reviewing the
passenger arrival declaration form, questioning the person (and, if necessary, a spouse or family
member included in the declaration), and inspecting the baggage.
The power to search a person in schedule 2, clause 12 is limited to situations where a
biosecurity officer suspects the person may have on them an article the importation of which
would constitute an offence.
All personal searches must be carried out by officers of the same sex. This ensures that the
dignity of the subject person is respected and protected, in accordance with s 4 Constitution.
The powers to search conveyances, premises, or buildings (schedule 2, clause 1), are limited
to situations where a biosecurity officer reasonably suspects the presence of a prohibited or
restricted non-native species, pest or disease that is not under official control.
There are special protections in place for dwelling houses, which can only be searched with the
consent of the owner or if the Magistrate issues a warrant. This requires the Magistrate to be
satisfied that there may be a regulated article that poses a biosecurity threat to the Pitcairn
Islands in the dwelling house and that the consent of the owner/occupier for a search cannot be
obtained (schedule 2, clause 1(2)).
The power to inspect documents (schedule 2, clause 2) recognises the privacy expectation in
personal letters and provides that the power of inspection can only be exercised if the
biosecurity officer reasonably suspects that a letter contains or relates to a biosecurity threat.
I am satisfied that the powers of search, seizure, and inspection in the Ordinance are consistent
with s 11 Constitution.
Section 21 Constitution – protection of property
The s 21(1) right to peaceful enjoyment of possessions is engaged by the powers of search,
seizure, and inspection along with the powers to quarantine vessels, test, take samples, treat,
and destroy articles.
These powers are necessary to achieve the purpose of the Ordinance, are not overly extensive
and are subject to appropriate restrictions. As with all powers, they can only be exercised to
achieve the biosecurity functions of the Government.
The appropriate restrictions and necessity for the search, seizure, and inspection powers has
been dealt with under s 11.
The power to quarantine vessels can only be exercised if a biosecurity officer reasonably
suspects that the vessel poses a biosecurity threat to the Pitcairn Islands (including having on
board a prohibited import or prohibited or controlled non-native species or being infected or
infested with a prohibited or controlled pest or disease).
The power to test incoming regulated articles may only be exercised in order to ascertain
whether the article meets the biosecurity import requirements in respect of it (schedule 2, clause
5).
The power to take samples may only be exercised if the taking of a sample is necessary for the
grant of biosecurity import clearance or intra-Island biosecurity clearance (schedule 2, clause
6).
Treatment will be undertaken where an incoming article is found to be or contain a prohibited
or restricted species, or to be infected, infested, or contaminated by a prohibited or restricted
pest or disease (schedule 2, clause 7).
The power of destruction can be exercised if:
   -   The importer fails to comply with biosecurity requirements (eg open container, allow
       biosecurity officer to inspect goods, take samples, conduct tests, submit goods to
       biosecurity measures): s 26(4);
   -   Biosecurity import clearance is refused and the importer fails to make arrangements for
       reconsignment within a reasonable time: s 27(4);
   -   The article has been abandoned: s 45(2);
   -   The owner opts to have the article destroyed instead of treated: schedule 2, clause 7(5);
   -   The owner fails to have the article treated within a reasonable time: schedule 2, clause
       7(6);
   -   Appropriate treatment is not available in the Pitcairn Islands or there would still be a
       biosecurity risk after treatment or the importer/owner chooses not to have the article
       treated: schedule 2, clause 7(7) & clause 9(1);
   -   Reconsignment of a prohibited good is not effected within a reasonable time or is not
       acceptable: schedule 2, clause 8(5).
There is a requirement that the Chief Biosecurity Officer obtain the written approval of the
Administrator before arranging for the destruction of articles that appear to be of or above the
value of $1,000 (schedule 2, clause 9(5)).
Where articles are destroyed, no compensation is payable unless negligence or malice is
proved: s 21(5), s 26(6), s 29(4), s 46(1), schedule 2, clause 4(5), clause 5(5), clause 6(8), clause
7(9), clause 9(8).
The destruction of articles clearly involves the deprivation of a person’s possessions. Section
21(1) of the Constitution provides that no one shall be deprived of his or her possessions except
in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general
principles of international law.
I am satisfied that destruction of biosecurity risk articles under the conditions set out in the
Ordinance is in the public interest. The no compensation provisions raise an issue as to whether
the deprivation is consistent with general principles of international law.
However, s 21(2) Constitution affirms the right of the Government of Pitcairn to enforce such
laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in accordance with the general interest.
Hence whilst the Ordinance does contemplate some interference with peaceable enjoyment of
possessions and, in some circumstances, the deprivation of possessions, this is necessary to
protect the general interest in preserving the biosecurity of the Pitcairn Islands.
Conclusion
In summary, the Ordinance does contain provisions which interfere with the right to liberty,
the right to privacy and protection of property. However, I am satisfied that it is consistent
with Pitcairn’s Constitution and can be passed.
For completeness, I also note that the powers afforded to biosecurity officers in the Ordinance
are broadly similar to those in the equivalent United Kingdom legislation (refer Part 5 Invasive
Alien Species (Enforcement and Permitting) Order 2019) and New Zealand legislation (refer
Part 6 Biosecurity Act 1993).


Simon Mount KC
Attorney-General
29 January 2024
