     PLANT AND ANIMAL
QUARANTINES AND REQULATIONS




     REPUBLIC OF PALAU




             0
                                  REPUBLIC OF PALAU
                     BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE AND MINERAL RESOURCES

                  NOTICE OF ADOPTION AO FINAL REQULATIONS REGARDING
                             PLANT AND ANIMAL QUARANTINES


Having published on May 4, 1999, a notice of the proposed amendment of the Republic of Palau’s Plant and
Animal Quarantine Regulations in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, 6 PNC & 125, and the
Plant and Animal Control Act, 34 PNC & 2002, the Republic of Palau Division of Agriculture and Mineral
Resources hereby notifies the Republic that it has adopted as final regulations the proposed Plant and Animal
Quarantine Regulations, having received no public comments.


The new Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations will take effect on July 5, 1999.


The complete Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations are available for review at the Division of Agriculture
and Mineral Resources and Bureau of Domestic Affairs.

These Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations are adopted on June 4, 1999.




                                             Herman Francisco, Chief
                                             Division of Agriculture and Mineral Resources




                                               Kuniwo Nakamura
APPROVED :        June        ,1999            President of the Republic of Palau




                                                       1
                            PLANT AND ANIMAL QUARANTINE REGULATIONS

                                          TABLE OF PROVISIONS




PART I – GENERAL PROVISIONS


1.1    Short Title
1.2    Authority
1.3    Effective Date
1.4    Purpose
1.5    Definitions
1.6    Codes of practice

PART II – PLANT AND ANIMAL GERERAL REQUIREMENTS

2.1    Point of entry
2.2    Requirements of the persons entering the Republic of Palau
2.3    Notification of the arrival of regulation materials into the Republic of Palau
2.4    Availability of documents, manifests and conveyance movement information
2.5    Powers of the Chief of Agriculture
2.6    Language of documents and labeling of goods
2.7    Inspection, examination and treatment of any conveyance arriving from overseas
2.8    Disposal of garbage
2.9    Placement into quarantine
2.10   Security of quarantine area
2.11   Removal from quarantine
2.12   Samples and testing
2.13   Release of plants material, animal products of goods
2.14   Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Permits
2.15   Goods ordered back into quarantine
2.16   Seizure and destruction
2.17   Disposal of regulated material carrying or suspected to be carting a pest
2.18   Quarantine forms and Documents
2.19   Official importations by Government
2.20   Approved places for quarantine to be performed
2.21   Quarantine Seal
2.22   Official stamp(s)
2.23   Quarantine screening of live plants and live animals
2.24   Treatment
2.25   Transport, storage, unpacking, treatment-Importer’s expense
2.26   In-transit movement of regulated material and goods
2.27   Declaration of national quarantine emergency
2.28   Emergency measure for the eradication/control of a quarantine pest
2.29   Expenses, fees and charges for importers and exporters
2.30   Exclusion of liability




                                                     2
PART III - APPOINTMENT & POWERS OF INSPCTORS

3.1   Appointments
3.2   Search and examine
3.3   Access to documents
3.4   Power to open shipment


PART IV – PLANT QURANTINES

4.1   General Plant Quarantines

      QP 1 For the entry of fresh fruit and vegetables
      QP 2 Entry of live plants or parts thereof (other than seeds or tissue culture) for propagation
      QP 3 Importation of seed
      QP 4 Cut flowers and foliage
      QP 5 Timber
      QP 6 Grass, bamboo, cane, palm fronds and goods manufactures from such materials
      QP 7 Soil, sand and gravel, ect.
      QP 8 Stored dried food products
      QP 9 Packing material, dunnage and second- hand bags
      QP 10 Handicrafts made from plant material
      QP 11 Bacteria, viruses, vaccines cultures and organisms

PART V - SPECIFIC PLANT PROHIBITIONS

5.1   Specific Plant Quarantine; prohibitions


PART VI – MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR LIVE ANIMAL IMPORTATION

6.1   Minimum conditions to be applied to live animal imports
6.2   Bonding of animals (ship’s pets)

PART VII – ANIMAL QUARNTINES

7.1   General Animal Quarantines

      QA 1    Importation of dogs
      QA 2    Importation of cats
      QA 3    Importation of cattle
      QA 4    Importation of small ruminants (sheep and goats)
      QA 5    Importation of domestic horses, mules and donkeys
      QA 6    Importation of domestic pigs
      QA 7    Importation of birds
      QA 8    Importation of day old chicks
      QA 9    Importation of hatching egg
      QA 10   Importation of domestic rodents and rabbits
      QA 11   Importation of embryos/ova of domestic ruminants and pigs
      QA 12   Importation of semen of domestic ruminants
      QA 13   Importation of semen of pigs

                                                       3
 QA14 Importation of non- commercial consignments of food product of animal imported as accompanied
      passengers’ baggage for personal use
 QA15 Importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from domestic ruminants
 QA16 Importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from pigs
 QA17 Importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from poultry
 QA18 Importation of eggs and egg products fro consumption and processing
 QA19 Importation of milk and milk products
 QA20 Importation of honey bees and apiary equipment
 QA21 Importation of all other animal products and other related articles


PART VIII – SPECIFIC ANIMAL PROHIBITIONS

8.1   Animal Quarantine- Specific animal prohibitions
8.2   Importation for special purposes
8.3   Movement of Monkeys within the Republic


PART X – EXPORT REQUIREMENTS

9.1   Power to examine and certify export consignments of plants and plants products
9.2   Phoytosanitary certificates and other documentation relating to plants and plant products
9.3   Examination of exports – animal and animal products
9.4   Re- export of plants and plant materials, animals and animal products


PART X – PENALTIES

10.1 Penalties


PART I.        GENERAL PROVISIONS

1.1   Short Title


These regulations may be cited as the Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations.

1.2   Authority and Repealer

In accordance with the authority conferred by the Palau National Code, Title 34, section 2002, the Chief of the
Agriculture and Mineral Resources has adopted these Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations. All Plant and
Animal Quarantine Controls and Regulations previously promulgated are superseded and hereby repealed.

1.3   Effective Date

The Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulation shall take effect thirty (30) days after approval by the President of
the Republic of Palau, in accordance with Palau National Code, Title 6, Section 127.



                                                        4
1.4    Purpose

The purpose of the Plant and Animal Quarantine Regulations is to protect the agricultural activities and general
well-being of the people of the Republic of Palau. These regulations are promulgated as a method of preventing
the introduction and further spread of injurious insects, pests, and diseases into and within the Republic of
Palau, to provide procedures and conditions to ensure the safe movement of plants and animals and plant and
animal products into and out of the Republic of Palau; and to fulfill international obligations to prevent the
movement of pests in international trade and traffic.

1.5   Definitions

Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of the provisions of these regulations:

       (a) “Abattoir” means premises approved by the veterinary administration of the exporting country and
           conforming with internationally accepted standards.
       (b) “Agent” includes any person performing functions on behalf of or instead of an owner or importer in
           relation to an import, or an exporter in relation to the export, of a live plant, plant material, live
           animal, animal product or goods which include plant or animal product in their composition.
       (c) “Agricultural Quarantine Facility” means a certified government facility, equipped and specifically
           designed and set aside for holding or for growing imported plants or plant materials or for holding
           imported animals.
       (d) “AI Center” means an artificial insemination facility for the production of semen approved by the
           veterinary administration of the exporting country and used exclusively for donor animals and
           conforming with internationally accepted standards.

       (e) “Animal” means any living stage of the animal kingdom except human beings: and, in the case of
           any mammal, bird, insect, fish, crustacean or reptile, includes the egg, larva, semen or the carcass
           thereof.

       (f) “Animal Product” means any part of an animal (including the flesh, wool, hair, skin, hide, bones,
           horns, hooves, feathers, and other parts of the carcass), and any product that is wholly, or partly
           derived from an animal or any part of an animal, being part of any animal or a product that has not
           been treated or sterilized to the stage where it is rendered free from any disease and from carrying
           any disease.

       (g) “Approved establishment” means an establishment approved by the administration of the exporting
           country which operates under government supervision and conforms with internationally accepted
           standards for the slaughter and processing of animals.
       (h) “Approved Place for the Performance of Quarantine” means a place other than an agricultural
           quarantine facility where the quarantine of plants, animals or goods may take place.
       (i) “Approved treatment” means any treatment approved by the Chief of Agriculture.

       (j) “As Prescribed” means any procedure or treatment specified by the Chief of Agriculture or
           incorporated in a manual or official treatment schedule.

       (k) “Authorized Official” means the Chief of Agriculture, Inspectors, or any other person designated by
           the Chief of Agriculture.



                                                       5
(l) “Certificate of origin” means a certificate issued by an official of the exporting country, certifying
    that the plants, plant material, animals, and animal products or other goods have been produced and
    processed in the exporting country and may include where applicable, in the absence of an official
    veterinarian of the exporting country, particulars of the measures taken to prevent the spread of
    disease.

(m) “Chief of Agriculture” means the Chief of the Divisions of Agriculture and Mineral resources.

(n) “Contaminate” means infestation or infection by plant or animal pests or having in association with
    it animals, animal products, unauthorized plant material or soil adhering to or in company with the
    goods.

(o) “Contraband Goods” means any goods imported into or transported within the Republic of Palau by
    any person in contravention of these regulations.

(p) “Conveyance” means any carrier such as a vessel, aircraft, lighter, barge, truck, van, vehicle, and
    transport or shipping container.

(q) “Cutting up establishment” means a slaughterhouse, export cutting plant, export cold store,
    butchery, cannery, or poultry plant where meat is cut into smaller cuts half carcases, cut into three
    wholesale cuts, prepare for retail sale or totally deboned.

(r) “Culture” means any plant or animal tissue, or any planting material or parts thereof on nutrient
    media.

(s)    “Declaration” refers to a written or oral statement certifying as to plants, plant material, animals,
      and animal products or other prohibited or restricted goods under these regulations which
      accompanied a person on their arrivals from overseas or arrived as their cargo.

(t) “Disease in relation to animals,” means any disease, parasite or pest affecting animals that is
    included on the OIE List A or List B or is declared by the President or his designee to be a disease,
    parasite or pest of socio-economic or public health importance or which is significant in the
    international trade of animals or animal products. For the purpose of these regulations, goods of
    animal origin shall deemed to be diseased if they are in a deteriorated or abnormal condition,
    whether or not that condition is dependent on the presence of, or is due to the operation,
    development, growth or effect of a disease.

(u)     “Disease in relation to plants,” means any disease, pest affecting plants, or a noxious plant that is
      included on the OIE List A or List B or is declared by the President or his designee to be a disease,
      pest or plant of socio-economic or public health importance or which is significant in the
      international trade of plants or plant materials. For the purposes of these regulations, goods of plant
      origin shall be deemed to be diseased if they are in a deteriorated or abnormal condition, whether or
      not that condition is dependent on the presence of, or is due to the operation, development, growth
      or effect of a disease.

(v) “Domestic ruminants” means cattle, buffalo, goats and sheep.

(w) “Dunnage” means any timber used in the stowage of goods in conveyances such as vessels or cargo
    containers.


                                                  6
 (x)    “Examination” includes inspections and shall include the inspection of any document, the taking of
       any sample, the conducts of any test or other procedure used to determine the conformity or
       otherwise with the conditions under which an importation of plants, plant materials, animal or
       animal material or other regulated goods has been approved.

 (y) “Export” means to take a thing or cause it to be sent out of the country by any means of
 conveyance.

 (z) “Export Inspection” means the inspection or examination of agricultural produce and animals,
 conveyance, vessels, aircraft or goods, for the purpose of ensuring that the goods comply with the
 country of destination sanitary and or phytosanitary quarantine requirements.

 (aa) “Fish” means any aquatic animal, whether piscine or not, and includes any mollusk, crustacean,
 coral, sponge, holothurian (beche-de-mer), and reptile and their young and eggs.

 (bb)“Free zone” means a clearly defined territory within a country in which no case of a specified
 disease has been reported during a defined period for such disease, and within which and at the borders
 of which official veterinary control is effectively applied for animals and animal products, and their
 transportation.

 (cc)“Fruit and Vegetables” means the edible portion of any plant, whether attached to the plant or not,
 and includes any peel, skin, shell or seed, whether edible or not, including vegetables, in the raw or
 unprocessed state.

 (dd)“Garbage” means mixed refuse waste material derived in whole or in part from plants, fruits,
 vegetables, meats or other plant or animal material, or other refuse of any character whatsoever that has
 been associated with any fruits, vegetables, meats or other plant or animal material and includes vessel
 or aircraft galley scraps.

 (ee)“Goods” means any movable property and includes plants and plant material, animals and animal
 products.

  (ff)   “Handicrafts” shall include native artifacts, decorative goods or adornments made from or
containing plant material, including but not limited to, seeds, vines, leaves, wood, grass, gum, dried
flowers; animal materials, including but not limited to, untreated feathers, skin, hair, fur, wool, dried
flesh, teeth, bones; sea shells and other items such as the external shells of animals, coral and like
materials.

 (gg)“Import” means to bring a thing or cause it to be brought into the Republic of Palau from any place
 outside of the Republic of Palau, or moved within the Republic of Palau by any conveyance.

 (hh)“Infected” means a condition caused by a plant or animal disease pathogen.

 (ii)“Infested” means the presence of plant or animal pests other than a plant or animal disease pathogen.

 (jj)“Inspection” means the examination of plants or plant material, animals or animal products, goods or
other regulated material for the purpose of determining conformity with these regulations and any other
Republic of Palau entry requirements. Inspection shall include the examination of any conveyance,
container or packaging of any kind on which or in which such goods have been carried or stored or on or
in which it is intended to carry or store such goods and any place where such goods, conveyance or
packaging have been or are being held prior to clearance by an Inspector.
                                                 7
(kk)“Inspector” means an Inspector appointed by the President to enforce the provisions of the Plant and
Animal Quarantine Regulations, quarantine and controls. Inspector also includes temporary inspectors
appointed by the President.


(ll)   “Intermediate Quarantine” in the case of plants, means the growing of plants intended for
consignment to the Republic of Palau in a place approved by the Chief of Agriculture, where the plants
are screened for plant pests, including disease, and certified by the plant health authority to the effect
that the plants have been grown in the approved place and as far as can be determined are free of plant
pests. In the case of animals, intermediate quarantine means the performance of prescribed quarantine
conditions by animals or animal product intended for import into the Republic of Palau in a placed
approved for the purpose by the Chief of Agriculture.

(mm) International Animal Health Certificate” means a certificate issued by an official veterinarian of
the exporting country, certifying the state of good health of the animal, and giving particulars where
applicable of any tests to which the animal has been subject, the vaccinations carried out on the animal
which is the subject of the certificate and giving particulars of the measures taken to prevent the spread
of disease.

(nn) “International Health Certificate” means a certificate issued be an official veterinarian of the
exporting country, certifying the wholesomeness of animal products, and giving particulars where
applicable of the measures taken to prevent the spread of disease.

(oo)       “In Transit” means the importation into the Republic of Palau, the storage, transfer or movement
       within the Republic of Palau of plants, plant material, animals or animal products, goods or
       regulated material which are not intended for importation into Republic of Palau and which are
       intended to be on forwarded to a destination outside of the Republic of Palau, irrespective of the
       duration of the temporary stay in the Republic of Palau.

(pp)“Land” includes any surface area, building, wharf or port facility.

(qq) “Noxious weed” means any plant declared by the Chief of Agriculture to be a noxious weed.
(rr) “O.I.E” means the Office International des Epizooties.

(ss) “OIE List A disease” means a list of transmissible diseases, identified from time to time by the OIE,
which have the potential for very serous and rapid spread irrespective of national borders, which are of
serious socio-economic or public health consequence and which are of major importance in the
international trade of animals and animal products.

(tt) “OIE List B disease” means a list of transmissible diseases, identified from time to time by the OIE,
which are considered to be of socio-economic and/or public health importance within countries and
which are significant in the international trade of animals and animal products.

(uu) “Official Veterinarian” means a civil service veterinarian or a veterinarian appointed or authorized
by the veterinary administration of the exporting country.

(vv) “Owner” means the person responsible for plants, plant materials, animal, animal products or any
goods, or regulated material, and may include the owner, owner’s agent, the person to whom the goods
are consigned or by whom they are being exported or the person in charge of any conveyance in which
plants, plant material, goods are being carried or have been carried into the Republic of Palau.
                                                  8
(ww) “Person” means both singular and plural and shall include individuals, corporations, companies,
association, societies, partnerships, governments, and natural persons.

(xx) “Part of the territory of a country” means a geographical or administrative entity possessing an
authorized administrative veterinary organization capable of taking and controlling the appropriate
measures.

(yy) “Phytosanitary Certificate” means and official certificate issued by a plant protection authority,
substantially in the format of the current Model Certificate of the International Plant Protection
Convention.

(zz) “Plant” includes a dead plant and any part of a plant.

(aaa) “Plant and Animal Quarantine Permit” means a written authorization for the purpose of
facilitating the movement of any plants, plant materials, animals,-animal products or goods as
designated in these regulations as requiring a permit for such movement and where such plants, plant
materials, animals, animal products or other regulated goods are intended for importation from overseas
issued by the Chief of Agriculture.

(bbb) “Plant Material” means all goods of plant origin and shall include but not bi limited to, timber,
wooden articles, and other items manufactured or not, wholly or in part from material of plant origin.

(ccc) “Plant Pest” means and organism of animal or plant origin that can directly or indirectly cause
injury or damage to plants and includes any living stage of insect, mite, nematode, snail slug or other
invertebrate animal, bacteria, fungi, virus or similar organism not known to occur in any part of the
Republic of Palau.

(ddd) “Point Of Entry” means the designated, official seaport, airport or post office in the Republic of
Palau through which any conveyance or goods must first enter the Republic of Palau.

(eee) “Poultry” means any fowl, duck, geese, turkey, pigeon, pheasant, quail, guinea fowl, and other
avian species normally consumed by man and the viable egg of the same.

(fff)      “Quarantine” means a restriction or other control method imposed upon the production
movement or existence of plants, plant material, animal products or any other goods; or measures which
are put in place to prevent, or limit the introduction or spread of a quarantine pest.

(ggg) “Quarantine Area” means any land which has been declared by the Chief of Agriculture to be a
quarantine area on account of the presence or suspected presence of a quarantine pest or in or on which
measures are to be taken to prevent the entry to, exit from or spread of a quarantine pest.


(hhh) “Quarantine Pest” means a pest of potential national economic importance to the endangered
country and is not yet present there or is present but not widely distributed and being actively controlled.

(iii) “Quarantine Station” includes a temporary quarantine station, a quarantine check point, a pre-
entry or post-entry quarantine station, a place approved by the Chief of Agriculture for intermediate
quarantine and all facilities and services related to a quarantine station or check point.


                                                 9
       (jjj) “Regulated Material” means garbage, soil, pest and other materials, substances and goods,
       including but not specific to, plant or plant material, animals or animal products, the importation or
       movement of which is controlled under these regulations.

       (kkk)“Re-ship or Re-export” in relation to any imported plant, plant material, animal or animal product,
       or regulated material, means to remove or to take a thing or cause it to be sent out of the Republic of
       Palau by any conveyance.

       (lll) “Soil” means the loose surface material of the earth in which plants grow and which may serve to
       harbor plant pests, in most cases consisting of disintegrated rock with an admixture of organic material
       and soluble salts including among other things gravel, rock aggregate, compost, clay, sand and silt.

       (mmm) “Timber” includes logs, poles, dunnage, branch wood, firewood and all wood, which has been
       split, hewn, sawn or dressed or otherwise manufactured and includes furniture partly or wholly
       manufactured with timber, pre-fabricated building units, shakes, shingles, wooden cases or boxes and
       the like.


       (nnn)“Tissue Culture” means plants in a clear aseptic medium in a sealed, transparent container.

       (ooo)“Treatment” means the use of remedial measures to ensure the removal of injurious or
       objectionable materials, or the elimination, sterilization or destruction of any plant or animal pest or
       contamination including among other measures the fumigation, cleaning, incineration, disinfections,
       disinfestations of plants, plant material or other goods or regulated materials and in the case of animals,
       treatment means the use of remedial measures to ensure the removal of dipping or spraying or any other
       practice carried out for the removal of such pest or contamination including destruction and disposal of
       affected animals or animal product.

       (ppp)“Veterinarian” means a qualified veterinarian resident in the Republic of Palau and approved by
       the Chief of Agriculture for the purposes of these regulations.

1.6 Codes of practice

Except in so far as the following are contrary to the provisions of these Regulations, they shall be adopted as
codes of practice and their provisions shall generally be applied in the Republic of Palau:

       (a)     The International Animal Health Code of the Office International des Epizooties;

       (b)     The Manual of the International Embryo Transfer Society;

       (c)     The International Air Transport Association Live Animal Regulations.

PART II.       PLANT AND ANIMAL GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

2.1    Points of entry

No plant, plant material, animal, animal product or other regulated material may be imported into the Republic
of Palau except through a designated official point of entry. The following are designated official points of
entry:

       (a)     Airports:      Palau International Airport (Airai Airstrip)
                                                        10
       (b)     Seaports:         Malakal Commercial Port

       (c)     Post Office:      Koror

2.2    Requirements of all persons entering the Republic of Palau

       (a) Every person, on entering the Republic of Palau, shall be required to make a written or oral
           declaration with respect to plants, plant material, animals, animal products, soil, cultures or any
           other thing that is the subject of these regulations.

       (b) No person may introduce into the Republic of Palau any plant, plant material, animal, animal
           product, or any other thing that is the subject of these regulations unless the provisions of these
           regulations have been duly complied with in respect of such plants, plant material, animal, animal
           product, or other regulated material.

       (c) No person shall make any false declaration or give false certification.

2.3    Notification of the arrival of regulated materials into the Republic of Palau

It is the duty of the importer, agent, Customs officials, Port Manager, Postmaster and/or Airport Manager to
notify the Chief of Agriculture or his delegate of the intended arrival of regulated material under these
regulations and provide such information as the Chief of Agriculture may require.

2.4    Availability of documents, manifests and conveyance movement information

The master or agent of any conveyance entering or moving within the Republic of Palau shall on the request of
an Inspector provide cargo manifests, ship’s logs, crew lists and such other documents as are considered
necessary to determine the quarantine status of such conveyance.



2.5    Powers of the Chief of Agriculture

In addition to any powers granted under these Regulations, the Chief of Agriculture

       (a) may delegate in writing specific powers designated in these Regulations to authorized officials and
           these delegations will remain effective until revoked in writing. The Chief of Agriculture may not
           delegate his power of delegation;

       (b) shall determine appropriate conditions for the entry of plants, plant products, animals,
           animal products and goods so as to prevent the introduction of plant and animal diseases and
           quarantine pests into the Republic of Palau as far as is reasonably practicable and desirable for the
           benefits of public, plant and animal health, and animal production generally and to preserve the flora
           and fauna.

2.6    Language of documents and labeling of goods

       (a) All documents and certificates accompanying imports made under these regulations             shall be
           presented in the English language.


                                                              11
      (b) No goods may be imported into the Republic of Palau under these regulations unless evidence of
          origin and contents is presented in the English language.

      (c) No person shall import or offer for entry any plant, plant material, animal product or other regulated
          material unless the case, box, package, crate, container is plainly and correctly marked to indicate
          the country of origin, name and address of shipper and name and address of consignee.

2.7   Inspection, examination and treatment of any conveyance arriving from overseas

      (a) Immediately upon the arrival of any conveyance from any overseas country the conveyance, together
          with its cargo, baggage, garbage and provisions may be inspected, examined and ordered for
          treatment by an Inspector for the purpose of enforcing these regulations, and no person shall enter
          the conveyance or remove any baggage or cargo from the conveyance without the authority of the
          Inspector until such inspection, examination or treatment is completed.

      (b) Inspection, examination and treatment of a conveyance may include:

              (i) inspection of the conveyance, its cargo and stores as well as treatment if necessary at the
              expense of the owner or agent of the conveyance;

              (ii) spraying or fumigation of every compartment of the conveyance;

              (iii)inspection of a document certifying that a treatment has been carried out or is
              purported to have been carried out in relation to the conveyance for the control of pests in any
              conveyance; and

              (iv) any other inspection or examination deemed by an Inspector to be necessary to prevent the
              introduction or spread of pests into or within the Republic of Palau.

      (c) In the case of a conveyance entering an unofficial port of entry, all costs associated with the
          quarantine inspection are to be met by the owner or agent of the conveyance.

2.8   Disposal of Garbage

      (a) It is prohibited to land any garbage in the Republic of Palau from any conveyance without the
      express authorization of an Inspector.

      (b) All garbage arriving on board conveyances, including vessels and aircraft must be retained on the
      conveyance in leakproof, covered containers and in the case of sea vessels, kept inside the vessel’s
      railing.

      (c) Garbage must not be dumped at sea within the area which extends a distance to twelve (12) miles
      beyond the outer reef or atoll of any island within the Republic of Palau.

      (d) All costs associated with the supervision, treatment or destruction of garbage shall be at the expense
      of the importer.




                                                         12
2.9    Placement into Quarantine

Where an Inspector is not satisfied that the imported plants, plant material, animals, animal products and/or
goods are free of disease or quarantine pests, which in his opinion constitute a risk to the Republic of Palau, he
shall advise, where appropriate, the importer or his agent, the Chief of Customs, the Port Manager and/or the
Postmaster that the plants, plant material, animals, animal products and/or regulated goods are to be held under
quarantine and not released to the importer or his agent until such time as an Inspector or authorized officer is
satisfied that the disease or quarantine pest has been eliminated.


2.10   Security of quarantine area

       (a) No person shall enter a quarantine area or quarantine station without the permission of the Inspector
       in charge.

       (b) No person shall damage, interfere with or in any way reduce the effectiveness of any measures taken
       to secure a quarantine area or quarantine station, or of any plants, plant material, animals, animal
       products and related articles therein.

       (c) An Inspector may lock, seal or otherwise prevent the entry to and exit from any quarantine area or
       quarantine station, regardless of the ownership of such quarantine area or quarantine station.

2.11   Removal from quarantine

       (a) No plants, plant material, animals or animal products or other regulated goods may be removed from
       any quarantine area, quarantine station or other place where quarantine detention or treatment is or has
       been performed without written permission from an Inspector.

       (b) No person shall remove any plant, plant material, animal, animal products or other regulated material
       in contravention of these regulations or take from the control of an Inspector any plant, plant material,
       animal, animal products or other regulated material.


2.12   Samples and testing

An Inspector or authorized official may take any sample, make any test, fumigate, disinfect, or in any way treat
any plants, animals, or goods subject to quarantine and any conveyances carrying the same at any time that such
plants, animals or goods are subject to quarantine control or may order that such action is taken, and shall give
written notification of such action to the owner or agent.


2.13   Release of plants, plant material, animals, animal products or goods

Provided all requirements of these regulations for the import and clearance of plants, plant materials, animals,
animal products or goods have been met and subsequent to satisfactory conclusion of a treatment, an Inspector
shall advise the importer or his agent, the Chief of Customs, the Port Manager and/or Postmaster, as the case
may be, that such imported plants, plant materials, animal, animal products or goods may be released to the
importer or the owner.




                                                            13
2.14   Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Permits

       (a) It shall be unlawful to import into the Republic of Palau any plants, plant material, animals, animal
       products or other regulated material except in conformity with the conditions of a permit issued for such
       movement.

       (b) Applications for Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Permits shall provide specific information
       including:

              (i) Full name, residential and postal address of the importer;

              (ii) Name and address of the exporter of the goods;

              (iii)The origin of the goods;

              (iv) The quantity, the common and scientific name (where applicable) of the goods proposed to
              be imported;

              (v) The mode of transport, point of entry, and the approximate date of arrival; and

              (vi) Such other information as the Chief of Agriculture may from time to time specify.



       (c) Applications for Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Permits shall be made prior to importation.

       (d) In the granting of any Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Permit the Chief of Agriculture may
       specify such conditions as he considers necessary to take into account the risks of importing plant
       disease, animal disease and quarantine pests.

       (e) Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Permits may be issued for single or multiple importations and
       the alternative shall be indicated on the permit.


       (f) The Chief of Agriculture may grant or authorize the granting of general import permits valid for
       unlimited importations of a specified commodity by unspecified importers where it is in his opinion
       expedient so to do, providing at all times that such permits do not result in an increased quarantine risk.

       (g) The following items may be imported without a permit:

               (i) fully manufactured foods, hermetically sealed and not requiring refrigeration for permanent
               storage, but excluding foods derived from animals and preserved only by drying;

               (ii) fully manufactured personal clothing and footwear;

               (iii) fully tanned or processed leather, feather, fleece and hair goods except used saddlery,
               harnesses and other equipment used with animals;

       (h) Where the animal or plant disease or pest status of the exporting country has changed or has been
       reported to have changed since the issue of a Plant and Animal Quarantine Entry Permit or if any other
       condition prevails whereby the entry of the plants, plant material, animal, animal products or other
                                                        14
       regulated goods would constitute a quarantine risk, such permits may be cancelled at any time without
       notice, whether or not the importer has a pre-existing contractual obligation to import.

2.15   Goods ordered back into quarantine

       (a) An Inspector may examine any imported plant, plant material, animal, animal products, goods or
       regulated material that has been from quarantine.

       (b) Where, after examination of any imported plant, plant material, animals, animal products, goods or
       regulated material that has been released from quarantine, the Inspector is of the opinion that there is a
       danger of spreading pests and/or diseases, the Inspector may order such plant, plant material, animal,
       animal product, goods or regulated material back into quarantine for tests or treatment as prescribed, and
       the owner shall be responsible for all costs.


2.16   Seizure and Destruction

       (a) Any plants, plant material, animals, animal products, or other regulated material introduced or
       attempted to be introduced into the Republic of Palau without a permit may be seized by an Inspector
       and destroyed by order of the Inspector provided the declared value of such goods does not exceed two
       hundred dollars. Where the value of such goods exceeds two hundred dollars the goods may be
       destroyed by order of the Chief of Agriculture, and such destruction shall be at the owner’s expense.

       (b) Before destruction of any plants, plant material, animals, animal products, or other regulated
       material seized or ordered to be destroyed is carried out, the Chief of Agriculture shall ensure that
       evidence of any violation of law or of these regulations is preserved.


2.17   Disposal of regulated material carrying or suspected to be carrying a pest

       (a) Any plant, plant material, animal, animal product or goods imported in accordance with these
       regulations which on examination or re-examination by an Inspector is shown to be or is suspected to be
       carrying a pest which in his opinion cannot be effectively treated shall:

              (i) in the case of an animal infected or believed to be infected with an OIE List A disease or other
              disease not present at that time in the Republic of Palau be ordered by an Inspector to be
              destroyed immediately; and

              (ii) in all other cases the importer or owner shall be ordered by an Inspector to re-export or
              destroy the plants, plant material, animal, animal product or other regulated goods within a
              specified period, and in default of such order, such plants, plant material, animal product or other
              regulated goods shall be destroyed at the importer’s expense.

       (b) Where the importer or owner of goods which have been ordered for destruction in accordance with
       subsection (a) fails to take action to destroy the goods within the prescribed time, and Inspector may
       arrange for such goods to be destroyed, and the Republic may recover the costs of such destruction
       through an action in the Trial Division of the Supreme Court.

       (c) The importer or owner of goods which have been ordered for destruction in accordance with
       subsection (a) shall have no claim, cause, of action, or other legal proceeding of any nature against the
       Republic or any of its officers in respect of such destruction.
                                                            15
2.18   Quarantine forms and documents

       (a) The Chief of Agriculture may introduce forms at any time to facilitate the safe import into the
       Republic of Palau and export from the Republic of Palau of plants, plant material, animals, animal
       products and goods.

       (c) The Chief of Agriculture may impose fees for the issuance of any forms.


2.19   Official importation by Government

        (a) Official importation of plants, plant material, animals, animal products or goods by the Government
       of the Republic of Palau are exempt from the prohibition hereafter in these regulation. Such
       importations shall be made subject to the conditions set out in a permit issued by the Chief of
       Agriculture.

       (b) Official importations of organisms of plant or animal origin, including any living stage of insect,
       mite, nematode, snail, slug, or other invertebrate animal, bacteria, fungi, virus or other organism or plant
       or animal may be imported under permit issued by the Chief of Agriculture.



2.20   Approved places for quarantine to be performed

       (a) The Chief of Agriculture may, in writing, approved a place other than a quarantine station as a place
       where the quarantine of any plant, plant material, animal product or other regulated material may take
       place and any quarantine action as an Inspector may direct may be undertaken at such approved place.

       (b) Application for registration of a place as an approved place for the performance of
       quarantine shall be made in writing on the approved form and submitted to the Chief of Agriculture.

       (c) The Chief of Agriculture may apply such conditions or require such facilities as he deems necessary
       for the proper performance of quarantine related activities and when satisfied that such condition have
       been met and that such required facilities are available, he shall approved such place as a place for the
       performance of quarantine subject to such conditions or restriction as he deems necessary.


       (d) On payment of the prescribed fee the owner or operator of a place which has been
       approved for the performance of quarantine shall be issued with a certificate of registration.

       (e) A certificate of registration of an approved place for the performance of quarantine shall remain
       current for a period of one year from the date of registration unless previously cancelled by the Chief of
       Agriculture or there is a change in the ownership of such approved place or such approved place ceases
       to operate.

2.21   Quarantine Seal

       (a) At any time after the arrival of a conveyance or goods in the Republic of Palau an
       Inspector may place a quarantine seal on any container or package of imported goods or on any cabin or
       locker in any conveyance from outside of the Republic of Palau, either for subsequent quarantine

                                                        16
       inspection, or for the holding of goods under quarantine while the conveyance remains in the territorial
       waters of the Republic of Palau.

       (b) An inspector may place a quarantine seal or lock in any container or package of imported goods
       which has been discharge from any conveyance arriving from outside of the Republic of Palau, either
       for subsequent quarantine inspection, treatment or detention prior to release or re-export of goods as the
       case may be.

       (c) No person may interfere with or remove a quarantine seal or lock without the permission of an
       inspector.


2.22   Official Stamp(s)

       (a) The official quarantine stamps shall be used in conjunction with the signature of an authorized
           officer to authenticate documents issued under these regulations.

       (b) No person, other than an authorized official, may use an official quarantine stamp for any purpose.

2.23   Quarantine screening of live plants and live animals

       (a) The Chief of Agriculture may prescribed, as a condition of importation into the Republic of Palau, a
           period of quarantine at an approved quarantine station or quarantine area where live plants or live
           animal are to be detained and undergo any inspection or examination or treatment as prescribed.
           Animals or plants detained in such quarantine shall be release when an Inspector is satisfied that the
           plants or animal is free from pest and disease.
       (b) The Chief of Agriculture may prescribe, as a condition of entry into the Republic of Palau, the
           completion of specified period of quarantine at an approved quarantine facility located outside of the
           Republic of Palau, where plants or animals are screened for prescribed pests and diseases, prior to
           entry into the Republic of Palau.


2.24   Treatment

       Where imported plants, plant material, animals, animal products, regulated material or goods have been
       detained in quarantine on the evidence of infestation of a pest, or suspected infection or infestation of a
       pest, an Inspector may order a treatment as prescribed to be carried out at the import’s expense.



2.25   Transport, storage, unpacking, treatment, growth in quarantine: Importer’s expense

       (a)Prior to the release from quarantine detention of any imported plants, plant material, animal, animal
       product and/or goods, the importer or owner shall pay the prescribed fees including the cost of transport,
       examination, unpacking, security, storage, treatment, cleaning, sorting, and in the case of live plants,
       growth and care in post-entry quarantine, and in the case of live animals in post-entry quarantine, care
       and feeding of such animals.

       (b)Upon notification by an Inspector of the release from quarantine detention of imported plants, plant
       material, animal product and/or goods, such imported plants, plant material, animals, animal product
       and/or goods must be removed from the place of detention within five working days, and if they are not
       so removed, the importer or owner shall be required to pay prescribed fees for each additional day or
                                                      17
       part thereof during which the imported plants, plant material, animals, animal product and/or goods
       remain at the place of quarantine.

       (c)Notwithstanding the provisions of (b) the owner or importer of any live animal which has been
       released from post-entry quarantine but which has not been removed immediately following release
       shall be responsible for meeting the cost of all food provided to such animal/s until they are removed
       from quarantine.

2.26   In-transit movement of regulated material and goods

Any plants, plant material, animals, animal products, or goods in transit through the Republic of Palau to
another country may be subject to quarantine safeguard measures and permission to transit shall be required.


2.27   Declaration of national quarantine emergency

The President, on the advice of the Chief of Agriculture, may declare a state of national quarantine emergency
for the eradication or control of a quarantine pest of economic, public health or environmental importance.

2.28   Emergency measures for the eradication/control of a quarantine pest

       (a) During a declared state of national quarantine emergency the Chief of Agriculture may take such
       actions as are deemed necessary to control or eradicate a pest or disease affecting plants, animals or
       goods, and such measures may include but not be limited to:

               (i)Declaring specific pests including noxious weeds to be quarantine pest;

               (ii)Defining a geographic area within the Republic of Palau as a quarantine area;

               (iii)Controlling the movement of persons, plants, animals, conveyances or goods into or out of a
               quarantine area;

               (iv)Notifying the owner or occupier of the land, in writing, of the measures to be taken to
               eradicate or control any quarantine pest; and

               (v)Undertaking or arranging to undertake measures to eradicate or control any quarantine pest if
               the owner or occupier of land on which the quarantine pest occurs, or is believed to occur,
               cannot be contacted.


               (vi)Where it is deemed necessary for an Inspector to carry out control measures or destruction or
               to arrange to carry out control measures or destruction of plants, plant material, animals or
               animal material in the absence of the owner the cost of such control measures or destruction
               may be recovered through an action brought by the Republic in the Trial Division of the
               Supreme Court.


       (b) Any emergency quarantine measures taken by the Chief of Agriculture must either be incorporated
           into regulation or rescinded as soon as practicable after issuance, but in no case more than thirty(30)
           days after the emergency quarantine measures are taken.


                                                             18
2.29   Expenses, fees and charges for importers and exporters

       (a) All costs and expenses of, and attendant upon, any importation or exportation including any
           documentation, tests, inspection, treatment, detention in quarantine, destruction or re-export, or of
           any other procedure or action taken or brought about under the provision of these regulations shall
           be borne by the importer or exporter as the case may be and no compensation shall be payable by the
           Government of the Republic of Palau for any loss or reduction in value caused by such action.

       (c) If any plants, plant material, animal, animal products or goods are required by these Regulations to
           be permitted, inspected, examined, treated, destroyed or held in quarantine, the importer or
           consignee in the case of imports and, in the case of Part IX of these Regulations the exporter, shall
           pay the appropriate fee as determined by the Chief of Agriculture.

2.30   Exclusion of liability

Neither the Division of Agriculture and Mineral Resources not the Chief of Agriculture, Authorized Officers or
Inspectors shall be liable for any loss or damage resulting from the exercise of their authority under these
regulation unless the loss or damage was caused otherwise than in the reasonable exercise of their authority.


PART III. APPOINTMENT & POWERS OF INSPECTORS

3.1    Appointments

The President may appoint such inspectors or temporary inspector as may be necessary for the purposes of these
Regulation.

3.2    Search and examine

       (a)An inspector may enter any conveyance, land or building, other than a dwelling house, to search for
       and examine plants, plant materials, animals, animal product or any other goods the subject of these
       regulations which he reasonably believes may be infested with a quarantine pest or disease or is likely to
       have come into contact with a quarantine pest or disease.

       (b)An Inspector may only enter a dwelling house for the purpose of conducting an inspection where he
       has the expressed permission of the owner or under the authority of a search warrant issued for such
       inspection by the Trial Division of the Supreme Court.

       (c)When requested to do so, an Inspector shall present written evidence of his appointment as an
       Inspector.

3.3    Access to documents

An Inspector may examine log, manifest, cargo stowage plan , passenger list, crew list or other necessary
document in carrying out his functions under the these regulation.

3.4    Power to open shipment

An Inspector may require the importer or the agent to open any mail, box, case, receptacle, space, or container,
and if the importer or agent fails to do so, the Inspector may arrange for the opening of such mail, box, case,
receptacle, space, or container at the importer’s expense.
                                                           19
PART IV. PLANT QUARANTINE

4.1    General Plant Quarantine

The following prohibitions and restrictions apply to each particular plant material listed below:

QP 1   For the entry for fresh fruits and vegetables

       (a)The entry of fresh fruit and vegetables into the Republic of Palau is prohibited      except under
       permit issued by the Chief of Agriculture prior to the importation.

       (b)All importations of fresh fruits and vegetables from a place outside the Republic of Palau shall be
       accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate issued by the exporting country.


       (c)All fresh fruits and vegetables must be imported in new, clean packages which must state the country
       of origin and a description of the produce.

       (d)The entry of fruit fly susceptible species of fruits and vegetable is prohibited from all countries where
       fruit flies exotic to the Republic of Palau are known to occur unless such fruits or vegetables have been
       subjected to an approved quarantine treatment and/or conditions.

       (e)It is prohibited to import into the Republic of Palau any fruits or vegetables after they have transited
       through areas known to be infested with any fruit fly specie or other quarantine pests not established
       within the Republic of Palau, unless such fruits and vegetable are maintained in the original package and
       such packages have not been exposed to any quarantine pests between the point of origin and the entry
       point into the Republic of Palau.

       (f)All imported fresh fruits and vegetables shall be examined by an Inspector on arrival and if a pest is
       detected, a treatment as prescribed shall be applied before the consignment is released to the importer.
       In the absence of a suitable treatment the fruits and/or vegetables shall be directed to be destroyed or re-
       exported at the importer’s expense.

       (g)Fruits and vegetables which have been cooked, hermetically canned, frozen, dried or candied,
       preserved or otherwise processed in such a manner as to preclude a pest risk an to render the product
       non-viable are exempt from the provisions of this Regulation.


QP 2   Entry of live plants or parts thereof (other than seeds) for propagation

       (a) The importation of plants or planting material which can be propagated, other than seed, may be
       limited to the smallest quantity of propagating material consistent with standard horticultural practices
       to enable the satisfactory establishment and reproduction of the introduced cultivar.

       (b)All imported plants shall be free from soil.

       (c)An approved packing material may be used around the roots of imported plants. Approved packing
       material may consist of sterile peat moss, sphagnum moss, perlite, vermiculite, sawdust, shredded paper
       or other inert materials.



                                                             20
       (d)All importations of live plants and planting material from a place outside the Republic of Palau shall
       be accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate issued by the exporting country and such certificate shall
       state details of any treatment given to the plants or planting material in the place of origin and include
       any other endorsements required as a condition of the importation.

       (e)Plant tissue cultures may be imported in aseptic, sealed flasks in a sterile medium such as agar. They
       shall be subject to inspection on arrival and any contaminated flasks and their contents shall be
       destroyed.

QP 3 Importation of seed

       (a) Small commercial packets of flower and vegetable seeds may be imported without a permit at the
       discretion of the Chief of Agriculture.

       (b) With the exception of seeds imported without a permit under QP 3 (a), all seeds shall be
       accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate. The Chief of Agriculture may also require an official seed
       analysis report.

       (c) Upon arrival, samples of seed may be drawn for examination and if necessary, in the opinion of
       Inspector, treatment shall be applied.

       (d) All seeds shall be pure and free from injurious extraneous matter, including soil, noxious weed
       seeds, insects and diseases and shall be subject to such conditions as are determined by the Chief of
       Agriculture.

QP 4   Cut flowers and foliage

       (a) Subjected to other relevant provision of these regulations, any cut flower and/or foliage, excluding
       members of the family Heliconiaceae (which are prohibited), may be imported, if on inspection at the
       point of entry the cut flowers are free from pests and contain no material capable of propagation.

       (b) Any cut flower that can be propagated may be treated as prescribed to prevent propagation.

       (c) Subject to relevant provision of these regulations, any imported dried flower and/or foliage shall be
       subject to inspection at the point of entry, and if found to contain pests or viable seeds, shall be subject
       to treatment as prescribed to remove any quarantine pest or viable seeds before release.

QP 5   Timber

       (a)Not withstanding the provisions of QP 5 (d), all consignments of timber imported from overseas shall
       be subjected to inspection on arrival and treatment as prescribed if necessary. If such prescribed
       treatment is not available, the consignment may be ordered to re-shipped or destroyed. If treatments or
       reshipment are not performed within 30 days of the order the consignment shall be destroyed.

       (b) The importation of bark and timber with bark attached is prohibited unless treated for pests.

       (c)The importation of previously used timber shall be subjected to mandatory treatment for pests before
       release.




                                                       21
       (d) Imported timber that has been subjected to an approved treatment for the prevention of insect attack
       prior to entry to the Republic of Palau may be imported subject to the provision of an official certificate
       of treatment and to inspection of the timber on arrival to verify the efficacy of the treatment.

QP 6   Grass, bamboo, cane, palm fronds and goods manufactured from such materials

       (a) Grass, bamboo, cane and palm fronds, including wall and roof thatching materials, are prohibited
       entry into the Republic of Palau.

       (b) Manufactured bamboo and cane furniture may be imported subject to inspection on arrival and
       treatment if necessary.


QP 7   Soil, sand and gravel

       (a) The importation of soil, sand or gravel into the Republic of Palau is prohibited except by permit
           issued prior to such importation by the Chief of Agriculture.

       (b) Soil used as ballast in any conveyance shall not be discharged within the Republic of Palau or within
           the territorial waters of the Republic of Palau.


QP 8   Stored dried food product

       If on inspection stored dried food products including polished rice, spices, and other dried food products
       are found to infested with pests or contaminated in any way, an Inspector may order that such infested
       goods be treated, destroyed or re-exported on the expense of the owner or agent.


QP 9   Packing material, dunnage and second-hand bags

       (a) Importation into the Republic of Palau of any packing materials other than an     approved packing
           material is prohibited.

       (b) Approved packing material shall include wood shavings, sawdust, sphagnum moss, sterile peat
           moss, wood wool, ground cork, charcoal, shredded paper, plastics, perlite, vermiculite, non-plant and
           non-animal based materials and any other material approved by the Chief of Agriculture as a
           packing material.

       (c) No second-hand bags, sack, containers, wrapping or packing materials which has previously been
           used for the transport of plant or animal material or which was manufactured to be used for that
           purpose shall be used for the importation of any kind of goods.

       (d) Any imported timber dunnage, including skids, pallets, racks, stickers, etc. is subjected to inspection
           and treatment as prescribed, re-shipment or destruction at the expense of the importer or agent.

QP 10 Handicrafts made from plant material

       Provided handicrafts do not contain any material prohibited or restricted under these regulations, such
       handicrafts may enter subject to inspection and treatment as required.


                                                        22
QP11 Bacteria, viruses, vaccines, cultures and organisms

       (a) It is prohibited to import, any living culture or organism including parasites, arachnids, mollusks,
           nematodes, fungi, bacteria, virus, viroids, vaccines intended for use with animals, mycoplasma,
           parasitic plant organism, plant pests or other invertebrate animals unless a permit has been issued for
           such importation by the Chief of Agriculture prior to such importation of the consignment and only
           in compliance with the conditions imposed by such permit.

       (b) The importation into the Republic of Palau of commercial yeast and yogurt cultures shall be exempt
           from all provisions of QP 11 (a).


PART V. SPECIFIC PLANT PROHIBITION

5.1    Specific Plant Quarantines: prohibitions

The importation into the Republic of Palau from a place outside the Republic of Palau of the plants listed in the
first column of the First Schedule to these Regulations is subject to the specific prohibitions shown in the third
column.



PART VI – MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR LIVE ANIMAL IMPORTATION

6.1    Minimum conditions to be applied to live animal importations

       (a) For the importation of live animals generally, including embryos and ova, the conditions specified
       shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following minimum requirements:

               (i)    the first port of entry into the Republic of Palau shall be specified in the import permit
               and shall be a designated, official point of entry;

               (ii)   the time and date of embarking, the estimated time and date of arrival in the Republic of
               Palau and the airline/flight number or ship/voyage number shall be communicated to the Chief of
               Agriculture at the earliest possible time and no later than one working day before embarkation of
               the animals for the Republic of Palau;

               (iii) all animals shall be cosigned to the Republic of Palau as manifested cargo unless
               otherwise specified in the import permit;

               (iv)   the facilities for the transport of animals shall conform with internationally accepted
               codes of practice as appropriate;

               (v)     all importations of animals are to be accompanied by:

                 (1)   the import permit issued for that importation;

                (2)    a declaration signed by the owner or exporter of the animals providing such information
                       and guarantees as may be required regarding the identification, history and origin of the
                       animals; and


                                                           23
        (3) an international animal health certificate signed and stamped by an official veterinarian of
        the exporting country certifying the state of good health of the animals and giving particulars
        where applicable of the biological tests to which the animal have been subjected and the
        vaccinations carried out on the animals which are the subject of the certificate and of any
        measures taken to prevent the spread of disease.

       (vi) all animals shall be transported directly without trans-shipment, off-loading or contact with
       animals not he subject of the same import permit or animals not of equivalent certified health
       status from the port of departure to the port of arrival in the Republic of Palau unless other
       provisions have been made in the import permit;

       (vii) notice of the death, loss or sickness of any animals during the voyage shall be given to an
       Inspector immediately on arrival in the Republic of Palau by the person in charge of the vessel or
       aircraft;

       (viii) all foodstuffs, litter, manure, straw or bedding and packing material, crates, containers or
       any other related articles shall be off-loading only on the instructions of an Inspector, who may
       order their cleaning, disinfection, destruction, incineration or other means of disposal;

       (ix) all animals and documents shall be inspected on arrival by an Inspector;

       (x) no animals shall be released from quarantine unless the Chief of Agriculture, or his
       delegate is satisfied, following the inspection that the import is in accordance with the provisions
       of these regulations, that all conditions of the import permit have been met up to the time of
       arrival in the Republic of Palau and that no period of quarantine detention, treatments or tests are
       required;

       (xi) unless an imported animal is released from quarantine following its arrival in the Republic
       of Palau, it shall be detained under quarantine control until further notice and may be subjected
       to any test or treatment required to satisfy the conditions of entry for such animal;

       (xii) any import permit granted is not transferable;

       (xiii) any import permit may be canceled or amended at any time after issue and before arrival of
       the animals in the Republic of Palau should the animal health and/or quarantine status of the
       country of origin change or be reported to have changed prior to arrival;

       (xiv) all costs and expenses of, and attendant upon, any importation including any
       documentation, tests, inspections, treatments, detention in quarantine, destructions or re-export,
       or of any other procedure or action taken or brought about under the provisions of these
       regulations shall be borne by the importer and no compensation shall be payable by Republic of
       Palau for any loss or reduction in value caused by such action;

(b) In the case of any OIE List A List B disease or for any communicable disease which is considered to
be of socio-economic or public health importance or which is significant in the international trade of
animals and animal products or for any communicable diseases with important socio-economic or
sanitary influence at the national level and which affect live animals and for which export health
certification conditions have not been prescribed in these regulations; either



                                                24
                (i) the exporting country is free from such disease, and no case of such disease was officially
                reported during the six months immediately preceding the importation of the animals concerned;
                or

                (ii) in the case where the country of export is not free from any such disease referred to in the
                preceding subsection (b) and for which export health certification conditions have not been
                prescribed in these regulations, the Chief of Agriculture shall attach such conditions on the
                import permit sufficient in his opinion to safeguard against the introduction of such disease. Such
                conditions shall not be less than those recommended in the International Animal Health Code of
                the O.I.E.

6.2     Bonding of animals (ship’s pets)

      The master of every conveyance arriving in the Republic of Palau shall be required to enter into a bond
      with the Government of the Republic of Palau whereby any animal on board such conveyance may not be
      introduced into the Republic of Palau while such conveyance
      remains in the Republic of Palau unless permitted by an Inspector and subjected to quarantine safeguards.


PART VII.       ANIMAL QUARANTINES

7.1     General Animal Quarantine

The following prohibitions and restrictions apply to each particular animal or animal product listed below:

QA 1 Importation of Dogs

        (a) For the importation of dogs, the presentation of an international animal health certificate is
        require, attesting that the animals:

                (i) were examined within 48 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and showed no sign
                of any infectious disease;

                (ii) have been effectively vaccinated against distemper, hepatitis and canine parvovirus at least
                one month and not more than three months before shipment;

                (iii) have been effectively treated against echinococcosis-hydatidosis, round, hook and whip
                worms within three days of shipment;

                (iv) have been effectively treated against, and found on examination to be visibly free of, all
                ectoparasites within three days of shipment;

                (v) showed no clinical sign of rabies on the day of shipment, and were kept from birth or for six
                months prior to shipment in the exporting country, or a part of the territory of the exporting
                country where no case of rabies was officially reported during the two years immediately
                preceding the importation of the animals concerned; and

                (vi) have been vaccinated with an inactivated rabies virus more that thirty days prior to entry into
                the Republic of Palau.

        (b) animals originating from a country or a part of a country where rabies occurs or is reported to occur
        or where rabies vaccination is routinely practiced, either
                                                         25
              (i) must undergo a period of not less that 120 days in an approved quarantine facility in a
              territory or part of a territory recognized by the Republic of Palau as a rabies free area prior to
              entry to the Republic of Palau; or

              (ii) must meet the entry requirements of the State of Hawaii.

      (c) As soon as the animals arrive in the Republic of Palau they shall immediately be taken under the
      control of an Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of Agriculture,
      where the animals shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.
QA 2 Importation of Cats

   (a) For the importation of cats, the presentation of an international animal health certificate is required
   attesting that the animals:

          (i)were examined within 48 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and
          showed no sign of any infectious disease;

          (ii) have been effectively vaccinated against Feline Panleucopaenia at least one month and not more
          than twelve months before shipment, and Feline Viral Rhinotracheitis/Calici virus at least one month
          and not more than six months before shipment;

          (iii) have been effectively treated against echinococcosis-hydatidosis, round, hook and whip worms
          within three days shipment;

           (iv)have been effectively treated against, and found on examination to be
            visibly free of, all ectoparasites within three days of shipment;

           (v) showed no clinical sign of rabies on the day of shipment, and were kept from birth or for six
          months prior to shipment in the exporting country, or a part of the territory of the exporting country
          where no case of rabies was officially reported during the two years immediately preceding the
          importation of the animals concerned; and

            (vi) have been vaccinated with an inactivated rabies virus more than thirty days prior to entry into
           the Republic of Palau.

      (b) animals originating from a country or a part of a country where rabies occurs or is reported to occur
      or where rabies vaccination is routinely practiced, either

               (i) must undergo a period of not less that 120 days in an approved quarantine facility in a
              territory or part of a territory recognized by the Republic of Palau as a rabies free area prior to
              entry to the Republic of Palau; or

               (ii) must meet the entry requirements of the State of Hawaii.


      (c) As soon as the animals arrive in the Republic of Palau they shall immediately be taken under the
          control of an Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of Agriculture,
          whereat the animals shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.
                                                        26
QA 3 Importation of cattle

      (a) For the importation of cattle the presentation of an international animal health certificate is required
      attesting that the cattle:

        (i) were examined in daylight within 24 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and showed no
        clinical sign of any disease, including skin diseases and external parasites;

        (ii) were kept since birth or for at least the six months prior to shipment in the exporting country, or part
        of the territory of the exporting country which is recognized as free from rabies and all OIE List A
        diseases which affect cattle or may be carried by cattle and rabies and where these diseases are
        notifiable;

        (iii) In the case of any OIE List A or List B disease or for any communicable disease which is
        considered to be of socio-economic or public health importance or which is significant in the
        international trade of animals and animal products or for any communicable diseases with important
        socio-economic or sanitary influence at the national level and which affect live animals and for which
        export health certification conditions have not been prescribed in these regulations; either

                    (1) that the exporting country is free from such disease and that no case of such disease and
                    that no case of such disease was officially reported during the six months immediately
                    preceding the importation of the animals concerned; or

                    (2) in the case where the country of export is not free from any such disease referred to in the
                    preceding sub-section and for which export health certification conditions have not been
                    prescribed in these regulations, the Chief of Agriculture shall attach such conditions on the
                    import permit sufficient in his opinion to safeguard against the introduction of such disease.
                    Such conditions shall not be less than those recommended in the International Animal Health
                    Code of the O.I.E.

        (iv) have undergone dipping or spraying with an effective insecticide on two occasions at seven day
        intervals, the last being within forty-eight hours of shipment.

        (v) have been treated with an effective anthelmintic on two occasions at 21 day intervals, the last being
        within 48 hours of shipment;

        (vi) have for the thirty days prior to shipment been held in an approved establishment during which time
        the animals were maintained in complete isolation, subjected to regular veterinary observation and at no
        time during which did either they or any other animals in the same quarantine establishment show any
        sign of disease;

        (vii) come from a herd in which no clinical sign of bovine brucellosis was officially reported during the
        six months prior to shipment;

        (viii) come from a country or part of the territory of a country free from bovine brucellosis, and showed
        negative response to effective tests for bovine brucellosis during the thirty days prior to shipment;




                                                         27
       (ix) come from a country or part of the territory of a country officially free from bovine tuberculosis,
       and showed negative response to an effective test for bovine tuberculosis during the thirty days prior to
       shipment; and

     (b) As soon as the animals arrive in the Republic of Palau they shall immediately be taken under the
     control of an Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of Agriculture, where
     the animals shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.


QA 4 Importation of small ruminants (sheep and goats)

       (a) For the importation of small ruminants the presentation of an international animal health certificate
       is required attesting that the animals:

       (i) were examined in daylight within 24 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and showed no
       clinical sign of any disease, including skin diseases and external parasites;

       (ii) were kept since birth or for at least the six months prior to shipment in the exporting country or part
       of the territory of the exporting country which is internationally recognized as free from rabies and all
       OIE List A diseases which affect small ruminants or which may be carried by small ruminants and
       where these diseases are notifiable;

       (iii) in the case of any OIE List A or List B disease or for any communicable disease which is
       considered to be of socio-economic or public health importance or which is significant in the
       international trade of animals and animal products or for any communicable diseases with important
       socio-economic or sanitary influence at the national level and which affect live animals and for which
       export health certification conditions have not been prescribed in these regulations; either

           (1) that the exporting country is free from such disease and that no case of such disease was
               officially reported during the six months immediately preceding the importation of the animals
               concerned; or

          (2) in the case where the country of export is not free from any such disease referred to in the
          preceding sub-section and for which export health certification conditions have not been prescribed in
          these regulations, the Chief of Agriculture shall attach such conditions on the import permit sufficient
          in his opinion to safeguard against the introduction of such disease. Such conditions shall not be less
          than those recommended in the International Animal Health Code of the O.I.E.

       (iv)have undergone dipping or spraying with an effective insecticide on two occasions at
        seven day intervals, the last being within forty-eight hours of shipment.

       (v) have been treated with an effective anthelminitic on two occasions at 21 day intervals.
        the last being within 48 hours of shipment;

       (vi)have for the thirty days prior to shipment been held in an approved quarantine establishment
       during which time the animals were maintained in complete isolation, subjected to regular




                                                        28
  veterinary observation and at no time during which did either they or any other animals in the
  same quarantine establishment show any sign of disease; and either

            (1) come from a country or part of a country free from caprine or ovine brucellosis; or

            (2) come from a sheep or goat flock free from caprine or ovine brecellosis.

      (b) As soon as the animals arrive in the Republic of Palau they shall immediately be taken under the
      control of an Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of Agriculture,
      where the animals shall remain until they are release by an Inspector.


QA 5 Importation of domestic horses, mules and donkeys

      (a) For the importation of domestic horses, mules and donkeys an international animal health certificate is
          required attesting that animals:

          (i)were examined in daylight within 24hours of shipment, found to be in good health
            and showed no clinical sign of any disease, including skin diseases, mange and external parasites;

          (ii)were kept since birth or for the six months prior to shipment in the exporting
           country, or part of the territory of the exporting country, which is internationally
           recognized as free from OIE List A diseases which affect horses, mules and donkeys
          or may be carried by horses, mules and donkeys and rabies, where rabies is a notifiable disease and
          no cased of rabies was officially reported during the past two
               years;

          (iii)have undergone dipping or spraying with an effective insecticide on two occasions
            at seven day intervals, the last being within forty-eight hours of shipment.

          (iv)have been treated with an effective anthelmintic on two occasions at 21 day
            intervals, the last being within 48 hours of shipment; and

          (v)have for the thirty prior to shipment been held in an approved quarantine
           establishment during which time the animals were maintained in complete isolation,
           subjected to regular veterinary observation and at no time during which did either
           they or any other animals in the same quarantine establishment show any sign of
           disease.


      (b) As soon as the animals arrive in the Republic of Palau they shall immediately be taken
        under the control of an Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of
        Agriculture, where the animals shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.




                                                         29
QA 6 Importation of domestic pigs



       (a) For the importation of domestic pigs the presentation of an international animal health
           Certificate is required attesting that the animals;

       (i)were examined in daylight within 24 hours of shipment, found to be in good health
          and showed no clinical sign of any disease, including skin disease

       (ii)were kept since birth or for six months prior to shipment in the in the exporting
         country which is internationally recognized as free from rabies and all OIE List
         A diseases which affect pigs or which may be carried by pigs and where these diseases
         are notifiable and no case of any of these diseases was officially reported during the
         past two years;

      (iii)have for the thirty days prior to shipment held in an approved quarantine established
       during which time the animals were maintained in a complete isolation, subjected to
       regular veterinary observation and at no time during which did either they or any other
       animals in the same quarantine establishment show any sign of disease.

      (iv)have undergone dipping or spraying with an effective insecticide on two occasions at
      seven day intervals, the last being within 48 hours of shipment;

      (v)have been treated with an effective anthelmintic on two occasions at 21 day intervals, the
       last being within 48 hours of shipment;


     (vi)In the case of any OIE List A or List B disease or for any communicable disease which
      is considered to be of socio-economic or public health importance or which is significant
      in the international trade of animals and animal products or for any communicable diseases
      with important socio-economic or sanitary influence at the national level and which affect
      live animals and for which export health certification conditions have not been prescribed
      in these regulations; either

             (1) that the exporting country is free from such disease and that no case of such
              disease was officially reported during the six months immediately preceding the
              importation of the animals concerned; or

             (2) in the case where the country of export is not free from any such disease referred
             to in the preceding sub- section and for which export health certification condition have not been
             prescribed in these regulation, the Chief of Agriculture shall attach such conditions on the import
             permit sufficient in his opinion to safeguard against
             the introduction of such disease. Such conditions shall not be less than recommended
             in the International Animal Health Code of the O.I.E.

     (b)As soon as the animals arrive in the Republic of Palau they shall immediately be taken
      under the control of an Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the
     Chief of Agriculture, where the animals shall remain until they released by an Inspector.




                                                     30
 QA 7 Importation of birds

      (a) Birds shall be identified in their scientific name by genus and species in both the
       application to import and in the international animal health certificate;




       (b)For the importation of domestic birds the presentation of an international animal health
      certificate is required attesting that the birds:

          (i) showed no clinical sign of disease on the day of shipment;

          (ii)come from establishments which are regularly inspected by the official government veterinary
          authority of the country of export;

         (iii)have been kept in a country, or a part of the territory of the exporting country
          which is internationally recognized as free from OIE list A diseases which affect
          domestic birds or may be carried by domestic birds since they were hatched or
          for at least the past twenty-one days prior to export; and either


                 (1) have not been vaccinated against Newcastle disease (ND), highly virulent
                  avian influenza; or

                 (2) have been vaccinated against Newcastle disease (ND),highly virulent avian
                  influenza, using a vaccine complying with internationally accepted standards,
                  the nature of the vaccine used and the date of vaccination to be stated in the
                  international animal health certificate;


       (iv) if they have not been vaccinated against infectious bursal disease, that they come from
         an establishment free from infectious bursal disease;


       (v) come from establishments free from avian infectious bronchitis, infectious laryngo-
        tracheitis (ILT) and fowl cholera;


       (vi) come from establishments free from pullorum-typhoid disease, and have been tested
       negative to pullorum – typhoid disease and been kept in an approved quarantine station for
       not less than twenty-one days prior to shipment;

 (c) As soon as the birds arrive in the Republic of Palau they shall immediately be taken under the
control of an Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of Agriculture,
where the birds shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.




                                                        31
QA 8 Importation of day-old chicks

For the importation of day-old chicks, turkey, poultry and other newly-hatched avian species, an international
animal health certificate is required attesting that the newly hatched birds:

          (a) come from establishments which are regularly inspected by the official veterinary
           authority of the country of export;

          (b) come from hatcheries situated in country which is internationally recognized as free
           of OIE List A
            diseases which affect domestic poultry or may be carried by domestic poultry;

          (c)either –


            (i) come from hatcheries situated in country free from infectious bursal disease
              (Gumboro disease); or

           (ii) come from establishments which are recognized as being free from infectious bursal
            disease following tests for the detection of precipitating antibodies and in which
            vaccination against infectious bursal disease is not practiced on the parent stock and
            have not been vaccinated against infectious bursal disease; or

           (iii) were vaccinated against infectious bursal disease using a vaccine complying with
             internationally accepted standards, the nature of the vaccine used and the date of
             vaccination to be stated in the international animal health certificate; or

           (iv) come from a flock in which vaccination against infectious disease is practiced on the
             parent stock;

          (d) were vaccinated against Marek’s disease, the nature of the vaccine to be stated in the
      international animal health certificate;


          (e) either -


          (i) come from establishments or hatcheries which are recognized as being free from
           pullorum-typhoid disease, avian infectious bronchitis, avian infectious laryngotracheitis
          (ILT) and fowl cholera; or

          (ii) come from establishments or hatcheries which vaccination against avian infectious
          bronvhitis, ILT and fowl cholera is not practiced on the parent stock or have not been
          vaccinated against avian infectious bronchitis, ILT and fowl cholera; or

          (iii)were vaccinated against avian infectious bronchitis, ILT and fowl cholera, the nature
           of the vaccine used and the date of vaccination to be stated in the international animal
          health certificate; or

          (iv) come from establishment; or hatcheries in which vaccination against avian infectious
            bronchitis, ILT and fowl cholera is practiced on the parent stock.
                                                        32
 (f) come from establishment or hatcheries which are recognized as being free from avian infectious

(g) showed no sign of mycoplasmosis on the days of shipment, originate exclusively from eggs produced by
birds from establishments free from mycoplasmosis, and are shipped in clean, not previously used packages.

QA 9 Importation of hatching eggs

For the importation of hatching eggs the presentation of an international animal health certificate
is required attesting that the hatching eggs:


     (a)come from hatcheries situated in a country which is internationally recognized as free
      of OIE List A diseases which affect domestic poultry or may be carried by domestic poultry;

     (b) come from establishments in hatcheries which are regularly inspected by the official
     veterinary authority of the exporting country;

     (c)come from establishments in which vaccination against Marek’s disease is practiced, the
     nature of the vaccine used shall also be stated in the certificate;

     (d)originate exclusively from birds kept in establishments free from mycoplasmosis;

     (e) come from establishments and/or hatcheries which are certified as being free from pullorum-typhoid
     disease and avian tuberculosis; and

     (f)have been disinfected in accordance with accepted international standards, are correctly identified and
     are shipped in clean and unused packages.


QA 10 Importation of domestic rodents and rabbits

       (a)For the importation of domestic rodents and rabbits the presentation of an international
       Animal health certificate is required attesting that the rodents or rabbits:

         (i)were examined within 24 hours of shipment, found to be in good health and showed
           no sign of any infectious disease;

         (ii)have been effectively treated against endoparasities within three days of shipment;

         (iii)have been effectively treated against, and found on examination to be visibly free of,
            all actoparasities within three days of shipment;

         (iv)have been treated with an effective anthelmintic on two occasions at 21 days intervals
           the last being within 48 hours of shipment;

         (v)were kept since birth or for at least the six months prior to shipment in the exporting
           country, or part of the territory of the exporting country which is internationally
           recognized as free from rabies and all OIE List A diseases which may carried by
           rodents or rabbits.
                                                         33
   (b)As soon as the animals arrive in the Republic of Palau they shall immediately be taken under
    the control of an Inspector to the quarantine premises previously approved by the Chief of
   Agriculture, where the animals shall remain until they are released by an Inspector.


QA11 Importation of embryos/ova of domestic ruminants and pigs

      (a)For the importation of embryos/ova of domestic ruminants and pigs, the presentation of
       international animal health certificate is required attesting that:

           (i)the donor female s and all other animals in the herd of origin showed no clinical sign
           of disease during the twenty-four hours prior to departure to the collection unit and for
           the following thirty days;

          (ii)the donor females were kept in a country or part of the territory of a country
           internationally recognized as free from OIE List A disease affecting domestic ruminants
           and pigs since birth or for the preceding 2 years and were kept in the same herd for at
           least the forty days prior to departure to the collection unit;

          (iii)the donor females were fertilized with semen meeting the requirements for the
           importation of semen into the Republic of Palau; and

          (iv)the collection unit remained free from OIE List A diseases affecting domestic
           ruminants and pigs since birth during the forty days following collection;

      (b)embryos/ova must be collected, washed, treated, examined for intact zona pellucida,
       otherwise and transported according to International Codes of Practice.


QA 12 Importation of semen of domestic ruminants

For the importation of the semen of domestic ruminants the presentation of international animal
health certificate is required attesting that the donor animals:

         (a)showed no clinical sign of disease on the days of collection and, expect for fresh semen
          for the following thirty days;

         (b)were kept in a country internationally recognized as free from OIE List A diseases
          which affect domestic ruminants and pigs, since birth or for not less six months prior
          to collection;

         (c)for bovine semen the following additional conditions apply:


               (i)were kept in the exporting country for the thirty days prior to collection, in an
               establishment or artificial insemination center where all animals are officially free
               from bovine tuberculosis; and


              (ii)either –

                                                        34
              (1)when the semen comes from an artificial insemination center, the testing program
              includes appropriate and effective tests for bovine brucellosis; or

              (2)when the semen does not come from an artificial insemination center, the donor
              animals come from a country or part of the territory of a country free from bovine
              brucellosis;

QA 13 Importation of semen of pigs

 For the importation of the semen of domestic pigs the presentation of an international health
 certificate is required attesting that the donor animals:

              (a)showed no clinical sign of disease on the day of collection and, except fro fresh
              semen, for the following thirty days; and

              (b)were kept in a country internationally recognized as free from OIE List A diseases
              affecting domestic ruminants and pigs since birth or for not less than six months prior
              to collection.

QA 14 Importation of non-commercial consignments of food product of animal origin being import as accompanied
passengers’ baggage and for personal use

Subject to the provisions of Subsection (d), the importation of consignments of food products of
Animal origin being imported as accompanied passengers baggage and for personal use is subject to the
following conditions:

              (a)all food products of animal origin imported by a passenger must have been
              slaughtered in an approved establishment, packaged and sealed, and must be labeled
              in English by the manufacturer clearly stating the contents and country of origin;

              (b) the total quantity of food products of animal origin which may be imported by a
              passenger on any single occasion shall not exceed 55 lbs per adult passenger; and

              (c)food products imported hereunder must not be resold.

              (d)notwithstanding the provisions of (a),(b) and (c), a permit may be issued in
              accordance with the provisions of these Regulations in respect of any meat products
              imported into the Republic of Palau for ceremonial purposes consistent with the
              customs of Palauan citizens.


QA 15 Importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from domestic ruminants

 For the importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from domestic ruminants, the
Presentation of an international health certificate or other approved certification is required. Where
required, the international health certificate shall attest that the entire consignment of meat comes
from animals:

              (a)which have been kept in a country internationally recognized as free from OIE
              List A diseases affecting domestic ruminants and pigs since birth; and

                                                         35
             (b) which were slaughtered in an abattoir, found to be healthy before and after
              slaughter, cut up in a cutting-up establishments under supervision of the government
             of the exporting country and considered to be fit for human consumption.

QA16 Importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from pigs

For the importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from pigs the presentation of
an international health certificate or other approved certification is required. Where required the
international health certificate shall attest that the entire consignment of meat comes from animals:

             (a)which have been kept in the country since birth, or have been imported from a
             country internationally recognized as free from OIE List A diseases affecting domestic
             pigs since birth; and

             (b) which were slaughtered in an abattoir, found to be healthy before and after
             slaughter, cut up in a preparation establishment and considered to be fit for human
             consumption.

QA 17 Importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from poultry

For the importation of unsterilized meat and meat products derived from poultry the presentation
of an international health certificate or other approved certification is required. Where required the
international health certificate shall attest that the entire consignment of meat comes from birds:

             (a)which have been kept in establishment free from Newcastle disease and highly
             pathogenic avian influenza and not situated in an infected zone of these diseases;

             (b) which were slaughtered in an abattoir not situated in an infected zone of Newcastle
             disease and highly pathogenic avian influenza, found to be healthy before and after
             slaughter, cut up in a preparation establishment and considered to be fit for human
             consumption.

QA 18 Importation of egg and egg products for consumption and processing

It is prohibited to import into the Republic of Palau eggs in the embryonic stages,(such as balot).
For the importation of eggs and egg products the presentation of an international health certificate
Or other approved certification is required. Where required the international health certificate shall
Attest that the entire consignment comes from birds:

             (a)which have been kept in an establishment free from Newcastle disease and highly
              pathogenic avian influenza and not situated in an infected zone of these diseases;

             (b)for eggs, the certificate must attest that the eggs have been disinfected in accordance
             with O.I.E. standards, are correctly identified, and are shipped in clean unused packages

             (c)for egg products, the certificate must attest that the eggs were sterilized by
              conventional heat


       treatment regimes during the manufacturing process.

                                                          36
QA 19 Importation of milk and milk products

       (a)Unless otherwise varied by the issuance of a general import permit under Section 2.14(f)
        of these Regulations, an international animal health certificate or other approved from of
       certification is required for the importation of milk and milk products. Where required the
       international health certificate shall attest that the animals from which the milk and milk
       products were derived:


             (i) were kept since birth or for at least 12 months prior to the collection of milk which
             was used in the manufacture of this shipment in an exporting country which is free
             from foot and mouth disease where this disease is notifiable;

             (ii)that vaccination against foot and mouth disease is not practiced; and

             (iii)that the milk and milk products were pasteurized or sterilized at conventional heat
             treatment regimes during the manufacturing process.

       (b) Persons arriving in the Republic of Palau with infants shall be exempt from the provisions of
           subsection (a) with respect to a liquid milk containing formula, in which
       case a maximum of one gallon may be allowed for each accompanied child under two years
       of age. In case of a powered milk or milk containing formula a maximum of two pound shall
       be permitted for each accompanied child under two years of age.


QA 20 Importation of honey bees and apiary equipment

For the importation of homey bees ( Apis mellifera) the presentation of an international health
Certificate is required attesting that:

        (a) the honey bees in the consignment come from apiaries which are regularly inspected
        by government officers empowered for that purpose by the exporting country;

        (b) the exporting country or part of the territory of the exporting country is free from
        Varroasis and Acariasis;

        (c) the exporting country or part of the territory of the exporting country is free from
        American Foul Brood, European Foul Brood and Chalk Brood;

        (d) that exporting country or part of the territory of the exporting country is free from
        evidence of Africanized bees; and

       (e) the entry of used bee keeping equipment including hives, frames, and tools, is prohibited.
QA 21 Importation of all other animal products and other related articles

For the importation of all other animal products and other related article:

        (a) the first port of entry in the Republic of Palau shall be specified in the import permit;

        (b) all animal products shall be consigned to the Republic of Palau as manifested cargo
                                                        37
         unless specific provision has been made in the import permit otherwise;

        (c) all importations of animal products and related goods are to be accompanied by;

              (i) all import permit issued for that importation; and

              (ii) an international health certificate signed and stamped by an official veterinarian
              of the exporting country certifying the state of good health of the animal products
              and related articles and giving particulars where applicable of any measures taken
              to prevent the spread of disease;

        (d) all animal products shall be inspected on arrival by an Inspector;

        (e) only when the inspector is satisfied, following the inspection prescribed in (d) above
         that the import is in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, that all conditions
         of the permit have been met up to the time of importation, and that no period of quarantine
         detention, treatments or tests are required shall a Quarantine Release be issued;


        (f) unless a Quarantine Release is issued according to the provision of (e) above, all
        animal products and related articles will be detained under quarantine control until
        further notice and be subjected to any test, treatment, disinfection or fumigation require;

        (g) notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.2 and2.14(f) of these Regulations, an inspector may
         order animal products that are imported or introduced in to the Republic of Palau in contravention of
         the provisions of any regulation made hereunder, or a any conditions of the import permit, to be seized,
         destroyed, disposed of or re-exported at the owner’s expense;

        (h) any import permit granted may be canceled or amended at any time after issue and before arrival of
        the animal products and related articles in Republic of Palau should the animal health and /or
        quarantine status of the country of origin change or be have change or be reported to have changed in
        the meantime.

PART VIII. SPECIFIC ANIMAL PROHBITIONS


8.1   Specific animal prohibitions

The importation into the Republic of Palau from a place outside the Republic of Palau of the animals
listed in the Second Schedule to these Regulations is prohibited.


8.2 Importation for special purposes


Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 7.1 and 8.1, and permit may be issued in accordance with
these Regulations in respect of any animal required to be imported or introduce into Republic of Palau for:

          (a)the purpose of research or experiment to improve the quality of animal in the Republic
           of Palau and the products to be derived therefrom; or

          (b)the purpose of any zoological garden or display approved by the Chief of Agriculture.
                                                       38
8.3 Movement of monkeys

The movement of monkeys from any island, including the island of Angaur, to any other island
in the Republic of Palau is prohibited.

Part IX.   EXPORT REQUIREMENTS


9.1 Power to examine and certify export consignments of plants and products

    (a)An Inspector, at the request of an exporter, may sample and inspect any plants or plants
     products intended for export from the Republic of Palau.

    (b)An Inspector may withhold or detain any plants or plants products intended for export
     until such time as he satisfied that plants or plant products meet with any and all terms and
     conditions of the importing country and are of sufficient quality and wholesomeness.

    (c)An Inspector may apply official seals to any packages on the completion of any inspection
     of plants or plant products intended for export from the Republic of Palau.

    (d)An Inspector may issue a certificate or other documentation setting out the result of his
     inspection or certifying as to the origin of the plants or plant products, provide details of any
     treatments applied to the plants or plant products or any other matter of which he is aware in
     relation to the plants or plant products.

    (e)The exporter shall be responsible for the payment of any fees or charges associated with
     the inspection and/or certification of plants or plant material intended for export from the
     Republic of Palau.

9.2 Phytosanitary certificates and other documentation relating to plants and plant products

    (a)An Inspector may issue a phytosanitary certificate for plants or plants products produced
     in the Republic of Palau where such certificate is a condition of importation into the country
    of destination and where he believes that such plants or plant products conform with the import
    requirements of the importing country.

    (b) The phytosanitary certificate issued is to be substantially bases on the Model adopted by
     the International Plant Protection Convention of 1951, as amended from time to time.

    (c)the issuance of a phtyosanitary certificate shall not release the importer or exporter from
     compliance with any quarantine import regulations of the country to which the plant material
     are consigned.


9.3 Examination of export – animal and animal products

    (a)The Chief of Agriculture may require that any animal, animal products, and related goods
     Goods being exported be inspected by an Inspector prior to export.


                                                             39
    (b) An Inspector may withhold or detain any animals or animal products being exported until
     Such time as he satisfied that they meet any and all terms and conditions of the importing country and are
    of sufficient quality and wholesomeness.

    (c)The Chief of Agriculture shall inspect any meat being exported commercially prior to export
     in accordance with the Export Meat Inspection Act, Title 34 of the Palau National Code,
     Chapter 21.


9.4 Re-export of plants and plant materials, animal and animal products

All plants and plant materials, animals and animal products intended for re-export from the Republic of Palau
must clearly be identified as such and the country of origin stated on the accompanying certification.

    (a)An Inspector shall only issue a Re-export Phytosanitary Certificate plants and plant product
     which have arrived in the Republic of Palau but which are not intended for importation into
     the Republic of Palau.

    (b) An Inspector shall only issue a re-export Phytosanitary Certificate where he is satisfied that
     such plants, plant products or other regulated materials are accompanied by a Phytosanitary
     Certificate issued by the plant health authority of the country of origin and that such goods
     comply generally with the goods described on such certificate.

    (c)An Inspector may issue a re-export International Animal Health Certificate in the case of a
     live animal or a re-export International Health Certificate in the case of an animal product
     where such animal or animal product as the case may be has arrived in the Republic of Palau
     but is not intended for importation into the Republic of Palau.

    (d) An Inspector may issue a re-export International Animal Health Certificate in the case of a live animal
    or a re-export International Health Certificate in the case of an animal product, where he is satisfied that
    such animal or animal product as the case may is accompanied by an International Animal Health
    Certificate in the case of an animal, or an International Health Certificate in the case of an animal product
    issued by the animal authority of the country of origin and that such animal or animal product conforms
    generally with the description printed on such certificate.

PART X.       PENALTIES


10.1   Penalties

       (a) Pursuant to Title 34 of the Palau National Code, Section 2010, any person who violates
       any provision of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
       subject to the penalties provided by law.

       (b) Each plant, class of plant product or animal or class of animal product imported, held, used, or
       transported in violation of these regulations shall constitute a separate offense under this provision.

       (c) The Chief of Agriculture shall have the authority to impose fines by citation for particular violations
       of these Regulations or any other quarantine controls. Such fines may not exceed
       $1000 for each violation.


                                                            40
                                              FIRST SCHEDULE

       Importation of plants and plant materials of the following species is prohibited as stated in Section 5.1



 Common name                      Scientific Name                   Plants or plant material prohibited

 Banana, Abaca, and               Musaceae family and             fPlants, corms and cut flowers except tissue
 Heliconia                        Heliconiaceae family             culture certified free from bunchy top
                                                                  disease, mosaic virus, Panama disease
                                                                  banana streak disease and bacterial diseases
                                                                  including moko disease, black leaf streak
                                                                  and Sigatoka disease
Citrus                           Citrus species and the           All except fruit and seeds. Fruit from areas
                                 following genera:                where citrus canker (Xanthomonas
                                 Citropsis, Citrus,               campestris p.v. citri (Hasse) Dye) and other
                                 Eremocitrus, Fortunella          diseases not present in Palau occurs. All of
                                 Microcitrus,                     Murraya spp.
                                 Monanthocitrus,
                                 Pleurocitrus and Poncirus
Maize/Popcorn                   Zea mays L.                All except seed
All palms including              Cocos species and all     All except seeds nuts and pollen from areas
Coconut and betel Nut            members of the family     approved by the Chief of Agriculture
                                 Palmae
Pepper                           Piper species             All except seed
Sweet potato                     Ipomoea batatas           All except pathogen tested tissue cultures
                                                           and seed
Tapioca/cassava                  Manihot esculenta         All except stems and tissue cultures from
                                                           Pathogen tested sources
Taro and edible aroids           Alocasia macrorrhiza L .; All except seed and tissue culture
                                Colocasia esculenta L.;
                                Cryptosperma chamissonis
                                (Schott); and Xanthosoma
                                sagittifolium
Tomato                          Lycopersicon esculentum All except fruit and seed
                                (Miller).
Yams                            Dioscorea spp.             All except seed and tissue culture




                                                                  41
                                               SECOND SCHEDULE

Importation of animals of the following species is prohibited as stated in Section 8.1



     (i) any snake of any species;
     (ii) any living stage of any venomous reptile, venomous amphibian, venomous fish or venomous
     invertebrate;
     (iii) any red vented bulbul (Molpaster cafer L.) or Mynah bird (Aeriodotheres fuscus)
     (iv) any American grey squirrel (Sciurus carolensis gmelin);
     (v) any monkey;
     (vi) any mongoose (Herpestes sp.);
     (vii) any mink; ( Mustela vison);
     (viii) any parrot;
     (ix) such other animal which the Chief of Agriculture may specify as likely to become a nuisance or to
     cause injury or damage




                                                            42
