                                           359

                             BIOSECURITY ACT 2013
                                    (NO. 3 OF 2013)


                       BIOSECURITY REGULATIONS 2015


                             Arrangement of Regulations

      Part I - Preliminary

1.    Short Title and Commencement
2.    Interpretation

      Part II – Biosecurity Points of Entry and Departure

3.    Designated Points of Entry and Departure
4.    Designated Biosecurity Holding Areas
5.    Format for Application for Private Biosecurity Goods Holding Areas
6.    Director to approve Private Biosecurity Goods Holding Areas
7.    Format for Biosecurity Arrival Declaration
8.    Format for Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate for vessels
9.    Format for Bond or Guarantee for vessels or air craft in the case of animals
10.   Format for Bond or Guarantee for vessels and aircraft in the case of meat or meat
      products
11.   Format for Bond or Guarantee for vessels or aircraft in the case of plants or plant
      products
12.   Control of Entry and Exit from Biosecurity Holding Areas

      Part III – Import of plants and animals including plant and animal products

13.   Declared Regulated Pests and Diseases for plants
14.   Declared Regulated Pests and Diseases for animals
15.   Prohibition on import of live plants and animals
16.   Format for Application for permit to import plants and animals
17.   Format for permits to import plants and animals
18.   Agent to cooperate in Execution of section 23 of the Act
19.   Biosecurity officer to inspect manifest
20.   Offence to release cargo stamped “QH”
21.   Format for Application for Biosecurity Import Clearance
22.   IPPC and wood, wood packing material
23.   Consignments held under Regulation 19
                                          360

      Part IV – Sea Containers

24.   Exterior of containers to be clean
25.   Requirement for Biosecurity Import Clearance
26.   Further Standards of Cleanliness
27.   Exterior of Sea Container
28.   Requirement for Refrigerated or Insulated sea container
29.   Chief Health Officer and Director to be satisfied
30.   Chief Health Officer to Add Further Cleaning Methods

31.   Inspection of Incoming Sea Containers
32.   Right of Biosecurity Officers to inspect incoming sea containers
33.   Movement of sea containers in Honiara and Noro
34.   Landing of sea containers for use in Solomon Islands
35.   Agent to meet cost of cleaning or treatment of sea containers

      Part V – Used vehicles, earthmoving and logging machinery

36.   All Used Vehicles to be inspected
37.   Requirement for Certificate of Cleanliness from exporting country
38.   Decontamination and repeated inspection of Used Vehicles
39.   Military vehicles to comply before deployment
40.   Safe disposal
41.   Definition

      Part VI – Export of Plants and Animals including Plant and Animal Products

42.   Application form for Biosecurity Export Clearance and Sanitary or Phytosanitary
      Certificate
43.   Containers leaving Solomon Islands to be cleaned
44.   General Certificate of Cleanliness

      Part VII – Designated Biosecurity Quarantine Stations

45.   Designated Biosecurity Quarantine Stations
46.   Format for Application for Private Biosecurity Quarantine Stations
47.   Director to approve Private Biosecurity Quarantine Stations

      Part VIII – Administration

48.   Gazetting of Designated Biosecurity Officers
49    Biosecurity Landing Clearance for arriving vessels
50.   Fees
                                           361


Schedule 1 – Designated Points of Entry and Departure for Regulated Articles

Schedule 2 – Designated Biosecurity Holding Areas

Schedule 3 – Form 3A – Application for Commercial Land or Buildings to be Designated as
                       A Private Biosecurity Holding Area
             Form 3B - Approval by the Director on Application for a Private Biosecurity
                       Goods Holding Area
Schedule 4 – Form 4A - Biosecurity Arrival Declaration for Vessels arriving in Solomon
                       Islands (does not include yachts with berths for 5 people or less)
             Form 4B - Biosecurity Arrival Declaration for Commercial Aircraft Arriving
                       in Solomon Islands
Schedule 5 – Form 5A – Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate, (Master’s
                       Certificate)
             Form 5B - Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate (Yachts), (Master’s
                       Certificate)
             Form 5C - Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate for Vessels
                       Intending to stay in Solomon Islands, (Master’s Certificate)

Schedule 6 – Form 6A - Ship Master’s or Pilot’s Bond and Guarantee (Animals)
             Form 6B - Ship Master’s or Pilot’s Bond and Guarantee (Meat)
             Form 6C - Ship Master’s or Pilot’s Bond and Guarantee (Plants (inc. Fruits
                        And vegetables))

Schedule 7 – Form 7B - Application to Import Plant Material
             Form 7C - Application to Import Live Animals
             Form 7D - Application to Import Animal Products
             Form 7E - Application to Import Earth

Schedule 8 - Form 8A - Permit to Import Plants
             Form 8B - Permit to Import Animals
             Form 8C - Permit to Import Animal Products
             Form 8D - Permit to Import Earth

Schedule 9 - Application for Biosecurity Import Clearance

Schedule 10 - Form 10A - Biosecurity Import Clearance (Sea Containers, Sea and Air
                         Cargoes)
              Form 10B - Biosecurity Import Clearance (Mail)

Schedule 11 A- Solomon Islands Sea Container Exterior Cleanliness Standard
         11B - Approved Cleaning Methods for Refrigerated and Insulated containers
                                           362


Schedule 12 - Application for Sanitary or Phytosanitary Certificate and Biosecurity Export
              Clearance

Schedule 13 - Designated Biosecurity Quarantine Stations for Live Animals and Plants

Schedule 14 - Application for Private Land or Building to be Designated as a Private
              Biosecurity Quarantine Station

Schedule 15 - Designation of Director and other Biosecurity Officers

Schedule 16 - Biosecurity Landing Clearance for Vessels Arriving in Solomon Islands

Schedule 17 - Fees
                                                     363


                                  BIOSECURITY REGULATIONS 2015


     IN exercise of the powers conferred by section 106 of the Biosecurity Act, the Minister of
     Agriculture and Livestock hereby makes the following regulations –

                                            Part I - Preliminary
Short Title and
commencement             1.     (1)     These Regulations may be cited as the Biosecurity
                  Regulations 2015 and shall come into force on the 1st day of June 2015.
Interpretation
                         2.     (1)     In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires –

                                “act” means the Biosecurity Act 2013 as amended from time to time;

                                “apron” means a reinforced hard-standing area used to park aircraft,
                                       usually in-front of passenger terminals or aircraft
                                       maintenance or storage hangers;

                                “dunnage” means wood packaging material used to secure or support
                                      a commodity but which does not remain associated with the
                                      commodity;

                                “hanger” means a building at an airport used to cover aircraft while
                                       being serviced or stored;

                                “IPPC” means the International Plant Protection Convention which
                                      Solomon Islands has ratified under World Trade Organisation
                                      (WTO) with all its provisions as applicable and amended
                                      from time to time.

                                “minister” means the Minister for the time being charged with
                                       responsibility for Biosecurity matters;

                                “operator” means, in relation to aircraft and vessels, the person or
                                       persons who own or lease an aircraft;

                                “quarantine pest” means a pest of potential economic importance to
                                       the area endangered thereby and not yet present there, or
                              364

                 present but not widely distributed and being officially
                 controlled (IPPC);

    "sea container" means a standardized reusable steel box or frame
           used for the safe, efficient and secure storage and movement
           of materials and products which is designed and constructed -

      (i)        to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more modes of
                 transport;
      (ii)       in such a manner as to permit its ready handling and in
                 particular its transfer from one mode of transport to another;
      (iii)      for ease of loading and unloading of its contents; and
      (iv)       of a standard size often expressed in twenty-foot equivalent
                 units (TEU) which is a unit of capacity equal to one standard
                 20ft × 8ft (6.10m × 2.44m) (length × width) container,
                 containers are commonly of 1 or 2 TEUs, i.e. 20 or 40ft x
                 8ft;;

“shipping line” includes a shipping company that operates a shipping
      service with vessels which it owns, leases or otherwise and has
      routine or confirmed destinations which its vessels service.

“wood” means a commodity class for round wood, sawn wood, wood
     chips or dunnage, with or without bark;

“wood packaging material” means wood or wood products (excluding
     paper products) used in supporting, protecting or carrying a
     commodity, it includes: crates, boxes, packing cases, dunnage,
     pallets, cable drums and spools/reels or any other thing made
     wholly or in part of wood but does not include-
                 wood packaging material made entirely from thin wood (6
                  mm or less in thickness)
                 wood packaging made wholly of processed wood material,
                  such as plywood, particle board, oriented strand board or
                  veneer that has been created using glue, heat or pressure, or
                  a combination thereof
                 barrels for wine and spirit that have been heated during
                  manufacture
                                                      365

                                         gift boxes for wine, cigars and other commodities made
                                          from wood that has been processed and/or manufactured in
                                          a way that renders it free of pests
                                         sawdust, wood shavings and wood wool
                                         wood components permanently attached to freight vehicles
                                          and containers.

                    (2)    For the purposes of section 2(2) of the Act, a regulated article shall be
                           any plant or animal, or plant or animal product, or any other item that
                           may have come into contact with any of the aforementioned which in the
                           opinion of the Director may transmit a pest or disease of a plant or
                           animal.


                          PART II – BIOSECURITY POINTS OF ENTRY AND DEPARTURE
Designated
points of               3.     The landing and export of animals, plants, earth and any other things
entry and       regulated under regulation 2(2) is prohibited at all seaports and airports, except at
departure
                the seaports and airports designated in SCHEDULE ONE.

Designated              4.     The designated Biosecurity Holding Areas of these points of entry
biosecurity
holding ares    and departure for regulated articles as required by Section 11 of the Act are as
areas           prescribed in SCHEDULE TWO.

 Documents
 Format for              5.     Individuals, organisations or companies wishing to establish private
 Application
 for private    Biosecurity Goods Holding Areas for the purposes of inspection of imported goods
 Biosecurity    for the purposes of the Act must apply to the Director of Biosecurity using the
 Goods
 Holding        Application form as prescribed in SCHEDULE THREE A. All approvals by the
 areasareas     Director shall be communicated to the applicant using the form prescribed in
 areasararea
 s Areas        SCHEDULE THREE B.
Director to
approve                  6.     The specifications for design, construction and management of a
private
Biosecurity     private biosecurity quarantine station will be set by the Director of Biosecurity from
Goods Holding   time to time and will be disclosed to applicants whose applications have been
Areas
                approved.
Format for
Biosecurity             7.    The format for the Biosecurity Arrival Declaration for vessels and
arrival
declaration     commercial aircraft are as prescribed in SCHEDULE FOUR forms 4A and 4B
                respectively.
                                                          366

Format for                 8.      The Format for the Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate
incoming
conveyance          (Master’s Certificate) for vessels is as prescribed in SCHEDULE FIVE forms 5A –
biosecurity         5C.
certificate for
vessels
                             9.      Where an animal is on board an arriving vessel or aircraft, the
Format for          captain or pilot is required to enter into a Bond or Guarantee to the effect that the
Bond or             animal will remain on board while the vessel or aircraft remains within Solomon
Guarantee for
vessels or air      Islands territorial waters. The format for the Bond or Guarantee is as prescribed in
craft in the case   SCHEDULE SIX form 6A.
of animals


Format for
                             10.     Where meat or meat products which do not meet the requirements
Bond or             for entry into Solomon Islands are on board a vessel or aircraft arriving in Solomon
Guarantee for
vessels and
                    Islands the captain or pilot is required to enter into a Bond or Guarantee to the effect
aircraft in the     that the meat or meat products will remain on board while the vessel or aircraft
case of meat or
meat products
                    remains within Solomon Islands territorial waters. The format for the Bond or
                    Guarantee is as prescribed in SCHEDULE SIX form 6B. For aircraft this section
                    only applies if the aircraft is to remain on the ground overnight.

Format for Bond
                            11.     Where plants or plant products which do not meet the requirements
or Guarantee for for entry into Solomon Islands are on board a vessel or aircraft arriving in Solomon
vessels or
aircraft in the
                  Islands the captain or pilot is required to enter into a Bond or Guarantee to the effect
case of plants or that the plants or plant products will remain on board while the vessel or aircraft
plant products
                    remains within Solomon Islands territorial waters. The format for the Bond or
                    Guarantee is as prescribed in SCHEDULE SIX form 6C. For aircraft this section
                    only applies if the aircraft is to remain on the ground overnight.

Control of                   12.    All border agencies and owners of Biosecurity Holding Areas are
entry and exit
from
                    subject to biosecurity controls. The Director of Biosecurity will advise the owners of
Biosecurity         Biosecurity Holding Areas on how the entry and exit from these Areas is to be
Holding
Areas
                    managed to maintain biosecurity control.

              Part III – IMPORT OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS INCLUDING PLANT AND
                                     ANIMAL PRODUCTS

 Declared                    13.    All pests and diseases of plants which conform to the International
 regulated pests
 and diseases       Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) of “quarantine pest” see Section 2
 for plants         Interpretation above or
                    https://www.ippc.int/sites/default/files/documents/20140214/ispm_05_en_2014-02-
                                                       367

                  14cpm-8_201402141055--559.25%20KB.pdf are declared Regulated Pests and
                  Diseases.

Declared                  14.    All diseases, infections and infestations listed on the World
regulated
pests and         Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) website (as updated regularly)
diseases for      http://www.oie.int/animal-health-in-the-world/oie-listed-diseases-2014/ and are not
animals
                  already present in Solomon Islands are also declared Regulated Pests and Diseases.
Prohibition
on import of              15.   It is prohibited to import any live plant or animals, or plant and
live plants       animal products unless specifically permitted in writing by the Director of
and animals
                  Biosecurity.

Format for                16.     An application for a Biosecurity Import Permit for plants and
Application
for permit to     animals including plant and animal products and earth must be made on the format
import plants     as prescribed in SCHEDULE SEVEN forms 7A – 7E.
and animals
Format for                17.    The format for the permit to import plants and animals including
permits to
import plants     plant and animal products and earth will be as prescribed in SCHEDULE EIGHT
and animals       forms 8A TO 8D.

Agent to                  18.     In order to execute the powers conferred by Section 23 of the
cooperate in
Execution of      Biosecurity Act the shipping agent or air cargo agent, shall provide the relevant
section 23 of     Biosecurity Officer with all copies of the cargo manifest for each vessel or aircraft
the Act
                  arriving in Solomon Islands in either manuscript or electronic form.
Biosecurity
officer to                19.     The Biosecurity Officer shall, immediately upon receipt of the cargo
inspect           manifest, inspect the manifest and stamp with “Quarantine Hold” or “QH” or
manifest
                  otherwise mark (e.g. electronically using ASYCUDA system or any other approved
                  system) every item listed which in his opinion may harbour regulated pests or
                  diseases or be a regulated article.

Offence to                 20.     It is an offence (Penalty items 19 and 36) for anyone (including a
release cargo
stamped “QH”
                  customs officer or shipping agent, or air cargo or airline agent, or Ports Authority
                  officer) to release any item of cargo that has been stamped “Quarantine Hold” unless
                  instructed by a Biosecurity Officer as required under regulation 23 below, following
                  any necessary inspection and treatment.
Format for
Application for           21.    An application for Biosecurity Import Clearance must be made on
Biosecurity       the Form prescribed in SCHEDULE NINE.
Import
Clearance
                                                        368

IPPC and
                             22.     Wood and wood packing material may not be landed in Solomon
wood, wood          Islands (i.e. removed out of a designated Biosecurity Holding Area) unless it
packing
material            complies with the standards set under the International Standard for Phytosanitary
                    Measures (ISPM) 15 of the International Plant Protection Convention.

Consignments                23.     Where Biosecurity Officers are satisfied that all biosecurity import
held under
regulation 19
                    requirements for a consignment held under regulation 20 above have been satisfied
                    they will issue a Biosecurity Import Clearance form as prescribed in SCHEDULE
                    TEN A and B.

                                               PART IV - SEA CONTAINERS
Exterior of
containers to be             24. The exterior of every sea container landed from any ship and
clean
                    destined to leave a Biosecurity Holding Area must be clean and free from
                    contamination with insects and other pests, soil, debris and animal or vegetable
                    matter.

Requirement for
Biosecurity
                            25.     A Biosecurity Import Clearance Form giving permission for a sea
Import Clearance    container to leave a Biosecurity Holding Area as prescribed in SCHEDULE TEN A
                    will only be issued by a Biosecurity Officer if:

                                   a) The sea container is covered by a Certificate of Cleanliness
                                      issued by the exporting country, or
                                   b) Where no Certificate of Cleanliness is provided, the container
                                      meets the standard of external cleanliness prescribed in
                                      SCHEDULE ELEVEN A hereto.
Further standards           26.     The Director may from time to time add further standards of
of Cleanliness
                    cleanliness as and when required.

Exterior of                 27.     If the exterior of any sea container is not of sufficient state of
sea container
                    cleanliness to the satisfaction of the Director such sea container must be
                    immediately cleansed within the Biosecurity Holding Area and all matter removed
                    therefrom must be disposed of to the satisfaction of a Biosecurity Officer.

Requirement             28.    Every refrigerated or insulated sea container landed from any ship
for refrigerated
or insulated sea must have been thoroughly cleaned in a manner prescribed in SCHEDULE
container.       ELEVEN B immediately prior to loading and despatch to Solomon Islands. The
                    Shipping Line must produce a Certificate of Container Cleanliness to the satisfaction
                    of the Director.
                                                          369

 Chief Health                29.      Where any refrigerated or insulated sea container shall not carry with it
 Officer and
 Director to be
                   a certificate stating that it has been cleaned in a manner prescribed in SCHEDULE
 satisfied         ELEVEN B immediately prior to loading and despatch to Solomon Islands or is in a
                   dirty or contaminated condition on its arrival in Solomon Islands, the Chief Health
                   Officer may require that its contents be inspected and passed fit for human consumption
                   before being released. The Director shall then require the sea container to be cleaned in
                   the manner as prescribed in the SCHEDULE ELEVEN B after it has been emptied of
                   its contents.

Chief Health              30.    The Chief Health Officer may from time to time add further
Officer to add
further cleaning   approved cleaning methods and standards to those as prescribed in SCHEDULE
methods            ELEVEN B.

Inspection of               31.   Every incoming sea container which is loaded in whole or in part
Incoming Sea       with regulated articles may, before any articles are removed therefrom, be opened
Containers
                   within a designated Biosecurity Goods Holding Area for inspection by a Biosecurity
Right of           Officer.
Biosecuirty
Officers to
inspect incoming          32.    Any Biosecurity Officer shall have the right to inspect any other
sea containers
                   incoming sea container (whether loaded or not) and the goods contained therein.

Movement of                33.    In Honiara or Noro, sea containers may be moved between
sea containers     designated Biosecurity Goods Holding Areas before clearance inspection if
in Honiara
and Noro           approved by a Biosecurity Officer.

Landing of sea
containers for
                           34.      Sea containers destined for use within Solomon Islands must in every
use in             case be first landed at Honiara or Noro or any other area designated by the Director.
Solomon
Islands
Agent to meet
                           35.     For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that the actions
cost of cleaning required and the costs incurred in cleaning or treating sea containers to meet the
or treatment of
sea containers
                 requirements of these regulations are to be borne by the shipping agent, importer or
                   individual responsible for the importation of the containers.

                             PART V – USED VEHICLES, EARTHMOVING AND LOGGING
                                                MACHINERY

 All used                  36.    All used vehicles, earthmoving and logging machinery, intended for
 vehicles to be
 inspected         use in Solomon Islands can only be issued a Biosecurity Import Clearance and
                   released from a Biosecurity Port Holding Area if it has been inspected by a
                                                         370

                  Biosecurity Officer and found to be free of soil, pests, plant debris, seeds, plant and
                  animal material to the satisfaction of the Director of Biosecurity.
Requirement
for certificate           37.      Where used vehicles, earthmoving and logging machinery arrive
of cleanliness    with a certificate of cleanliness from the exporting country, the Biosecurity Officer
from
exporting         may decide to inspect sufficient to validate the certificate.
country
Decontamina-              38.     Where used vehicles, earthmoving and logging machinery arrive in
tion and
repeated          an unclean condition they are to be decontaminated within the Biosecurity Port
inspection of     Holding Area (including, where necessary, partial or full dismantling of the used
used vehicles
                  vehicles, machinery and equipment) and repeatedly inspected by a Biosecurity
                  Officer until they are free of soil, pests, plant debris, seeds, plants and animal
                  material to the satisfaction of the Director of Biosecurity.
Military
vehicles to
                          39.    This regulation applies equally to used military vehicles, machinery
comply before     and equipment prior to deployment or redeployment. Military authorities are
deployment
                  expected to cooperate in the application of this regulation and will be encouraged to
                  apply these phytosanitary measures.

 Safe disposal             40.     All soil, pests, plant debris, seeds, plants and animal material
                  removed from any contaminated vehiclers, vessels or container must be disposed of
                  safely to the satisfaction of the Director of Biosecurity.

 Definition               41.     For the purposes of this Part, “used vehicle” includes all types of
                  used vehicles, machinery or equipment, whether for purposes of agricultural,
                  construction, forestry, horticultural, military, mining, private use or for any purpose.

                      PART VI – EXPORT OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS INCLUDING PLANT
                                        AND ANIMAL PRODUCTS

 Application form
 for Biosecurity         42.     An application for Biosecurity Export Clearance and sanitary or
 Export Clearance phytosanitary certificates must be made on the Form as prescribed in SCHEDULE
 and Sanitary or
 Phytosanitary    TWELVE.
 Certificate

 Containers                43.     Every sea container leaving Solomon Islands which is to be loaded in
 leaving
 Solomon          whole or in part with agricultural products must, prior to loading, be cleaned to the
 Islands to be    satisfaction of a Biosecurity Officer who may issue a certificate to the effect that it has
 cleaned
                  been so cleaned.
                                                       371

General                  44.     Biosecurity Officers may issue Certificates of Cleanliness for any sea
Certificate of
Cleanliness      containers if requested by an importing country.

                       PART VII– DESIGNATED BIOSECURITY QUARANTINE STATIONS

Designatred              45.     Areas designated as biosecurity quarantine stations for live animals
Biosecurity
Quarantine       and plants for the purposes of the Act are prescribed in SCHEDULE THIRTEEN.
Stations
Format for               46.      Individuals, organisations or companies intending to establish private
Application
for private      biosecurity quarantine stations for the purposes of post-entry quarantine of animals
Biosecurity
Quarantine
                 or plants for the purposes of the Act must apply to the Director of Biosecurity using
Stations         the Application form as prescribed in SCHEDULE FOURTEEN.
Director to
approve                   47.     The specifications for design, construction and management of a
private
Biosecurity      private biosecurity quarantine station will be set by the Director of Biosecurity on
Quarantine       receipt of a formal application.
Stations

                                            PART VIII - ADMINISTRATION
Gazetting of
Designated
                         48.
                           For the purposes of sections 73 and 74 of the Act, the persons listed
Biosecurity      in SCHEDULE FIFTEEN are hereby designated as Biosecurity officers.
Officers
Biosecurity               49.    All vessels arriving in Solomon Islands must obtain a biosecurity
landing
clearance for    landing clearance from a Biosecurity Officer before berthing at any designated point
arriving         of entry in Solomon Islands. The format to be used is that as prescribed in
vessels
                 SCHEDULE SIXTEEN.

Fees                    50.     All the fees applicable for the time being, for purposes of the
                 administration of the Act are as prescribed in SCHEDULE SEVENTEEN hereto.
                                     372

                              SCHEDULE ONE

DESIGNATED POINTS OF ENTRY AND DEPARTURE FOR REGULATED
                             ARTICLES
             (Section 10 (1) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)



    The landing and export of animals, plants, plant and animal products, earth
    and any other things regulated under the Act is prohibited at all seaports and
    airports, except at the seaports and airports as designated below-

     A. Designated Primary Points of Entry and Departure-
           Honiara (seaport)
           Noro (seaport)
           Henderson (airport)
           Munda (airport)

     B. Designated Secondary Points of Entry and Departure-
           Ballalae (airport)
           Gizo (seaport)
           Graciosa Bay (seaport and airport)
           Nusatupe (airport)
           Shortland Harbour (Kulitanai bay) (seaport)
           Tulagi (seaport)
                                       373

                              SCHEDULE TWO

            DESIGNATED BIOSECURITY HOLDING AREAS
                 (Section 11 of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

1. Designation of Biosecurity Holding Areas

   A. The following Areas are hereby designated as Seaport Holding Areas -
      i.   Honiara (seaport). All areas (including wharfs) and buildings
           within the Ports Authority security fence.
      ii.   Noro (seaport). All areas and buildings within the Ports Authority
            security fence. Until further notice only the following types of sea
            container may be landed at Noro:
            a. empty refrigerated containers, sea containers for use by Sol Tuna
               Company Limited and National Fisheries Development under a
               Compliance Agreement,
            b. sea containers holding polished rice for human consumption from
               Australia.
            c. tanktainers.
   B. The following Areas are hereby designated as Airport Holding Areas-
       i.   Henderson (airport). The international passenger arrivals hall,
            hangers and cargo handling areas and the “apron” area immediately in
            front of the international arrivals building.
      ii.   Munda (airport). The international passenger arrivals hall, cargo
            handling areas and the “apron” area immediately in front of the
            international arrivals building.

2. The following Areas are designated as Biosecurity Goods Holding Areas-
      i. Bond store within the offices of air-cargo agents.
                  Solair Air Freight
                  P.O. Box 23
                  Honiara
                  Pacific Air Cargo
                  P.O. Box R 126
                  Honiara
                                       374

                 Pacific Air Express
                 P.O. Box 183
                 Honiara
                 DHL Express
                 P.O. Box 439
                 Honiara.
                 Express Freight Management
                 Express Air Cargo
                 P.O. Box C3
                 Honiara.
          And as amended from time to time by Gazette Notice.
          ii.   Warehouse or secure areas designated by the Director of
                Biosecurity under separate compliance agreements and
                published when needed by Gazette Notice.
3. The following Areas are designated as Biosecurity Postal Holding Areas-
       The postal sorting rooms within the Honiara central post office.

4. The following Areas are designated as Biosecurity Port Holding Areas -

  Ballalae (airport)                     Shortland Harbour (Kulitanai bay)
  Gizo (seaport)                         (seaport)
  Graciosa Bay (seaport and              Tulagi (seaport)
  airport)
  Nusatupe (airport)
                                         375

                               SCHEDULE THREE

Form 3 A: Application for Commercial Land or Buildings to be Designated as a Private
            Biosecurity Goods Holding Area



Form 3 B: Approval by the Director On Application for a Private Biosecurity
          Goods Holding Area
                                            376

                                                                                  Form 3 A


      APPLICATION FOR COMMERCIAL LAND OR BUILDINGS TO BE
    DESIGNATED AS A PRIVATE BIOSECURITY GOODS HOLDING AREA

                    (Regulation 5 of the Biosecurity Regulations 2015)

Name of applicant/company:

……………………………………………………………………..

……………………………………………………………………..

……………………………………………………………………..

Tel: ……………………………… Email: ………………………………………………



Location of proposed site (Please provide a specific address and details (registered parcel
numbers etc...) of the facilities proposed):

………………………………………………………………………………………………

………………………………………………………………………………………………

………………………………………………………………………………………………

Purpose of this application and proposed use of the land: ………………………….…

………………………………………………………………………………………………

………………………………………………………………………………………………

………………………………………………………………………………………………

Signed: ……………………………………                              Date: …………………………………
                   Applicant
                                                        377

                                                                                                     Form 3A Page 2
                                                 Biosecurity Act 2013

Designation of   15.    (1) The Minister may, by order in the Gazette, designate –
biosecurity
holding areas
                               (a)    any territorial waters or any part of a seaport as a biosecurity port holding
                                area for vessels; and

                                (b)    any part of an airport as a biosecurity port holding area for aircraft.

                       (2)      A biosecurity port holding area is one where incoming conveyances may be held for
                                biosecurity inspection pending biosecurity landing clearance or other disposition
                                under this Act.

                       (3)      The Minister may, by order in the Gazette, designate any area of land at or adjacent to
                                a seaport or airport as a biosecurity goods holding area for incoming or outgoing
                                containers and goods.

                       (4)      A biosecurity goods holding area is one where incoming or outgoing containers or
                                goods may be held for biosecurity inspection pending biosecurity clearance or other
                                disposition under this Act.

                       (5)      The Minister may designate any part of a mail exchange as a biosecurity postal
                                holding area for incoming or outgoing postal items.

                       (6)      A biosecurity postal holding area is one where incoming or outgoing postal items
                                may be held for biosecurity inspection pending biosecurity clearance or other
                                disposition under this Act.

                       (7)      Before making an order under subsection (1), (3) or (5), the Minister must obtain
                                the advice of the Director and consult, as the case may be, the officers or authorities
                                responsible for the movement of vessels, aircraft and postal items in Solomon
                                Islands.

                       (8)      A mail exchange may only be designated as a biosecurity holding area in respect of
                                regulated articles that at the time of entry or departure are in a mail bag or other
                                container that conforms to the requirements of the postal legislation of Solomon
                                Islands.
Management
of biosecurity
                 16.    (1)            No person, other than the person in charge of the area or a biosecurity officer
holding areas           acting in the course of duty, may enter a biosecurity holding area without the written
                        permission of the Director, or the permission of the person in charge of the area or of a
                        biosecurity officer.

                        (2)     A biosecurity officer may, in order to reduce a biosecurity threat, lock, seal or
                                otherwise prevent entry to and exit from a biosecurity holding area or any building in
                                it.

                        (3)     A person commits an offence if the person -

                                (a)      enters a biosecurity holding area without permission given under
                                         subsection (1); or
                           378


      (b)   damages, interferes with or in any way reduces the effectiveness of
            measures taken to secure a biosecurity holding area, or any regulated
            article or other item in the area.

(4)     The Director may issue written directions to the person in charge of a
        biosecurity holding area as to the management of the area.

(5)     A person who removes or attempts to remove from a biosecurity holding area
        any regulated article without obtaining biosecurity clearance in respect of it,
        unless for the purpose of biosecurity measures being applied to the article in
        accordance with this Act, commits an offence.
                                               379

                                                                           Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                  Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                           PO Box G13
                                                                                            HONIARA
                                                                                             Tel. 24657

                                     SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                          Form 3 B

       APPROVAL BY THE DIRECTOR ON APPLICATION FOR A PRIVATE
                 BIOSECURITY GOODS HOLDING AREA

                      (Regulation 5 of the Biosecurity Regulations 2015)

        Name of Applicant: ……………………………………………………………….
        Address: ……………………………………………………………………………
        ………………………………………………………………………………………
        Phone/Mobile: …………………………………………………………………….
        Email: ……………….……………………………………………………………
        Certificate of Business Registration Number: ………………………
        Date: ………………………………………………………………...
                                          APPROVAL

IN exercise of the powers conferred upon me by regulation 5, APPROVAL is hereby
granted to you to operate a private Biosecurity Goods Holding Area for the purpose of
inspection of imported goods on

(parcel number……………………………description of land/ premises…………………..)

Your License Number is:……………………………………………

Duration:…………………………Years


………………………………………
DIRECTOR OF BIOSECURITY

Note: Your Licence may be cancelled without notice to you if you fail to comply with the Licence
      conditions as approved by the Director from time to time.
                                     380

                            SCHEDULE FOUR


Form 4A:   Biosecurity Arrival Declaration for Vessels Arriving in Solomon
           Islands (does not include yachts with berths for 5 people or less)

Form 4B:   Biosecurity Arrival Declaration for Commercial Aircraft Arriving in
           Solomon Islands
                                                    381

                                                                                        Form 4A
                   BIOSECURITY ARRIVAL DECLARATION
                FOR VESSELS ARRIVING IN SOLOMON ISLANDS

                  (does not include yachts with berths for 5 people or less)
                  (Sections 14 and 21 of the Biosecurity Act 2013, Reg. 7)

1. Name of vessel: ……………………...                              2. Voyage Number: …………........
3. Destination port of first arrival in Solomon Islands: …………………………
4. Last port of call before arrival in Solomon Islands: ……… …………...........
                                                                         Port       Country

5. Estimated date and time of arrival in Solomon Islands: …………………….…
6. Actual date of arrival in Solomon Islands: ..............................
7. Actual time of arrival in Solomon Islands: ..............................
8. Intended port(s) of call: ........................................
9. Proposed itinerary until final departure from Solomon Islands:
……………………..…………………………………………………………………
10. Number of crew: ……………….……… 11. Number of passengers: ………
12. Live animals on board: Yes/No                               13. Live plants on board: Yes/No
(Please list on reverse any live animals or plants on board)
14. Do you wish to land the animal: Yes/No.
15. Description of any illness, sickness or disease affecting any animal on board:
…………………………………………………………………………………………

Signed: Operator/Master/Agent: …………….…………………Date: ........................
This form must be delivered to Biosecurity Solomon Islands not less than 24 hours
before arrival in the case of vessels. The form may be delivered electronically or by
manuscript and may come direct from the Master or Pilot or via a designated
Biosecurity Clearance Agent. (If similar information is required by other border agencies it
may be combined into one general form )

Contact details for Biosecurity Solomon Islands are:

Seaport: Tel: ………………………………. Email: ………………………………
                                                            382

                                                                                                      Form 4A page 2.
 List of all animals and plants on board:
    Kind of          Kind of     Number Country and port                                            Comments
    animal            plant               where loaded




                                               Biosecurity Act 2013
 14.      (1)      The master or captain of every vessel or aircraft destined for Solomon Islands must make or cause to
          be made to the Director a biosecurity arrival declaration, in the prescribed form, stating –
              (a)       the destination seaport or airport in Solomon Islands and the estimated time of arrival of the vessel
                        or aircraft;
              (b)       its immediately preceding port or place of call;
              (c)       the proposed itinerary of the vessel or aircraft until it leaves Solomon Islands;
              (d)       the nature and country of origin of its cargo;
              (e)       the number of passengers and crew;
              (f)       the presence of any live animal or live plant on the vessel or aircraft;
              (g)       the nature of any illness or malady affecting any live animal, plant, crew member, passenger or
                        other individual on board the vessel or aircraft; and
              (h)       any other matter relevant to facilitating biosecurity landing clearance of the vessel or aircraft that
                        is specified by the Director.
            (2) The declaration required by subsection (1) –
               (a)      must be made not less than 24 hours in the case of a vessel, or 60 minutes in the case of an
                        aircraft, before the estimated time of arrival;
               (b)      may be made by electronic means, in accordance with directions of the Director issued from
                        time to time;
               (c)      may be made through a biosecurity clearance agent; or
               (d)      may be made in conjunction with or as part of a declaration made for customs or other
                        border control purposes.
         (3) A master or captain who fails to make a biosecurity arrival declaration, either directly or through a
               biosecurity clearance agent, commits an offence.

21.            (1)   The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in Solomon Islands –
               (a)      take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel from making contact with any
                        animal on shore unless permitted by a biosecurity officer, and then only as directed by the officer;
                        and
               (b)      seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas during the hours of darkness, except as
                        needed for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
       (2)     The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to ensure that
              (a)       no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant product;
              (b)       no bilge water or ballast water; and
              (c)       no sewage or foul wastewater,
               is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Solomon Islands.

       (3)     The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all reasonable steps to
               ensure that
               (a)      all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a suitable leak-proof container, with a
                                                   383

                lid, and the container is securely fastened at all times and kept within the vessel or aircraft; and
      (b)       garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from the vessel or aircraft under and in
                accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
(4)   The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all reasonable steps
      to ensure that no ship's stores are removed from the vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands, except
      under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
(5)   A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores (or require the stores to be locked or sealed by the master)
      of any incoming vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands.
(6)   The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the owner or charterer of the vessel or
      aircraft.
(7)   A master who contravenes subsection (1)(b), fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection
      (1)(a), (2), (3), (4) or (5) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given under any of those
      subsections commits an offence.
(8)   A captain who fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (3) or (4) or fails to obey a
      direction of a biosecurity officer given under either of those subsections commits an offence.
(9)   An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements prescribed by regulations.
                                                      384

                                                                                    Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                           Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                                    PO Box G13
                                                                                                     HONIARA
                                                                                                      Tel. 24657

                                          SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                                   Form 4B
            BIOSECURITY ARRIVAL DECLARATION
   FOR COMMERCIAL AIRCRAFT ARRIVING IN SOLOMON ISLANDS

                       (Regulation 7 of the Biosecurity Regulation 2015)

1. Airline name……………………………… 2. Flight number…………..………
3. Aircraft Registration: ……………………………………………….
4. Destination port of first arrival in Solomon Islands ……………………………
5. Estimated date and time of arrival…………………….…………………………
6. Actual date of arrival: ..............................7. Actual time of arrival: ...................
8. Intended port(s) of call: ......................................................
9. Proposed itinerary until departure final departure from Solomon Islands: …
…………………………………………………………………………………………
10. Number of crew: ……………….……… 11. Number of passengers: ………
Disinfection method:
Residual: YES / NO                                           Certificate expiry date:
………………………
Pre-embarkation: YES / NO                                    Top of Decent:           YES / NO
Aircraft staying overnight may require additional disinfection
12. Live animals on board:               Yes/No        13. Live plants on board:             Yes/No
(Please list on reverse any live animals or plants on board)
14. Description of any illness, sickness or disease affecting any animal on board
…………………………………………………………………………………………
While on the ground, garbage storage or disposal will be in accordance with the
Biosecurity Officer’s instructions. No animal or animal product and no plant or
                                                   385

plant product will be allowed to leave the said aircraft unless in accordance with the
Biosecurity Act 2013.
Signed: Operator/Pilot/Agent: ………………….………………….                                         Date: ………
This form must be delivered to Biosecurity Solomon Islands not less than 60
minutes before arrival. The form may be delivered electronically or by manuscript
and may come direct from the Pilot or via a designated Biosecurity Clearance Agent.
(If similar information is required by other border agencies this form may be combined with others into one
general form)


Contact details for Biosecurity Solomon Islands are:
Airport: Tel: ……………………………………. Email: ……………………………
                                                      386


                                                                                               Form 4B page 2,

 Biosecurity Act 2013
 15.     (1)      The master or captain of every vessel or aircraft destined for Solomon Islands must make or
         cause to be made to the Director a biosecurity arrival declaration, in the prescribed form, stating –
             (i)     the destination seaport or airport in Solomon Islands and the estimated time of arrival of
                     the vessel or aircraft;
             (j)     its immediately preceding port or place of call;
             (k)     the proposed itinerary of the vessel or aircraft until it leaves Solomon Islands;
             (l)     the nature and country of origin of its cargo;
             (m)     the number of passengers and crew;
             (n)     the presence of any live animal or live plant on the vessel or aircraft;
             (o)     the nature of any illness or malady affecting any live animal, plant, crew member,
                     passenger or other individual on board the vessel or aircraft; and
             (p)     any other matter relevant to facilitating biosecurity landing clearance of the vessel or
                     aircraft that is specified by the Director.
           (4) The declaration required by subsection (1) –
              (a)    must be made not less than 24 hours in the case of a vessel, or 60 minutes in the
                     case of an aircraft, before the estimated time of arrival;
              (b)    may be made by electronic means, in accordance with directions of the Director
                     issued from time to time;
              (c)    may be made through a biosecurity clearance agent; or
              (d)    may be made in conjunction with or as part of a declaration made for customs or
                     other border control purposes.
        (5) A master or captain who fails to make a biosecurity arrival declaration, either directly or
              through a biosecurity clearance agent, commits an offence.

22.            (1) The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in Solomon Islands –
               (a)     take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel from making contact
                       with any animal on shore unless permitted by a biosecurity officer, and then only as
                       directed by the officer; and
               (b)     seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas during the hours of darkness,
                       except as needed for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
       (10)    The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to ensure that
              (d)      no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant product;
              (e)      no bilge water or ballast water; and
              (f)      no sewage or foul wastewater,
               is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Solomon Islands.

       (11)   The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all
              reasonable steps to ensure that
              (a)    all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a suitable leak-proof
                     container, with a lid, and the container is securely fastened at all times and kept within
                     the vessel or aircraft; and
              (b)    garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from the vessel or aircraft
                     under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
                                                 387

(12)    The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all
        reasonable steps to ensure that no ship's stores are removed from the vessel or aircraft while it is
        in Solomon Islands, except under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
(13)    A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores (or require the stores to be locked or sealed by
        the master) of any incoming vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands.
(14)    The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the owner or charterer of the
        vessel or aircraft.
(15)    A master who contravenes subsection (1)(b), fails to take all reasonable steps as required by
        subsection (1)(a), (2), (3), (4) or (5) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given
        under any of those subsections commits an offence.
(16)    A captain who fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (3) or (4) or fails to
        obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given under either of those subsections commits an
        offence.
   (17)    An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements prescribed by regulations.
                                          388

                                  SCHEDULE FIVE



Form 5A: Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate, (Master’s Certificate)

Form 5B: Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate (Yachts), (Master's Certificate)

Form 5C: Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate For Vessels Intending to Stay in
       Solomon Islands, (Master's Certificate)
                                                   389

                                                                                 Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                        Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                                 PO Box G13
                                                                                                  HONIARA
                                                                                                   Tel. 24657

                                        SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                                 Form 5A

             INCOMING CONVEYANCE BIOSECURITY CERTIFICATE,
                        (MASTER’S CERTIFICATE)

                      (Section 15 (1)(d) and 21 of the Biosecurity Act 2013)


I, …………………………………………….…… of the …………….................…………
                              (FULL NAME)                                  (FULL NAME OF VESSEL)


hereby certify that while the said vessel is or has been within the outer limits of the
territorial sea of Solomon Islands:

1. No organic garbage1, bilge or ballast water and no sewage or foul wastewater has been
   or will be discharged overboard;

2. While in port, organic garbage1 storage or disposal and rat control measures will be in
   accordance with the Biosecurity Officer’s instructions;

3. No animal or animal product will be allowed to leave the said vessel unless in
   accordance with the Biosecurity Act 2013;

4. No plant or plant product will be allowed to leave the said ship except as in 3 above;

5. The following live animals and plants are on board the said vessel.

               Kind of            Kind of         Number         Country and port where loaded
               animal              plant




1
 Under the Biosecurity Act 2013 " organic garbage" means waste material derived in whole or in part from
plants, fruit, vegetables, meat or other plant or animal material, or other refuse of any kind that has been
associated with any plants, fruits, vegetables, meat or other plant or animal material.
                                                          390


To the best of my knowledge and belief the foregoing statements are true and correct in
every particular; and I am fully aware of the provisions of the Biosecurity Act the orders and
penalties/fines made under it.

Dated this …...............................day of ….............................. 20 …... at …............................

Signature: …………………………………………..
                           (Master)
                                               391


                                                                                          For 5A page 2.

                                  Biosecurity Act 2013
 15.   (1) The master or captain of every incoming vessel or aircraft must-

                (a)     take the vessel or aircraft directly to a biosecurity port holding area as
                        directed by a biosecurity officer;
                (b)     permit a biosecurity officer to board and search the vessel or aircraft in
                        accordance with section 47( 1);
                (c)     provide to the officer the log, cargo manifest, bill of lading, stores list,
                        passenger list, crew list and any other document that is on or in and
                        relates to the vessel or aircraft and that the officer reasonably requests for
                        the purposes of this Act; and
                (d)     complete an incoming conveyance biosecurity certificate, in the form specified or
                        approved by the Director, certifying that all garbage, live animals, meat or
                        animal products and plants or plant material on board the vessel or aircraft will
                        be lawfully disposed of.

21.     (1) The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in Solomon Islands –

                (a)   take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel from
                      making contact with any animal on shore unless permitted by a biosecurity
                      officer, and then only as directed by the officer; and
                (b)   seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas during the hours of
                      darkness, except as needed for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
        (2)         The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to ensure that

                (a)     no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant product;
                (b)     no bilge water or ballast water; and
                (c)     no sewage or foul wastewater,
                is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Solomon Islands.

        (3)     The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all
                reasonable steps to ensure that
                (a)    all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a suitable leak-proof
                       container, with a lid, and the container is securely fastened at all times and kept
                       within the vessel or aircraft; and
                (b)    garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from the vessel or
                       aircraft under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.

        (4)     The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must
                take all reasonable steps to ensure that no ship's stores are removed from the vessel
                or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands, except under and in accordance with the
                directions of a biosecurity officer.

        (5)     A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores (or require the stores to be locked
                                       392

      or sealed by the master) of any incoming vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon
      Islands.

(6)   The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the owner or
      charterer of the vessel or aircraft.

(7)   A master who contravenes subsection (1)(b), fails to take all reasonable steps as required
      by subsection (1)(a), (2), (3), (4) or (5) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer
      given under any of those subsections commits an offence.

(8)   A captain who fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (3) or (4) or
      fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given under either of those subsections
      commits an offence.

(9)   An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements prescribed by
      regulations.
                                              393

                                                                          Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                 Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                          PO Box G13
                                                                                           HONIARA
                                                                                            Tel. 24657

                                     SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                          Form 5B

       INCOMING CONVEYANCE BIOSECURITY CERTIFICATE (Yachts),
                     (MASTER'S CERTIFICATE)

                    (Section 15 (1)(d) and 21 of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

I, ……………………………………………of the …………………………………..............
                           (FULL NAME)                              (FULL NAME OF YACHT)


hereby certify that while the said yacht is or has been within the outer limits of the territorial
sea of Solomon Islands it has not visited/landed at any place or island or disposed of any
regulated article on land before arriving at this designated first point of Entry and:

1.      No organic garbage, bilge or ballast water and no sewage or foul wastewater has
        been or will be discharged overboard;

2.      While in port, organic garbage1 storage or disposal and rat control measures will be
        in accordance with the Biosecurity Officer's instructions;

3.      No animal or animal product will be allowed to leave the said yacht unless in
        accordance with the Biosecurity Act 2013;

4.      No plant or plant product will be allowed to leave the said ship except as in 3 above;

5.      The following live animals and plants are on board the said yacht.

         Kind of           Kind of       Number        Country and port where loaded
         animal             plant
                                                              394

To the best of my knowledge and belief the foregoing statements are true and correct in
every particular; and I am fully aware of the provisions of the Biosecurity Act the orders and
penalties/fines made under it.

Dated this ..................................day of .................................. 20 ...... at
..........................................

Signature: …………………………………………..
                                (Master )




Note: Under the Biosecurity Act 2013 " organic garbage" means waste material derived in whole or in part
from plants, fruit, vegetables, meat or other plant or animal material, or other refuse of any kind that has
been associated with any plants, fruits, vegetables, meat or other plant or animal material.
                                              395

                                                                                        Form 5B page 2.
                                  Biosecurity Act 2013

15. (1) The master or captain of every incoming vessel or aircraft must-
            (a)      take the vessel or aircraft directly to a biosecurity port holding area as
                     directed by a biosecurity officer;
            (b)      permit a biosecurity officer to board and search the vessel or aircraft in
                     accordance with section 47( 1);
            (c)      provide to the officer the log, cargo manifest, bill of lading, stores list,
                     passenger list, crew list and any other document that is on or in and
                     relates to the vessel or aircraft and that the officer reasonably requests for
                     the purposes of this Act; and
            (d)      complete an incoming conveyance biosecurity certificate, in the form specified or
                     approved by the Director, certifying that all garbage, live animals, meat or
                     animal products and plants or plant material on board the vessel or aircraft will
                     be lawfully disposed of.
            (e)
21. (1) The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in Solomon Islands –
            (a)      take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel from
                     making contact with any animal on shore unless permitted by a biosecurity
                     officer, and then only as directed by the officer; and
            (b)      seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas during the hours of
                     darkness, except as needed for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
    (2) The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to ensure that
            (a)      no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant product;
            (b)      no bilge water or ballast water; and
            (c)      no sewage or foul wastewater,
            is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Solomon Islands.
    (3)     The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all
            reasonable steps to ensure that
            (a)      all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a suitable leak-proof
                     container, with a lid, and the container is securely fastened at all times and kept
                     within the vessel or aircraft; and
            (b)      garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from the vessel or
                     aircraft under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
    (4)     The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must
            take all reasonable steps to ensure that no ship's stores are removed from the vessel
            or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands, except under and in accordance with the
            directions of a biosecurity officer.
    (5)     A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores (or require the stores to be locked
            or sealed by the master) of any incoming vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon
            Islands.
    (6)     The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the owner or
            charterer of the vessel or aircraft.
    (7)     A master who contravenes subsection (1)(b), fails to take all reasonable steps as required
            by subsection (1)(a), (2), (3), (4) or (5) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer
            given under any of those subsections commits an offence.
    (8)     A captain who fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (3) or (4) or
            fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given under either of those subsections
                                   396

      commits an offence.
(9)   An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements prescribed by
      regulations.
                                              397

                                                                         Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                         PO Box G13
                                                                                          HONIARA
                                                                                           Tel. 24657

                                      SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                          Form 5C

           INCOMING CONVEYANCE BIOSECURITY CERTIFICATE
          FOR VESSELS INTENDING TO STAY IN SOLOMON ISLANDS
                           (MASTER'S CERTIFICATE)

                    (Section 15 (1)(d) and 21 of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

I, ………………………………………………… of the ……………………………………
                (FULL NAME)                                     (FULL NAME OF VESSEL)


hereby certify that while the said vessel is or has been within the outer limits of the
territorial sea of Solomon Islands:

1. No organic garbage, bilge or ballast water and no sewage or foul wastewater has been or
   will be discharged overboard;
2. While in port, organic garbage1 storage or disposal and rat control measures will be in
   accordance with the Biosecurity Officer's instructions;
3. The following live animals and plants are on board the said vessel.

         Kind of           Kind of       Number       Country and port where loaded
         animal             plant




4.      Do you have any of the following items on board you wish to bring into Solomon
Islands?
        Animal Products       Yes          No           Plant Products       Yes
                              No

        Stored products         Yes          No             Native artefacts        Yes
                                No

        Used equipment e.g. Tents, bicycles, Motorbike, equipment used with animals, golf and
        fishing equipment, vacuum cleaner bags. Yes           No
                                                                398

5. All animals or animal products and plants or plant products that do not meet Solomon
   Islands biosecurity import requirements will be destroyed.

To the best of my knowledge and belief the foregoing statements are true and correct in
every particular; and I am fully aware of the provisions of the Biosecurity Act the orders and
penalties/fines made under it.

Dated this ..................................day of .................................. 20 ...... at ...................................

Signature: …………………………………………..
               (Master)


Note: Under the Biosecurity Act 2013 " organic garbage" means waste material derived in whole or in part
from plants, fruit, vegetables, meat or other plant or animal material, or other refuse of any kind that has
been associated with any plants, fruits, vegetables, meat or other plant or animal material.
                                                     399

                                                                                               Form 5C page 2.

Biosecurity Act 2013

       15. (1) The master or captain of every incoming vessel or aircraft must-
                   (a) take the vessel or aircraft directly to a biosecurity port holding area as
                       directed by a biosecurity officer;
                   (b) permit a biosecurity officer to board and search the vessel or aircraft in
                       accordance with section 47( 1);
                   (c) provide to the officer the log, cargo manifest, bill of lading, stores list,
                       passenger list, crew list and any other document that is on or in and relates
                       to the vessel or aircraft and that the officer reasonably requests for the
                       purposes of this Act; and
                   (d) complete an incoming conveyance biosecurity certificate, in the form
                       specified or approved by the Director, certifying that all garbage, live
                       animals, meat or animal products and plants or plant material on board the
                       vessel or aircraft will be lawfully disposed of.

       21. (1) The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in Solomon Islands –
                    (a)  take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel from
                         making contact with any animal on shore unless permitted by a biosecurity
                         officer, and then only as directed by the officer; and
                 (b)     seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas during the hours of
                         darkness, except as needed for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
            (2) The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to ensure that
                 (a)     no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant product;
                 (b) no bilge water or ballast water; and
                 (c)     no sewage or foul wastewater,
                 is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Solomon Islands.

            (3)     The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all
                    reasonable steps to ensure that
                    (a)      all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a suitable leak-proof
                             container, with a lid, and the container is securely fastened at all times and kept
                             within the vessel or aircraft; and
                    (b)      garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from the vessel or
                             aircraft under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
            (4)     The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must
                    take all reasonable steps to ensure that no ship's stores are removed from the vessel
                    or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands, except under and in accordance with the
                    directions of a biosecurity officer.
            (5)     A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores (or require the stores to be locked
                    or sealed by the master) of any incoming vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon
                    Islands.
            (6)     The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the owner or
                    charterer of the vessel or aircraft.
            (7)     A master who contravenes subsection (1)(b), fails to take all reasonable steps as required
                    by subsection (1)(a), (2), (3), (4) or (5) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer
                    given under any of those subsections commits an offence.
                                      400

(8)   A captain who fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (3) or (4) or
      fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given under either of those subsections
      commits an offence.
(9)   An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements prescribed by
      regulations.
                                           401

                                    SCHEDULE SIX


Form 6A: Ship Master's or Pilot's Bond and Guarantee (Animals)

Form 6B: Ship Master's or Pilot's Bond and Guarantee (Meat)

Form 6C: Ship Master's or Pilot's Bond and Guarantee (Plants (inc. fruits and vegetables))
                                                               402

                                                                                                Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                                       Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                                                PO Box G13
                                                                                                                 HONIARA
                                                                                                                  Tel. 24657

                                                 SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                                                      Form 6A

               SHIP MASTER'S OR PILOT'S BOND AND GUARANTEE

                          (Section 15 (8) and 21 of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

                                                         ANIMALS

I, .................................................................. of the ......................................................
                         (FULL NAME)                                                        (FULL NAME OF VESSEL OR
AIRCRAFT)
(hereinafter referred to as "the Master'' of the said ship or aircraft) in the country of
Solomon Islands am held and firmly bound by this bond to the Government of
Solomon Islands in the sum of Five Thousand United States Dollars (US$5,000.00) to
be paid to the said Government.

Dated at .......................... .this ............................ day of ………………. 20 ...

WHEREAS the animal, more particularly described in the Schedule hereto, being an
animal which may not be introduced into Solomon Islands arrived at
........................................... on the ................day of...........................last, by the said
ship or aircraft.

AND WHEREAS such animal, unless permitted under the Biosecurity Act, is not to
be landed while such ship or aircraft remains in Solomon Islands.

NOW THEREFORE the conditions of this bond or obligation is such that if the
Master keeps the animal securely confined on board in such a manner as may be
approved by a Biosecurity Officer and does not allow such animal, unless permitted
under the Act, to be landed, then this bond shall be void and of no effect, but
otherwise the same shall remain in force.
                                                          403

                                                   SCHEDULE

                                                                                              Country and port
Kind of animal                         Description                             Number
                                                                                               where loaded




 Signed: …………………………… Master/Pilot

 In the presence of         ..............................................................)
                            ..............................................................)
                            ..............................................................)

 NOTE: If the bonded animal comes ashore illegally outward clearance will not be granted until the Bond is paid.
 The Agent will be liable to pay this Bond if the Master fails to pay.
                                                                       404

                                                                                                                        Form 6A Page 2
                                                             Biosecurity Act 2013

      15.      (1)         The master or captain of every incoming vessel or aircraft must-
                     (a) take the vessel or aircraft directly to a biosecurity port holding area as directed by a biosecurity
                           officer;
                     (b) permit a biosecurity officer to board and search the vessel or aircraft in accordance with section
                           47( 1);
                     (c) provide to the officer the log, cargo manifest, bill of lading, stores list, passenger list, crew list
                       and any other document that is on or in and relates to the vessel or aircraft and that the officer
                       reasonably requests for the purposes of this Act; and
                 (d) complete an incoming conveyance biosecurity certificate, in the form specified or approved by the
                       Director, certifying that all garbage, live animals, meat or animal products and plants or plant material
                       on board the vessel or aircraft will be lawfully disposed of.
         (2)     After inspecting relevant documents and conducting any necessary search of an incoming vessel or
                 aircraft, and if satisfied -
                 (a)      that the vessel or aircraft does not have on board any regulated article that might pose a
                          biosecurity threat to Solomon Islands; and
                 (b)      that the prescribed fee, if any, has been paid,
                 a biosecurity officer may grant biosecurity landing clearance to the vessel or aircraft.
         (3)     Biosecurity landing clearance means that a vessel or aircraft may land crew members and any cargo
                 or passengers on board, but the crew and any cargo or passengers remain subject to biosecurity
                 control under this Act.
         (4)     Biosecurity landing clearance must be refused if a biosecurity officer orders the vessel or aircraft
                 into port quarantine pursuant to section 16(3).
         (5)     A master or captain who contravenes a provision of subsection (1) commits an offence.
         (6)     A master or captain who lands any crew, cargo or passengers from a vessel or aircraft without biosecurity
                 landing clearance of a biosecurity officer, commits an offence.
         (7)     A crew member or passenger who lands from a vessel or aircraft before it has received biosecurity
                 landing clearance, except with the permission of a biosecurity officer, commits an offence.
         (8)     Biosecurity landing clearance of a vessel or aircraft may be granted with or without conditions on
                 entry into a bond to the Government, in the form specified or approved by the Director, by the
                 master of the vessel or captain of the aircraft, for compliance with any requirements imposed
                 pursuant to this Act in respect of the vessel or aircraft or cargo.

21.    (1)                 The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in Solomon Islands –
                     (a)      take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel from making contact with any
                              animal on shore unless permitted by a biosecurity officer, and then only as directed by the officer;
                              and
                     (b)      seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas during the hours of darkness, except as needed
                              for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
         (2)         The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to ensure that
                     (a)      no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant product;
                     (b)      no bilge water or ballast water; and
                     (c)      no sewage or foul wastewater,
                     is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Solomon Islands.
         (3)         The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all reasonable steps to
                     ensure that
                     (a)      all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a suitable leak-proof container, with a lid, and
                              the container is securely fastened at all times and kept within the vessel or aircraft; and
                     (b)      garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from the vessel or aircraft under and in
                              accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
                                                        405

(4)   The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all reasonable steps
      to ensure that no ship's stores are removed from the vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands, except
      under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
(5)   A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores (or require the stores to be locked or sealed by the master)
      of any incoming vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands.
(6)   The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the owner or charterer of the vessel or
      aircraft.
(7)   A master who contravenes subsection (1)(b), fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (1)(a), (2),
      (3), (4) or (5) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given under any of those subsections commits an
      offence.
(8)   A captain who fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (3) or (4) or fails to obey a direction of a
      biosecurity officer given under either of those subsections commits an offence.
(9)   An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements prescribed by regulations.
                                                              406

                                                                                                Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                                       Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                                                PO Box G13
                                                                                                                 HONIARA
                                                                                                                  Tel. 24657

                                                 SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                                                Form 6B

                   SHIP MASTER'S OR PILOT'S BOND AND GUARANTEE

                             (Section 15 (8) and 21 of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

                                                            MEAT2

I, ……………………………………...…of the ……………………..................…………….
                        (FULL NAME)                                         (FULL NAME OF VESSEL OR AIRCRAFT)


(hereinafter referred to as "the Master" of the said ship or aircraft), in the country of Solomon
Islands am held and firmly bound by this bond to the Government of Solomon Islands in the
sum of Five Thousand United States Dollars (US$5,000.00) to be paid to the said
Government.

Dated at ................................ this ......................... day of.................20 ....

WHEREAS the meat, more particularly described in the Schedule hereto, being meat which
may not be introduced into Solomon Islands, arrived at .................................................... on
the …………………….day of ………………… last, by the said ship or aircraft.

AND WHEREAS such meat, unless permitted under the Biosecurity Act, is not to be landed
while such ship or aircraft remains in Solomon Islands.

NOW THEREFORE the condition of this bond or obligation is such that if the Master keeps
the meat securely confined on board in such a manner as may be approved by a Biosecurity
Officer and does not allow such meat, unless permitted under the Act, to be landed, then this
bond shall be void and of no effect, but otherwise the same shall remain in force.




2
    “Meat” includes, fresh, frozen and preserved meats.
                                                       407


                                                SCHEDULE

    Meat on board Type & Weight Country of origin Country & Port where loaded




Signed: …………………………………………… Master/Pilot

In the presence of    ..............................................................
                      ..............................................................)

NOTE: If bonded meat comes ashore illegally outward clearance will not be granted until
the Bond is paid. The Agent will be liable to pay this bond if the Master fails to pay.
                                                                    408

                                                                                                                   Form 6B page 2
                                                       Biosecurity Act 2013
  15.       (1)        The master or captain of every incoming vessel or aircraft must-
                  (a) take the vessel or aircraft directly to a biosecurity port holding area as directed by a biosecurity
                       officer;
                  (b) permit a biosecurity officer to board and search the vessel or aircraft in accordance with section
                       47( 1);
                  (c) provide to the officer the log, cargo manifest, bill of lading, stores list, passenger list, crew list
                     and any other document that is on or in and relates to the vessel or aircraft and that the officer
                     reasonably requests for the purposes of this Act; and
               (d) complete an incoming conveyance biosecurity certificate, in the form specified or approved by the
                     Director, certifying that all garbage, live animals, meat or animal products and plants or plant material
                     on board the vessel or aircraft will be lawfully disposed of.
      (2)        After inspecting relevant documents and conducting any necessary search of an incoming vessel
                 or aircraft, and if satisfied -
                (a) that the vessel or aircraft does not have on board any regulated article that might pose a biosecurity
                      threat to Solomon Islands; and
                (b) that the prescribed fee, if any, has been paid,
               a biosecurity officer may grant biosecurity landing clearance to the vessel or aircraft.

      (3)         Biosecurity landing clearance means that a vessel or aircraft may land crew members and any cargo
                  or passengers on board, but the crew and any cargo or passengers remain subject to biosecurity
                  control under this Act.
      (4)         Biosecurity landing clearance must be refused if a biosecurity officer orders the vessel or aircraft
                  into port quarantine pursuant to section 16(3).
      (5)         A master or captain who contravenes a provision of subsection (1) commits an offence.
      (6)         A master or captain who lands any crew, cargo or passengers from a vessel or aircraft without biosecurity
                  landing clearance of a biosecurity officer, commits an offence.
      (7)         A crew member or passenger who lands from a vessel or aircraft before it has received biosecurity
                  landing clearance, except with the permission of a biosecurity officer, commits an offence.
      (8)         Biosecurity landing clearance of a vessel or aircraft may be granted with or without conditions on
                  entry into a bond to the Government, in the form specified or approved by the Director, by the
                  master of the vessel or captain of the aircraft, for compliance with any requirements imposed
                  pursuant to this Act in respect of the vessel or aircraft or cargo.

21.      (1)        The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in Solomon Islands –
                    (a)     take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel from making contact with
                            any animal on shore unless permitted by a biosecurity officer, and then only as directed by the
                            officer; and
                    (b)     seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas during the hours of darkness, except as
                            needed for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
      (2) The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to ensure that
                    (a)     no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant product;
                    (b)     no bilge water or ballast water; and
                    (c)     no sewage or foul wastewater,
              is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Solomon Islands.

      (3)         The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all reasonable steps to
                  ensure that
                       (a)     all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a suitable leak-proof container, with a lid,
                                                        409

                      and the container is securely fastened at all times and kept within the vessel or aircraft; and
           (b)        garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from the vessel or aircraft under and in
                      accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
(4)   The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all reasonable steps
      to ensure that no ship's stores are removed from the vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands, except
      under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
(5)   A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores (or require the stores to be locked or sealed by the master)
      of any incoming vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands.
(6)   The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the owner or charterer of the vessel or
      aircraft.
(7)   A master who contravenes subsection (1)(b), fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (1)(a), (2),
      (3), (4) or (5) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given under any of those subsections commits an
      offence.
(8)   A captain who fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (3) or (4) or fails to obey a direction of a
      biosecurity officer given under either of those subsections commits an offence.
(9)   An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements prescribed by regulations.
                                                              410

                                                                                                Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                                       Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                                                PO Box G13
                                                                                                                 HONIARA
                                                                                                                  Tel. 24657
                                                 SOLOMON ISLANDS

                                                                                                                Form 6C
                   SHIP MASTER'S OR PILOT'S BOND AND GUARANTEE

                            (Section 15 (8) and 21 of the Biosecuritty Act 2013)

                                          Plants (inc. fruits and vegetables)

I, ……………………………………...…of the ……………..……………..………
                                    (FULL NAME)                    (FULL NAME OF VESSEL OR AIRCRAFT)


(hereinafter referred to as "the Master" of the said ship or aircraft), in the country of
Solomon Islands am held and firmly bound by this bond to the Government of Solomon
Islands in the sum of two thousand five hundred United States Dollars (US$2,500.00) to
be paid to the said Government.

Dated at ................................ this ......................... day of.................20 ....

WHEREAS the plants, more particularly described in the Schedule hereto, being plants
which may not be introduced into Solomon Islands, arrived at ...............................................
on the …………………….day of ………………… last, by the said ship or aircraft.

AND WHEREAS such plants, unless permitted under the Biosecurity Act, is not to be
landed while such ship or aircraft remains in Solomon Islands.

NOW THEREFORE the condition of this bond or obligation is such that if the Master keeps
the plants securely confined on board in such a manner as may be approved by a Biosecurity
Officer and does not allow such plant, unless permitted under the Act, to be landed, then this
bond shall be void and of no effect, but otherwise the same shall remain in force.

                                                        SCHEDULE

 Plants on board                             Country of origin                     Country & Port where loaded
                                                       411



Signed: …………………………………………… Master/Pilot

In the presence of       ..............................................................)
                         ..............................................................)
                         ..............................................................)

NOTE: If plant comes ashore illegally outward clearance will not be granted until the Bond is paid.
The Agent will be liable to pay this bond if the Master fails to pay.
                                                             412

                                                                                                            Form 6C page 2
Biosecurity Act 2013
15. (1)     The master or captain of every incoming vessel or aircraft must-
             (a) take the vessel or aircraft directly to a biosecurity port holding area as directed by a
                  biosecurity officer;
             (b) permit a biosecurity officer to board and search the vessel or aircraft in accordance with
                  section 47( 1);
             (c) provide to the officer the log, cargo manifest, bill of lading, stores list, passenger list, crew list
                  and any other document that is on or in and relates to the vessel or aircraft and that the officer
                  reasonably requests for the purposes of this Act; and
             (d) complete an incoming conveyance biosecurity certificate, in the form specified or approved by the
                  Director, certifying that all garbage, live animals, meat or animal products and plants or plant material
                  on board the vessel or aircraft will be lawfully disposed of.
     (2)    After inspecting relevant documents and conducting any necessary search of an incoming vessel or
            aircraft, and if satisfied -
             (a) that the vessel or aircraft does not have on board any regulated article that might pose a biosecurity
                  threat to Solomon Islands; and
             (b) that the prescribed fee, if any, has been paid,
           a biosecurity officer may grant biosecurity landing clearance to the vessel or aircraft.

     (3)   Biosecurity landing clearance means that a vessel or aircraft may land crew members and any cargo
           or passengers on board, but the crew and any cargo or passengers remain subject to biosecurity
           control under this Act.
     (4)   Biosecurity landing clearance must be refused if a biosecurity officer orders the vessel or aircraft
           into port quarantine pursuant to section 16(3).
     (5)   A master or captain who contravenes a provision of subsection (1) commits an offence.
     (6)   A master or captain who lands any crew, cargo or passengers from a vessel or aircraft without
           biosecurity landing clearance of a biosecurity officer, commits an offence.
     (7)   A crew member or passenger who lands from a vessel or aircraft before it has received biosecurity
           landing clearance, except with the permission of a biosecurity officer, commits an offence.
     (8)   Biosecurity landing clearance of a vessel or aircraft may be granted with or without conditions on
           entry into a bond to the Government, in the form specified or approved by the Director, by the
           master of the vessel or captain of the aircraft, for compliance with any requirements imposed
           pursuant to this Act in respect of the vessel or aircraft or cargo.

21. (1)     The master of every incoming vessel must, while the vessel is in Solomon Islands –
                 (a)     take all necessary steps to prevent any animal on board the vessel from making contact with
                         any animal on shore unless permitted by a biosecurity officer, and then only as directed by the
                         officer; and
                 (b)     seal all hatches and holds and enclosed cargo areas during the hours of darkness, except as
                         needed for the working of the vessel or its cargo.
    (2)     The master of every incoming vessel must take all reasonable steps to ensure that
                 (a)     no garbage containing any animal, plant, animal product or plant product;
                 (b)     no bilge water or ballast water; and
                 (c)     no sewage or foul wastewater,
           is discharged from the vessel into the sea while the vessel is in Solomon Islands.

   (3)     The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all reasonable steps to
           ensure that
                (a)     all garbage generated on the vessel or aircraft is placed in a suitable leak-proof container, with a lid,
                                                        413

                      and the container is securely fastened at all times and kept within the vessel or aircraft; and
           (b)        garbage is not disposed of in the sea, and is only removed from the vessel or aircraft under and in
                      accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
(4)   The master of every incoming vessel and captain of every incoming aircraft must take all reasonable steps
      to ensure that no ship's stores are removed from the vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands, except
      under and in accordance with the directions of a biosecurity officer.
(5)   A biosecurity officer may lock or seal the stores (or require the stores to be locked or sealed by the master)
      of any incoming vessel or aircraft while it is in Solomon Islands.
(6)   The cost of disposal of garbage under this section is to be borne by the owner or charterer of the vessel or
      aircraft.
(7)   A master who contravenes subsection (1)(b), fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (1)(a), (2),
      (3), (4) or (5) or fails to obey a direction of a biosecurity officer given under any of those subsections commits an
      offence.
(8)   A captain who fails to take all reasonable steps as required by subsection (3) or (4) or fails to obey a direction of a
      biosecurity officer given under either of those subsections commits an offence.
(9)   An incoming vessel must comply with any de-ratting requirements prescribed by regulations.
                                         414

                                 SCHEDULE SEVEN

Form 7A: Application to Import Fruit and Vegetables

Form 7B: Application to Import Plant Material

Form 7C: Application to Import Live Animals

Form 7D: Application to Import Animal Products

Form 7E: Application to Import Earth
                                             415

                                                                                      Form 7A

           APPLICATION TO IMPORT FRUIT AND VEGETABLES

                         (Section 28(2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)


Importer details: (Please Print)                Exporter details: (Please Print)
    Name: ……………………………………………                        Name: ……………………………………………
    Address: …………………………………………                      Address: …………………………………………
            …………………………………………..                             …………………………………………..
    Phone: …………………………………………..                      Phone: …………………………………………..
    Email: ……………………………………………                       Email: ……………………………………………
    Preferred contact: phone     email


 Botanical and/or common name                                Quantity      Country of Origin




Purpose of introduction: - Resale:              Personal consumption:                 Other:

Method of Transport -       Sea freight         Airfreight              Accompanied

Single import:               multiple imports

Expected date(s) of arrival: ……………………………………………………………….

I acknowledge that I, the importer, am responsible for fulfilling the conditions of the import
permit, as required by sections 26,27,28 and 29 of the Biosecurity Act 2013 and that failure
to do so, will result in the consignment being seized and re-exported or destroyed.
                                                      416

Signed: ………………………………………
                   (Importer)


Date: ………. / ……… / 20 ………………



                                                       Fee Paid: ………………………………………

Note: Multiple entry Import Permits for fruits and vegetables are valid until 30 June each year. Single entry
Import Permits are valid for one month from the date of issue. Import permit applications may take up to 10
business days to process, this period could be extended if further information is required.
                                                                      417

                                                                                                                                 Form 7A page 2.

                                                           Biosecurity Act 2013

(26)   (1)       The Director may specify in respect of incoming regulated articles –
                 (a) whether a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate from the biosecurity authority in the country of origin is required for an
                          article and if so the matters that must be certified;
                 (b) whether a biosecurity import permit must be obtained for the article and if so the conditions to be attached to the permit; or
                 (c) what biosecurity measures, if any, must be applied to the article on arrival in Solomon Islands before biosecurity import
                          clearance can be granted.
         (2) Specifications under subsection (1) -
                 (a) may be different for different types and quantities of the regulated article;
                 (b) may be by reference to the country or area of origin of the article; and
                 (c)      must only be those reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate the biosecurity risk to Solomon Islands
                          presented by the article.
         (3)         In determining specifications under subsection (l), the Director -
                 (a) must make a biosecurity risk assessment;
                 (b) must have regard to the requirements of the SPS Agreement and other international standards relating to
                          biosecurity matters;
                 (c) must have regard to the resources available for biosecurity control; and
                 (d) may apply the precautionary principle.
         (4)         The biosecurity risk assessment needed for making a specification under this section -
                 (a) may be performed by any qualified person (other than the importer) at the request of the Director; or
                 (b) is performed at the importer's expense.
         (5)         Specifications made under subsection (1) in respect of an article may be changed at any time before biosecurity
                     import clearance is obtained in respect of the article if the biosecurity risk presented by the article or consignment
                     changes.
         (6)         Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an article should be given to intending importers as soon
                     as practicable but no liability arises from a failure to do so.
         (7)         Before making or changing a specification under this section, the Director must obtain the advice of relevant
                     technical section heads.
         (8)         Specifications made under this section must be -
                     (a)        published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the Director; and
                     (b)        made available to the public for inspection or purchase.
(27)     (1)     A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is not the subject of a biosecurity import specification must apply in
         writing to the Director for a specification under section 26 in respect of the article.
         (2)         An application under subsection (1) in respect of an article must -
                     (a)        be made in sufficient time before the intended importation; and
                     (b)        give adequate information about the biosecurity procedures of the country of origin, the nature of the article
                                and the proposed importation, to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment in relation to the
                                article.
         (3)         Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director must as
                     soon as practicable, unless the article is or becomes a prohibited import under section 9, make a specification in
                     respect of it in accordance with section 26.
         (4)         Section 26(2), (3) and (4) apply to the making of a specification under this section.
(28)     (1)     If a biosecurity import permit is required under section 26(1) in respect of a regulated article or consignment, an application for a
         permit must -
                     (a)        be made before the article or consignment leaves the country of origin or, in the case of re-exported goods,
                                the re-exporting country;
                     (b)        be made to the Director in the manner specified or approved by the Director; and
                     (c)        be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any.
         (2)         An application for a biosecurity import permit must -
                     (a)        include evidence of the country of origin of the regulated article or consignment;
                                                                       418

                  (b)        state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;

                  (c)          state the expected date of arrival in Solomon Islands; and
                  (d)          give any other information the Director reasonably requires to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk
                               assessment.
       (3)         A decision on an application for a biosecurity import permit must be communicated to the applicant as soon as reasonably
                   practicable after the application is received duly completed.
       (4)         If the decision is to refuse the permit, the applicant must be notified in writing, with brief reasons.
(29)   (1)      If satisfied of the matters set out in section 28(1) and (2), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director, or a biosecurity
       officer, must as soon as practicable issue a biosecurity import permit.
       (2)         The form of a biosecurity import permit is as specified or approved by the Director.
       (3)         A biosecurity import permit may -
                   (a.)        be general or specific;
                   (b.)        relate to a single article or to a consignment of articles; or
                   (c.)        be different for different types of regulated article and relate to different countries of origin.
       (4)         A general permit covers all imports of a type specified in the permit, or from an area specified in the permit, and may cover
                   continuing imports over a period specified in the permit.
       (5)         A specific permit covers a single article or consignment and may specify an expiry date.
                                                       419

                                                                                                   Form 7B
                   APPLICATION TO IMPORT PLANT MATERIAL

                              (Section 28 (2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

Importer details: (Please Print)                               Exporter details: (Please Print)
     Name: ……………………………………………                                        Name: ……………………………………………
     Address: …………………………………………                                      Address: …………………………………………
               …………………………………………..                                            …………………………………………..
     Phone: …………………………………………..                                      Phone: …………………………………………..
     Email: ……………………………………………                                       Email: ……………………………………………
     Preferred contact: phone                 email


                                                                        Nature: seeds,
             Botanical and/or common name                                                         Quantity
                                                                         cuttings etc.




              For definition of plant material see reverse.


Country of Origin: ……………………………………………………………………………


Purpose of introduction: - Propagation/Research:                          Cut flower trade:          Other:

Method of Transport -               Sea freight                 Airfreight         Post
                                    Accompanied

Single import:                      multiple imports (seed only)

Expected date(s) of arrival: …………………………………………………………………

I acknowledge that I, the importer, am responsible for fulfilling the conditions of the import
permit, as required by sections 26,27,28 and 29 of the Biosecurity Act 2013 and that failure
to do so, will result in the consignment being seized and re-exported or destroyed.
                                                            420

Signed: ………………………………………
                      (Importer)


Date: ………. / ……… / 20….

                                                         Fee Paid: ………………………………………….



Note: Single entry Import Permits are valid for one month from the date of issue. Import permit applications may take up to 10
business days to process, this period could be extended if further information is required. Imports will not be permitted until
an Import Permit has been issued, you are recommended not to order any imports until you have received your import permit.
                                        421

                                                                       Form 7B page 2.

                                    Definitions



“plant product” means –

     (a)   plant material;
     (b)   timber; and

     (c)   any product manufactured wholly or partly from one or more plants;

“plant material” means any unmanufactured material of plant origin, including
     grain;
                                                    422

                                                                                         Form 7C

              APPLICATION TO IMPORT LIVE ANIMALS
                            (Section 28 (2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

 Importer details: (Please Print)                                   Exporter details: (Please Print)
   Name: ………………………………………………..                                         Name: ……………………………………………….
   Address: …………………………………………….                                        Address: ……………………………………………
            …………………………………………….                                               ……………………………………………….
   Phone: ………………………………………………..                                        Phone: ………………………………………………
   Email: ………………………………………………….                                        Email: ………………………………………………..
   Preferred contact: phone       email

        Each application can only be for one species from one country.
                                                                                          Identification
                                                                            Name (if
       Species                     Breed              Sex    Number                      (microchip, ear
                                                                           applicable)
                                                                                           tag, brand)




        (Continue on reverse side if necessary)

Country of origin: __________________________________________________________
Purpose of Introduction: - ____________________________________________________


Method of Transport:                              Sea Freight            Airfreight

Arrival details (Ship name/Flight No.): _________________

Expected date of arrival: _________________

I acknowledge that I, the importer, am responsible for fulfilling the conditions of the import
permit, as required by sections 26,27,28 and 29 of the Biosecurity Act 2013 and that failure
to do so, will result in the consignment being seized and re-exported or destroyed.
                                                              423

Signed: ………………………………………
                      (Importer)


Date: ………. / ……… / 20 ………………

                                                                   Fee Paid: ……………………………………

Note: Import Permits for live animals are valid for four months only from the date of issue. Import Permits may take up to 10
business days to process, this period could be extended if further information is required. Imports will not be permitted until an
Import Permit has been issued, you are recommended not to order any imports until you have received your Import Permit.
                                                                  424

                                                   Biosecurity Act 2013
(26)   (1)       The Director may specify in respect of incoming regulated articles –
                 (a)          whether a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate from the biosecurity authority in the country of origin is
                              required for an article and if so the matters that must be certified;
                 (b)          whether a biosecurity import permit must be obtained for the article and if so the conditions to be attached to
                              the permit; or
                 (c)          what biosecurity measures, if any, must be applied to the article on arrival in Solomon Islands before
                              biosecurity import clearance can be granted.
         (2)        Specifications under subsection (1) -
                 (a) may be different for different types and quantities of the regulated article;
                 (b) may be by reference to the country or area of origin of the article; and
                 (c)     must only be those reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate the biosecurity risk to Solomon Islands
                         presented by the article.
         (3)        In determining specifications under subsection (l), the Director -
                 (a) must make a biosecurity risk assessment;
                 (b) must have regard to the requirements of the SPS Agreement and other international standards relating to
                         biosecurity matters;
                 (c) must have regard to the resources available for biosecurity control; and
                 (d) may apply the precautionary principle.
         (4)        The biosecurity risk assessment needed for making a specification under this section -
                 (a) may be performed by any qualified person (other than the importer) at the request of the Director; or
                 (b) is performed at the importer's expense.
         (5)        Specifications made under subsection (1) in respect of an article may be changed at any time before biosecurity
                    import clearance is obtained in respect of the article if the biosecurity risk presented by the article or consignment
                    changes.
         (6)        Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an article should be given to intending importers as soon
                    as practicable but no liability arises from a failure to do so.
         (7)        Before making or changing a specification under this section, the Director must obtain the advice of relevant
                    technical section heads.
         (8)        Specifications made under this section must be -
                    (a)          published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the Director; and
                    (b)          made available to the public for inspection or purchase.
(27)   (1)       A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is not the subject of a biosecurity import specification
       must apply in writing to the Director for a specification under section 26 in respect of the article.
         (2)         An application under subsection (1) in respect of an article must -
                    (a)        be made in sufficient time before the intended importation; and
                    (b)        give adequate information about the biosecurity procedures of the country of origin, the nature of the article
                               and the proposed importation, to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment in relation to the
                               article.
         (3)        Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director must as
                    soon as practicable, unless the article is or becomes a prohibited import under section 9, make a specification in
                    respect of it in accordance with section 26.
         (4)        Section 26(2), (3) and (4) apply to the making of a specification under this section.
(28)   (1)       If a biosecurity import permit is required under section 26(1) in respect of a regulated article or consignment, an
       application for a permit must -
                  (a)          be made before the article or consignment leaves the country of origin or, in the case of re-exported goods,
                               the re-exporting country;
                  (b)          be made to the Director in the manner specified or approved by the Director; and
                  (c)          be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any.
         (2)         An application for a biosecurity import permit must -
                    (a)        include evidence of the country of origin of the regulated article or consignment;
                    (b)        state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;
                    (e)        state the expected date of arrival in Solomon Islands; and
                                                                  425

                   (f)        give any other information the Director reasonably requires to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk
                              assessment.
         (3)       A decision on an application for a biosecurity import permit must be communicated to the applicant as soon as
                   reasonably practicable after the application is received duly completed.
         (4)       If the decision is to refuse the permit, the applicant must be notified in writing, with brief reasons.
(29)   (1)      If satisfied of the matters set out in section 28(1) and (2), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director, or a
       biosecurity officer, must as soon as practicable issue a biosecurity import permit.
         (2)        The form of a biosecurity import permit is as specified or approved by the Director.
         (3)       A biosecurity import permit may -
                   (a.) be general or specific;
                   (b.)       relate to a single article or to a consignment of articles; or
                   (c.)       be different for different types of regulated article and relate to different countries of origin.
         (4)       A general permit covers all imports of a type specified in the permit, or from an area specified in the permit, and may
                   cover continuing imports over a period specified in the permit.
         (5)       A specific permit covers a single article or consignment and may specify an expiry date.
                                                      426

                                                                                             Form 7D

                  APPLICATION TO IMPORT ANIMAL PRODUCTS

                             (Section 28 (2) of the Biosecurity Act 20213)

Importer details: (Please Print)                        Exporter details: (Please Print)
    Name: …………………………………………………                               Name: ………………………………………………..
    Address: ……………………………………………..                            Address: …………………………………………….
               …………………………………………..                                     …………………………………………..
    Phone: ………………………………………………..                             Phone: ……………………………………………….
    Email: ………………………………………………….                             Email: …………………………………………………
Preferred contact: phone                email


         Product name                                          Description                     Quantity




    For definition of animal products see reverse.

Country of origin: __________________________________________________________

Purpose of import: -           Commercial:               Personal:             Research:      Other:

Method of transport -          Sea Freight             Airfreight              Accompanied

Single import:                     Expected date of arrival: ______________________

or

Multiple imports:                  Date of first arrival: __________________________

I acknowledge that I, the importer, am responsible for fulfilling the conditions of the import
permit, as required by sections 26,27,28 and 29 of the Biosecurity Act 2013 and that failure
to do so, will result in the consignment being seized and re-exported or destroyed.
                                                             427


Signed: ………………………………………
                      (Importer)


Date: ………. / ……… / 20………………



                                                          Fee Paid: ………………………………………….



Note: Multiple entry Import Permits for animal products are valid until 30 June each year. Single entry Import Permits are
valid for one month from the date of issue. Import permit applications may take up to 10 business days to process, this period
could be extended if further information is required. Imports will not be permitted until an Import Permit has been issued, you
are recommended not to order any imports until you have received your Import Permit.
                                       428

                                                                       Form 7D page 2.

                                   Definition
"animal product" means any article or substance derived from an animal, whether
     or not in combination with any other article or substance, and includes -

     (a)   meat, fat, milk, whey, cream, butter, cheese, eggs and other foodstuffs
           derived from an animal;

     (b)   the dung, urine, faeces, saliva, bone or blood of an animal, or any
           article or substance derived from the dung, urine, faeces, saliva, bone
           or blood of an animal;

     (c)   the secretions of any animal; or

     (d)   any product or biological preparation derived from any animal tissue
           or animal secretion;


For example: this includes stockfeed containing animal protein and animal genetic
material.
                                             429

                                                                                       Form 7E

                                     APPLICATION TO IMPORT EARTH

                          (Section 28 (2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)


Importer details: (Please Print)                Exporter details: (Please Print)

 Name: …………………………………………………                         Name: ………………………………………………..

 Address: ……………………………………………..                      Address: …………………………………………….

              …………………………………………..                              …………………………………………..

 Phone: ………………………………………………..                       Phone: ……………………………………………….

 Email: ………………………………………………….                       Email: …………………………………………………

Preferred contact: phone           email


                        Type of earth                                       Quantity




Country of origin: __________________________________________________________

Purpose of import: -        Commercial:          Personal:             Research:        Other:

Method of transport -       Sea Freight         Airfreight             Accompanied

Expected date of arrival: ______________________

I acknowledge that I, the importer, am responsible for fulfilling the conditions of the import
permit, as required by sections 26,27,28 and 29 of the Biosecurity Act 2013 and that failure
to do so, will result in the consignment being seized and re-exported or destroyed.
                                                              430

Signed: ………………………………………
                      (Importer)
Date: ………. / ……… / 20 ………………
                                                                               Fee Paid: …………………………



Note: Import Permits for earth are valid for 4 months, only, from the date of issue. Import permit applications may take up to
10 business days to process, this period could be extended if further information is required. Imports will not be permitted until
an Import Permit has been issued, you are recommended not to order any imports until you have received your Import Permit.
                                                                431

                                                                                                                      Form 7E page 2.

                                                  Biosecurity Act 2013
(26)   (1)     The Director may specify in respect of incoming regulated articles –
               (a) whether a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate from the biosecurity authority in the country of origin is required
                       for an article and if so the matters that must be certified;
               (b) whether a biosecurity import permit must be obtained for the article and if so the conditions to be attached to the
                       permit; or
               (c) what biosecurity measures, if any, must be applied to the article on arrival in Solomon Islands before biosecurity
                       import clearance can be granted.
        (2)       Specifications under subsection (1) -
               (a) may be different for different types and quantities of the regulated article;
               (b) may be by reference to the country or area of origin of the article; and
               (c) must only be those reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate the biosecurity risk to Solomon Islands presented
                       by the article.
        (3)       In determining specifications under subsection (l), the Director -
               (a) must make a biosecurity risk assessment;
               (b) must have regard to the requirements of the SPS Agreement and other international standards relating to
                       biosecurity matters;
               (c) must have regard to the resources available for biosecurity control; and
               (d) may apply the precautionary principle.
        (4)       The biosecurity risk assessment needed for making a specification under this section -
               (a) may be performed by any qualified person (other than the importer) at the request of the Director; or
               (b) is performed at the importer's expense.
        (5)       Specifications made under subsection (1) in respect of an article may be changed at any time before biosecurity
                  import clearance is obtained in respect of the article if the biosecurity risk presented by the article or consignment
                  changes.
        (6)       Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an article should be given to intending importers as soon
                  as practicable but no liability arises from a failure to do so.
        (7)       Before making or changing a specification under this section, the Director must obtain the advice of relevant
                  technical section heads.
        (8)       Specifications made under this section must be -
                  (a)          published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the Director; and
                  (b)          made available to the public for inspection or purchase.
(27)    (1)    A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is not the subject of a biosecurity import specification
        must apply in writing to the Director for a specification under section 26 in respect of the article.
        (5)       An application under subsection (1) in respect of an article must -
                  (a)       be made in sufficient time before the intended importation; and
                  (b)       give adequate information about the biosecurity procedures of the country of origin, the nature of the article
                            and the proposed importation, to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment in relation to the
                            article.
        (6)       Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director must as
                  soon as practicable, unless the article is or becomes a prohibited import under section 9, make a specification in
                  respect of it in accordance with section 26.
        (7)       Section 26(2), (3) and (4) apply to the making of a specification under this section.
(28)    (1)    If a biosecurity import permit is required under section 26(1) in respect of a regulated article or consignment, an
        application for a permit must -
                  (a)       be made before the article or consignment leaves the country of origin or, in the case of re-exported goods,
                            the re-exporting country;
                  (b)       be made to the Director in the manner specified or approved by the Director; and
                  (c)       be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any.
        (5)       An application for a biosecurity import permit must -
                                                                432

                 (a)        include evidence of the country of origin of the regulated article or consignment;
                 (b)        (b) state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;
                 (c)        state the expected date of arrival in Solomon Islands; and
                 (d)        give any other information the Director reasonably requires to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk
                            assessment.
       (6)       A decision on an application for a biosecurity import permit must be communicated to the applicant as soon as
                 reasonably practicable after the application is received duly completed.
       (7)       If the decision is to refuse the permit, the applicant must be notified in writing, with brief reasons.
(29)   (1)    If satisfied of the matters set out in section 28(1) and (2), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director, or a
       biosecurity officer, must as soon as practicable issue a biosecurity import permit.
       (6)       The form of a biosecurity import permit is as specified or approved by the Director.
       (7)       A biosecurity import permit may -
                 (a.) be general or specific;
                 (b.)       relate to a single article or to a consignment of articles; or
                 (c.)       be different for different types of regulated article and relate to different countries of origin.
       (8)       A general permit covers all imports of a type specified in the permit, or from an area specified in the permit, and may
                 cover continuing imports over a period specified in the permit.
       (9)       A specific permit covers a single article or consignment and may specify an expiry date.
                                        433


                                   SCHEDULE EIGHT

Form 8A: Permit to Import Plants

Form 8B: Permit to Import Animals

From 8C: Permit to Import Animal Products

Form 8D: Permit to Import Earth
                                             434

                                                                       Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                              Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                       PO Box G13
                                                                                        HONIARA
                                                                                         Tel. 24657

                                   SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                        Form 8A
                             PERMIT TO IMPORT PLANTS

                      (Section 29 (2)-(5) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

TO: ……………………………………………                                                   Permit No. …...........
             (Name of importer)
Address: ………………………………..…………….
          ……………………………………………
          ……………………………………………

Subject to the provisions of the Biosecurity Act and the conditions specified herein,
permission is granted to import the following plants: -

End use:
…………………………………………………………………………………………………

Details

               Botanical name                        Common name                   Quantity




Country of origin:
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………
                                      CONDITIONS
1.   This permit is valid for SINGLE/MULTIPLE* importation(s) for a period of one year
     from the date of issue.
2.   This permit must be produced at the time of importation.
                                                   435

3.   The plant(s) must be accompanied by a Phytosanitary Certificate issued in the country
     of origin.
4.   The plant(s) may only be imported through .......................................... (point of entry in
     Solomon Islands).
5.   The importation must comply with the specific requirements attached hereto.
6. Subject to inspection on arrival.


Date: …………………                                              Signed: …………………………..
                                                                       Biosecurity Officer

*Delete as necessary.
                                                                436

                                                                                                                      Form 8A page 2
                                                  Biosecurity Act 2013
(26)   (1)     The Director may specify in respect of incoming regulated articles –
               (a) whether a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate from the biosecurity authority in the country of origin is required
                       for an article and if so the matters that must be certified;
               (b) whether a biosecurity import permit must be obtained for the article and if so the conditions to be attached to the
                       permit; or
               (c) what biosecurity measures, if any, must be applied to the article on arrival in Solomon Islands before biosecurity
                       import clearance can be granted.
        (2)       Specifications under subsection (1) -
               (a) may be different for different types and quantities of the regulated article;
               (b) may be by reference to the country or area of origin of the article; and
               (c) must only be those reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate the biosecurity risk to Solomon Islands presented
                       by the article.
        (3)       In determining specifications under subsection (l), the Director -
               (a) must make a biosecurity risk assessment;
               (b) must have regard to the requirements of the SPS Agreement and other international standards relating to
                       biosecurity matters;
               (c) must have regard to the resources available for biosecurity control; and
               (d) may apply the precautionary principle.
        (4)       The biosecurity risk assessment needed for making a specification under this section -
               (a) may be performed by any qualified person (other than the importer) at the request of the Director; or
               (b) is performed at the importer's expense.
        (5)       Specifications made under subsection (1) in respect of an article may be changed at any time before biosecurity
                  import clearance is obtained in respect of the article if the biosecurity risk presented by the article or consignment
                  changes.
        (6)       Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an article should be given to intending importers as soon
                  as practicable but no liability arises from a failure to do so.
        (7)       Before making or changing a specification under this section, the Director must obtain the advice of relevant
                  technical section heads.
        (8)       Specifications made under this section must be -
                  (a)          published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the Director; and
                  (b)          made available to the public for inspection or purchase.
(27)    (1)    A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is not the subject of a biosecurity import specification
        must apply in writing to the Director for a specification under section 26 in respect of the article.
        (2)        An application under subsection (1) in respect of an article must -
                  (a)       be made in sufficient time before the intended importation; and
                  (b)       give adequate information about the biosecurity procedures of the country of origin, the nature of the article
                            and the proposed importation, to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment in relation to the
                            article.
        (3)       Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director must as
                  soon as practicable, unless the article is or becomes a prohibited import under section 9, make a specification in
                  respect of it in accordance with section 26.
        (4)       Section 26(2), (3) and (4) apply to the making of a specification under this section.
(28)    (1)    If a biosecurity import permit is required under section 26(1) in respect of a regulated article or consignment, an
        application for a permit must -
                    (a) be made before the article or consignment leaves the country of origin or, in the case of re-exported goods,
                            the re-exporting country;
                    (b) be made to the Director in the manner specified or approved by the Director; and
                    (c) be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any.
        (2)        An application for a biosecurity import permit must -
                  (a)       include evidence of the country of origin of the regulated article or consignment;
                  (b)       state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;
                                                                437

                 (c)        state the expected date of arrival in Solomon Islands; and
                 (d)        give any other information the Director reasonably requires to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk
                            assessment.
       (3)       A decision on an application for a biosecurity import permit must be communicated to the applicant as soon as
                 reasonably practicable after the application is received duly completed.
       (4)       If the decision is to refuse the permit, the applicant must be notified in writing, with brief reasons.
(29)   (1)    If satisfied of the matters set out in section 28(1) and (2), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director, or a
       biosecurity officer, must as soon as practicable issue a biosecurity import permit.
       (10) The form of a biosecurity import permit is as specified or approved by the Director.
       (11) A biosecurity import permit may -
                 (a.) be general or specific;
                 (b.) relate to a single article or to a consignment of articles; or
                 (c.) be different for different types of regulated article and relate to different countries of origin.
       (12) A general permit covers all imports of a type specified in the permit, or from an area specified in the permit, and may
                 cover continuing imports over a period specified in the permit.
       (13) A specific permit covers a single article or consignment and may specify an expiry date.
                                              438

                                                                         Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                         PO Box G13
                                                                                          HONIARA
                                                                                           Tel. 24657
                                     SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                         Form 8B

                              PERMIT TO IMPORT ANIMALS

                        (Section 29 (2)-(5) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

TO: ………………………………………………….Permit No. …...........
              (Name of importer)

Address: …………………………………………….
          ……………………………………………
          ……………………………………………

Subject to the provisions of the Biosecurity Act and to the conditions specified herein,
permission is granted to import the following animals: -

Details
                                                                                           Identification
                                                                       Name (if
          Species                  Breed        Sex    Number                             (microchip, ear
                                                                      applicable)
                                                                                            tag, brand)




Country of origin: ___________________________________________________________

                                           CONDITIONS
1. This permit is valid for SINGLE importation(s) for a period of four months from the
   date of issue.
2. This permit and health documents must accompany the animal.
3. The animal may only be imported through ..................... (point of entry in Solomon
   Islands).
                                          439

4. The importation must comply with the specific requirements attached hereto.
5. Subject to inspection on arrival.

Date: …………………….                                  Signed: …………………………………
                                                          Biosecurity Officer




* For animals other than domesticated give common names if available.
** Delete as necessary.
                                                                440

                                                                                                                      Form 8B page 2
                                                  Biosecurity Act 2013
(30)   (1)     The Director may specify in respect of incoming regulated articles –
               (d) whether a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate from the biosecurity authority in the country of origin is required
                       for an article and if so the matters that must be certified;
               (e) whether a biosecurity import permit must be obtained for the article and if so the conditions to be attached to the
                       permit; or
               (f) what biosecurity measures, if any, must be applied to the article on arrival in Solomon Islands before biosecurity
                       import clearance can be granted.
        (9)       Specifications under subsection (1) -
               (a) may be different for different types and quantities of the regulated article;
               (b) may be by reference to the country or area of origin of the article; and
               (c) must only be those reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate the biosecurity risk to Solomon Islands presented
                       by the article.
        (10) In determining specifications under subsection (l), the Director -
               (a) must make a biosecurity risk assessment;
               (b) must have regard to the requirements of the SPS Agreement and other international standards relating to
                       biosecurity matters;
               (c) must have regard to the resources available for biosecurity control; and
               (d) may apply the precautionary principle.
        (11) The biosecurity risk assessment needed for making a specification under this section -
               (a) may be performed by any qualified person (other than the importer) at the request of the Director; or
               (b) is performed at the importer's expense.
        (12) Specifications made under subsection (1) in respect of an article may be changed at any time before biosecurity
                  import clearance is obtained in respect of the article if the biosecurity risk presented by the article or consignment
                  changes.
        (13) Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an article should be given to intending importers as soon
                  as practicable but no liability arises from a failure to do so.
        (14) Before making or changing a specification under this section, the Director must obtain the advice of relevant
                  technical section heads.
        (15) Specifications made under this section must be -
                  (c)          published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the Director; and
                  (d)          made available to the public for inspection or purchase.
(31)    (1)    A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is not the subject of a biosecurity import specification
        must apply in writing to the Director for a specification under section 26 in respect of the article.
        (5)        An application under subsection (1) in respect of an article must -
                  (a)       be made in sufficient time before the intended importation; and
                  (b)       give adequate information about the biosecurity procedures of the country of origin, the nature of the article
                            and the proposed importation, to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment in relation to the
                            article.
        (6)       Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director must as
                  soon as practicable, unless the article is or becomes a prohibited import under section 9, make a specification in
                  respect of it in accordance with section 26.
        (7)       Section 26(2), (3) and (4) apply to the making of a specification under this section.
(32)    (1)    If a biosecurity import permit is required under section 26(1) in respect of a regulated article or consignment, an
        application for a permit must -
                    (d) be made before the article or consignment leaves the country of origin or, in the case of re-exported goods,
                            the re-exporting country;
                    (e) be made to the Director in the manner specified or approved by the Director; and
                    (f) be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any.
        (5)        An application for a biosecurity import permit must -
                  (a)       include evidence of the country of origin of the regulated article or consignment;
                  (b)       state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;
                                                                441

                 (c)        state the expected date of arrival in Solomon Islands; and
                 (d)        give any other information the Director reasonably requires to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk
                            assessment.
       (6)       A decision on an application for a biosecurity import permit must be communicated to the applicant as soon as
                 reasonably practicable after the application is received duly completed.
       (7)       If the decision is to refuse the permit, the applicant must be notified in writing, with brief reasons.
(33)   (1)    If satisfied of the matters set out in section 28(1) and (2), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director, or a
       biosecurity officer, must as soon as practicable issue a biosecurity import permit.
       (14) The form of a biosecurity import permit is as specified or approved by the Director.
       (15) A biosecurity import permit may -
                 (d.) be general or specific;
                 (e.) relate to a single article or to a consignment of articles; or
                 (f.) be different for different types of regulated article and relate to different countries of origin.
       (16) A general permit covers all imports of a type specified in the permit, or from an area specified in the permit, and may
                 cover continuing imports over a period specified in the permit.
       (17) A specific permit covers a single article or consignment and may specify an expiry date.
                                                442

                                                                            Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                   Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                            PO Box G13
                                                                                             HONIARA
                                                                                              Tel. 24657
                                     SOLOMON ISLANDS

                                                                                            From 8C
                      PERMIT TO IMPORT ANIMAL PRODUCTS

                       (Section 29 (2)-(5) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)


TO: ………………………………………………….                                                     Permit No. …...........
             (Name of importer)

Address: …………………………………………….
          ……………………………………………
          ……………………………………………

Subject to the provisions of the Biosecurity Act and to the conditions specified herein,
permission is granted to import the following animal products—

      Product name                                        Description                           Quantity




Country of origin: __________________________________________________________

                                         CONDITIONS
1.      This permit is valid for a period of .................. months from the date of issue for
        SINGLE/MULTIPLE* importation. (expiry date. …………………………….)
2.     This permit must be produced at the time of importation.
3.      The animal product may only be imported through ………………………… (point
        of entry in Solomon Islands).
4.      The importation must comply with the specific requirements attached hereto.
                                         443

5.      Health/Sanitary Certificate MUST accompany each import.
6.      Subject to biosecurity inspection on arrival.


Date: …………………                                   Signed: ………………………………..
                                                           Biosecurity Officer

*Delete as necessary.
                                                                444

                                                                                                                      Form 8C page 2
                                                  Biosecurity Act 2013
(34)   (1)     The Director may specify in respect of incoming regulated articles –
               (g) whether a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate from the biosecurity authority in the country of origin is required
                       for an article and if so the matters that must be certified;
               (h) whether a biosecurity import permit must be obtained for the article and if so the conditions to be attached to the
                       permit; or
               (i) what biosecurity measures, if any, must be applied to the article on arrival in Solomon Islands before biosecurity
                       import clearance can be granted.
        (16) Specifications under subsection (1) -
               (a) may be different for different types and quantities of the regulated article;
               (b) may be by reference to the country or area of origin of the article; and
               (c) must only be those reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate the biosecurity risk to Solomon Islands presented
                       by the article.
        (17) In determining specifications under subsection (l), the Director -
               (a) must make a biosecurity risk assessment;
               (b) must have regard to the requirements of the SPS Agreement and other international standards relating to
                       biosecurity matters;
               (c) must have regard to the resources available for biosecurity control; and
               (d) may apply the precautionary principle.
        (18) The biosecurity risk assessment needed for making a specification under this section -
               (a) may be performed by any qualified person (other than the importer) at the request of the Director; or
               (b) is performed at the importer's expense.
        (19) Specifications made under subsection (1) in respect of an article may be changed at any time before biosecurity
                  import clearance is obtained in respect of the article if the biosecurity risk presented by the article or consignment
                  changes.
        (20) Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an article should be given to intending importers as soon
                  as practicable but no liability arises from a failure to do so.
        (21) Before making or changing a specification under this section, the Director must obtain the advice of relevant
                  technical section heads.
        (22) Specifications made under this section must be -
                  (e)          published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the Director; and
                  (f)          made available to the public for inspection or purchase.
(35)    (1)    A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is not the subject of a biosecurity import specification
        must apply in writing to the Director for a specification under section 26 in respect of the article.
        (8)        An application under subsection (1) in respect of an article must -
                  (a)       be made in sufficient time before the intended importation; and
                  (b)       give adequate information about the biosecurity procedures of the country of origin, the nature of the article
                            and the proposed importation, to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment in relation to the
                            article.
        (9)       Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director must as
                  soon as practicable, unless the article is or becomes a prohibited import under section 9, make a specification in
                  respect of it in accordance with section 26.
        (10) Section 26(2), (3) and (4) apply to the making of a specification under this section.
(36)    (1)    If a biosecurity import permit is required under section 26(1) in respect of a regulated article or consignment, an
        application for a permit must -
                    (g) be made before the article or consignment leaves the country of origin or, in the case of re-exported goods,
                            the re-exporting country;
                    (h) be made to the Director in the manner specified or approved by the Director; and
                    (i) be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any.
        (8)        An application for a biosecurity import permit must -
                  (a)       include evidence of the country of origin of the regulated article or consignment;
                  (b)       state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;
                                                                445

                 (c)        state the expected date of arrival in Solomon Islands; and
                 (d)        give any other information the Director reasonably requires to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk
                            assessment.
       (9)       A decision on an application for a biosecurity import permit must be communicated to the applicant as soon as
                 reasonably practicable after the application is received duly completed.
       (10) If the decision is to refuse the permit, the applicant must be notified in writing, with brief reasons.
(37)   (1)    If satisfied of the matters set out in section 28(1) and (2), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director, or a
       biosecurity officer, must as soon as practicable issue a biosecurity import permit.
       (18) The form of a biosecurity import permit is as specified or approved by the Director.
       (19) A biosecurity import permit may -
                 (g.) be general or specific;
                 (h.) relate to a single article or to a consignment of articles; or
                 (i.) be different for different types of regulated article and relate to different countries of origin.
       (20) A general permit covers all imports of a type specified in the permit, or from an area specified in the permit, and may
                 cover continuing imports over a period specified in the permit.
       (21) A specific permit covers a single article or consignment and may specify an expiry date.
                                                 446

                                                                             Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                    Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                             PO Box G13
                                                                                              HONIARA
                                                                                               Tel. 24657
                                      SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                              Form 8D
                               PERMIT TO IMPORT EARTH

                        (Section 29 (2)-(5) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

TO: ………………………………………………….                                                       Permit No. …...........
                      (Name of importer)
Address: …………………………………………….
          ……………………………………………
          ……………………………………………

Subject to the provisions of the Biosecurity Act and to the conditions specified herein,
permission is granted to import the following type of earth —

       Type of earth                          Quantity                       Country of origin



                                          CONDITIONS

1.      This permit is valid for a period of six months from the date of issue for SINGLE
        importation.

2.      This permit must be produced at the time of importation. Copy for multiple

3.      The earth may only be imported through ................................ (point of entry in
        Solomon Islands).

4.     The importation must comply with the specific requirements attached hereto.

5.     Subject to inspection on arrival.

Date: …………………                                            Signed: ………………………………
                                                                        Biosecurity Officer
                                                                447

                                                                                                                      Form 8D page 2
                                                  Biosecurity Act 2013
(38)   (1)     The Director may specify in respect of incoming regulated articles –
               (j) whether a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate from the biosecurity authority in the country of origin is required
                       for an article and if so the matters that must be certified;
               (k) whether a biosecurity import permit must be obtained for the article and if so the conditions to be attached to the
                       permit; or
               (l) what biosecurity measures, if any, must be applied to the article on arrival in Solomon Islands before biosecurity
                       import clearance can be granted.
        (23) Specifications under subsection (1) -
               (a) may be different for different types and quantities of the regulated article;
               (b) may be by reference to the country or area of origin of the article; and
               (c) must only be those reasonably necessary to reduce or eliminate the biosecurity risk to Solomon Islands presented
                       by the article.
        (24) In determining specifications under subsection (l), the Director -
               (a) must make a biosecurity risk assessment;
               (b) must have regard to the requirements of the SPS Agreement and other international standards relating to
                       biosecurity matters;
               (c) must have regard to the resources available for biosecurity control; and
               (d) may apply the precautionary principle.
        (25) The biosecurity risk assessment needed for making a specification under this section -
               (a) may be performed by any qualified person (other than the importer) at the request of the Director; or
               (b) is performed at the importer's expense.
        (26) Specifications made under subsection (1) in respect of an article may be changed at any time before biosecurity
                  import clearance is obtained in respect of the article if the biosecurity risk presented by the article or consignment
                  changes.
        (27) Notice of a change in an import specification in respect of an article should be given to intending importers as soon
                  as practicable but no liability arises from a failure to do so.
        (28) Before making or changing a specification under this section, the Director must obtain the advice of relevant
                  technical section heads.
        (29) Specifications made under this section must be -
                  (g)          published in the biosecurity register and at the office of the Director; and
                  (h)          made available to the public for inspection or purchase.
(39)    (1)    A person proposing to import a regulated article of a type that is not the subject of a biosecurity import specification
        must apply in writing to the Director for a specification under section 26 in respect of the article.
        (11) An application under subsection (1) in respect of an article must -
                  (a)       be made in sufficient time before the intended importation; and
                  (b)       give adequate information about the biosecurity procedures of the country of origin, the nature of the article
                            and the proposed importation, to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk assessment in relation to the
                            article.
        (12) Upon receipt of an application under subsection (1), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director must as
                  soon as practicable, unless the article is or becomes a prohibited import under section 9, make a specification in
                  respect of it in accordance with section 26.
        (13) Section 26(2), (3) and (4) apply to the making of a specification under this section.
(40)    (1)    If a biosecurity import permit is required under section 26(1) in respect of a regulated article or consignment, an
        application for a permit must -
                    (j) be made before the article or consignment leaves the country of origin or, in the case of re-exported goods,
                            the re-exporting country;
                    (k) be made to the Director in the manner specified or approved by the Director; and
                    (l) be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any.
        (11) An application for a biosecurity import permit must -
                  (a)       include evidence of the country of origin of the regulated article or consignment;
                  (b)       state the nature and amount of the article or consignment;
                                                                448

                 (c)        state the expected date of arrival in Solomon Islands; and
                 (d)        give any other information the Director reasonably requires to enable the Director to make a biosecurity risk
                            assessment.
       (12) A decision on an application for a biosecurity import permit must be communicated to the applicant as soon as
                 reasonably practicable after the application is received duly completed.
       (13) If the decision is to refuse the permit, the applicant must be notified in writing, with brief reasons.
(41)   (1)    If satisfied of the matters set out in section 28(1) and (2), and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, the Director, or a
       biosecurity officer, must as soon as practicable issue a biosecurity import permit.
       (22) The form of a biosecurity import permit is as specified or approved by the Director.
       (23) A biosecurity import permit may -
                 (j.) be general or specific;
                 (k.) relate to a single article or to a consignment of articles; or
                 (l.) be different for different types of regulated article and relate to different countries of origin.
       (24) A general permit covers all imports of a type specified in the permit, or from an area specified in the permit, and may
                 cover continuing imports over a period specified in the permit.
                        (25) A specific permit covers a single article or consignment and may specify an expiry date.
                                                449

                                               SCHEDULE NINE

            APPLICATION FOR BIOSECUIRITY IMPORT CLEARANCE

                           (Section 24(2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

Applicant details: (Please Print)                   Importer details: (Please Print)
 Name: …………………………………………………                            Name: ………………………………………………..
 Address: ……………………………………………..                         Address: …………………………………………….
              …………………………………………..                                 …………………………………………..
 Phone: ………………………………………………..                          Phone: ……………………………………………….
 Email: ………………………………………………….                          Email: …………………………………………………
Preferred contact: phone            email



Vessel and Voyage No.: ………..............................      Airline and flight No. …………

AWB No. …………………………………………                                      BL No. ………………………

Container No. ……………………………………………………………………….

I apply for Import Clearance for the following items that have arrived in Solomon Islands on
the above mentioned vessel or aircraft.

          Nature of item                 Quantity          Distinguishing marks on          Country of
                                                                   package                   Origin




I attach originals of all relevant documents; (e.g. Import Permit; if issued; Sanitary or
Phytosanitary Certificate issued by the exporting country; if requested; details of any
biosecurity treatment required.).
                                                             450

Signed: …………………………….…………………..                                                                    Date: ………………
                          Applicant

                                                                               Fee Paid: …………………………

Note: 1. Except in exceptional circumstances applications will only be accepted if they are made at least 24 hours before
clearance is required.

Note: While every effort will be made to clear fresh and frozen produce within 24 hours if it complies with import conditions,
it may take longer to clear other items.
                                             451

                                                                                                    Page 2


                                Biosecurity Act 2013
24. (1) Every incoming article or consignment of regulated articles -
             (a)    is liable to biosecurity import clearance inspection by a biosecurity officer; and
             (b)    for that purpose must be taken to or retained in a biosecurity holding area for
                    inspection.
     (2)     An application for biosecurity import clearance of a regulated article or consignment
             must -
             (a)    be made to a biosecurity officer in the manner specified or approved by the
                    Director;
             (b)    be accompanied by the prescribed fee, if any;
             (c)    state the country of origin of the article or consignment;
             (d) state the nature and quantity of the article or consignment;
             (e)    attach any sanitary or phytosanitary certificate issued by the country of
                    origin in relation to the article or consignment;
             (f)    attach any biosecurity import permit relating to the document; and

             (g)     attach documentation relating to any other biosecurity measures
                     specified under section 26 (1) in relation to the article or consignment.

     (3)     The importer of a regulated article or consignment must on the request of a biosecurity
             officer -
             (a)      if the article or consignment is in a container, open the container or
                      enable the officer to do so;
             (b)      allow the officer to inspect the article or consignment in accordance
                      with section 49;
             (c)      allow the officer to take samples and conduct tests in accordance with
                      Part 7 to enable the officer to determine whether biosecurity import
                      clearance should be granted; and

             (d)     if the article or consignment requires biosecurity measures to be applied
                     to it, submit the article or consignment to such measures.

     (4)     The cost of taking an article to a biosecurity holding area, and of keeping it there, is to be
             borne by the importer of the article, and no compensation is payable for any loss or
             destruction or consequential loss caused as a result of the taking or keeping, unless
             negligence or mal ice is proved.
     (5)     If the importer of a regulated article or consignment fails to com ply with any of the
             requirements of subsection (3) -
             (a)      the person commits an offence; and
             (b)      a biosecurity officer may refuse to grant import clearance for the article or
                      consignment, and may order the article or consignment to be re-consigned or
                      destroyed.
     (6)     This section does not apply to passengers or crew members, but section 22 applies to
             such persons.
                                         452



                                  SCHEDULE TEN




Form 10A: Biosecurity Import Clearance (Sea Containers, Sea and Air Cargoes)

Form 10B: Biosecurity Import Clearance (Mail)
                                           453

                                                                         Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                         PO Box G13
                                                                                          HONIARA
                                                                                           Tel. 24657
                                 SOLOMON ISLANDS
                                                                                        Form 10A
                     BIOSECUIRITY IMPORT CLEARANCE
                       (Sea Containers, Sea and Air Cargoes)

                       (Section 25(2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

Addressee, Consignee, Agent
     …………………………………………………………………….
     …………………………………………………………………….
     …………………………………………………………………….

Method of arrival:
……………………………………………………………………………………
                            (Ship name and Voyage No., Aircraft Flight Number)

Country of origin of items described below:
…………………………………………………………
                                              (List more number on reverse if needed)

     Mark or B/L No.          Quantity                           Description




Container No.
…………………………………………………………………………………………
The items described above are:
Released unconditionally:                   ………………………                         ………………….
                                                 Signed Biosecurity Officer             date.
Prohibited in Solomon Islands               …………………………                         ………………….
                                                 Signed Biosecurity Officer             date.
                                         454

Held pending treatment:                  ………………………                              ………………….
                                                 Signed Biosecurity Officer                date.
Treatment:


Held pending reshipment         or destruction           ………………                         …………….
                                                           Signed Biosecurity Officer    date.
Released following treatment:            ……………………………                                    ...………….
                                                 Signed Biosecurity Officer             date.



                                          Fee paid: ……………………………………..
                                         455

                                               Form 10(A) page 2.
List Nos. of additional container here
                                        456

                                                                      Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                             Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                      PO Box G13
                                                                                       HONIARA
                                                                                        Tel. 24657
                                  SOLOMON ISLANDS

                                                                                     Form 10B
                     BIOSECURITY IMPORT CLEARANCE
                                        (Mail)
                     (Section 25(2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

Addressee, Consignee, Agent

     …………………………………………………………………….

     …………………………………………………………………….

     …………………………………………………………………….

Post Office:
……………………………………………………………………………………………

Country of origin of items described below:
……………………………………………..………….

      Quantity                                 Description




The items described above are:

Released unconditionally:                ………………………                         ………………….
                                              Signed Biosecurity Officer             date.
Prohibited in Solomon Islands*:          ………………………                         ………………….
                                              Signed Biosecurity Officer             date.
Held pending treatment*:                 ………………………                         ………………….
                                              Signed Biosecurity Officer             date.
Treatment:
                                            457




Released following treatment:                ………………………                         ………………….
                                                  Signed Biosecurity Officer      date.


* These items may alternatively be either returned to sender or destroyed. Please contact the
  Biosecurity Officer at the Post Office to discuss and agree your preferred option.



                                              Fee paid: ……………………………………..
                                              458

                                  SCHEDULE ELEVEN A


                           (Section 22 of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

SOLOMON ISLANDS SEA CONTAINER EXTERIOR CLEANLINESS STANDARD


All sea containers leaving any Port Biosecurity Holding Area for a destination within
Solomon Islands must first be visually checked by a Biosecurity Officer and found to be
externally clean to the following standard:

    1. All six sides have been visually checked for soil, animal or plant matter.
    2. All fixing lug holes have been visually checked for soil, animal or plant matter.
    3. All beams under the base of the container have been visually checked for soil,
       animal or plant matter.
    4. No contamination with soil, animal or plant matter has been found during any of the
       above inspections.

    (Note: dust, grease, and road splash are not a concern to Biosecurity Solomon Islands).



Definitions:

Soil: the particulate matter that plant roots live in but not including rocks or stones.

Animal matter: Any animal, including insects, or animal part or faeces except for a bird
droppings.

Plant Matter: Any plant or any part of a plant including bark, sticks, twigs, leaves, flowers
and seeds.
                                    459

                         SCHEDULE ELEVEN B


                   (Section 26 of the Biosecurity Act 2013)




APPROVED CLEANING METHODS FOR REFRIGERATED AND INSULATED
                      CONTAINERS


      a. All internal surfaces to be swept or vacuumed and thoroughly cleaned with
         4 per cent solution of sodium carbonate containing 0.1 per cent sodium
         silicate; or



      b. All internal surfaces to be swept or vacuumed and thoroughly cleaned with
         an approved detergent, followed by steam cleaning.
                                            460

                                  SCHEDULE TWELVE


     APPLICATION FOR SANITARY OR PHYTOSANITARY CERTIFICATE
               AND BIOSECUIRITY EXPORT CLEARANCE

                    (Section 35 (1) and (2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013)

                             Applicant Importer details: (Please Print)
details: (Please Print)                  Name: ………………………………………………..
 Name: …………………………………………………               Address: …………………………………………….
 Address: ……………………………………………..                      …………………………………………..
               …………………………………………..                  …………………………………………..
 Phone: ………………………………………………..             Phone: ……………………………………………….
 Email: ………………………………………………….             Email: …………………………………………………
Preferred contact: phone  email
Country and declared point of entry: ………………………………………………………….

Proposed date of export: ……………………………….                        Mode of export: ……………

Import Permit needed: Yes / No.                        Import Permit attached here: Yes/No.

Place where consignment may be inspected: …………………………………………………

Nature of the consignment: …………………………………….………………………......…
…………………………………………………………………………………………………

I             (name of applicant)                 agree that the appropriate Phytosanitary or
Animal Health Certificate will only be issued if the article to be exported meets the
standards of plant or animal health required by the importing country and that all required
treatments have been applied to the satisfaction of Biosecurity Solomon Islands. In addition
I agree that Biosecurity Solomon Islands will not be held liable for any cost or losses
incurred should the article fail inspection on arrival in the importing country.

Signed: ……………………………………………..                            Date: ………………………………
                Applicant

                                                                    Fee Paid: ………………
                                            461

                                SCHEDULE THIRTEEN


 DESIGNATED BIOSECURITY QUARANTINE STATIONS FOR LIVE ANIMALS
                         AND PLANTS

                    (Regulation 43 of the Biosecurity Regulations 2015)




Areas designated as biosecurity quarantine stations for animals and plants, for the purposes
of the Act.



    1. Plant quarantine area within the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock security
       fence near Henderson Airport.
    2. Animal Quarantine station at Tenavatu farm, Guadalcanal.
                                            462

                                SCHEDULE FOURTEEN


APPLICATION FOR PRIVATE LAND OR BUILDINGS TO BE DESIGNATED AS
          A PRIVATE BIOSECURITY QUARANTINE STATION

                    (Regulation 46 of the Biosecurity Regulations 2015)

Name of applicant/company:

……………………………………………………………………..

……………………………………………………………………..

……………………………………………………………………..

Tel: ……………………………….……………. Email: ………………………………......

Location of proposed site (Please provide a specific address and details (registered parcel
numbers etc...) of the facilities proposed):

…………………………………………………………………………………………………

…………………………………………………………………………………………………

…………………………………………………………………………………………………

Purpose of this application and proposed use of the land: ………………..........................

…………………………………………………………………………………………………

…………………………………………………………………………………………………

…………………………………………………………………………………………………




Signed: ………………………………………                                                Date: ……………....
                   Applicant
                                                 463

                                                                                               page 2

                                       Biosecurity Act 2013

40.   (1) The Minister, on the advice of the Director, and after consulting other relevant Ministries,
      may by order in the Gazette, designate any public or private land as a biosecurity quarantine
      station for animals, animal products, plants, plant products, conveyances, containers or other
      goods for the purposes of this Act.

        (2)       Before designating any private land as a biosecurity quarantine station, the
                  Minister, through the Director, must consult the owner, and must pay
                  compensation as agreed or as determined by a court for use of the land as a
                  quarantine station.

        (3)       The Permanent Secretary must, upon the advice of the Director, ensure that
                  every biosecurity quarantine station is provided with such buildings and
                  facilities as are reasonably needed –

                  (a)    to hold regulated articles in biosecurity quarantine;

                  (b)    to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the station or removing
                         items from the station;

                  (c)    to enable the Director to perform tests, provide treatment and apply other
                         biosecurity measures as required by or under this Act.

41.   (1)   The Director may issue specifications as to –

                  (a)    the examination, treatment, disposal or destruction of articles while in a
                         biosecurity quarantine station or in transit to or from a quarantine station;

                  (b)    the period for which different types of regulated articles must remain in a
                         biosecurity quarantine station.

        (2)       The fees or charges payable for keeping items in biosecurity quarantine are as
                  prescribed or specified.

        (3)       The cost of keeping an article in biosecurity quarantine is to be borne by the
                  importer of the article.

            (4)     No compensation is payable for any loss or destruction or consequential loss
                  caused by an item being detained in biosecurity quarantine, unless negligence or
                  malice is proved.
                                            464

                                            SCHEDULE FIFTEEN

   DESIGNATION OF DIRECTOR AND OTHER BIOSECURITY OFFICERS

(Sections 73, 74 of the Biosecurity Act 2013, Regulation 38 of the Biosecurity Regulations
                                          2015)

           A.     The Director and Deputy Director shall be appointed pursuant to section
                  116 of the Constitution
           B.     The following public officers are designated as Biosecurity Officers
                  upon the coming into operation of these Regulations:-

         Names of Public Officers:
         1      Francis Tsatsia        16      Jack Susulu            31    Moana Kelly
         2      Patteson Akipu         17      Japhet Tawo            32    Narety Levata
         3      Max Kolubalona         18      Jean Eroa              33    Nester Pokana
         4      Barney Keqa            19      Jemaima Vagi           34    Raymond Hausa
         5      Catherine Vigimana     20      John Pupulu            35    Reigeen Doley Sasa
         6      Crispus Fanai          21      Jordan Lavia           36    Reuben Alepio
         7      Daniel Wehi            22      Julianne Mose          37    Sabina Pelomo
         8      Donatus Meti           23      Leon Boso              38    Samson Kauli
         9      Frank Pitakere         24      Lionel Laora           39    Samuel Hone
         10     George Harunari        25      Lois Daiwo             40    Shanty Mae
         11     Gideon Suda            26      Lovelyn Foli           41    Shirely Nagu
         12     Hearly Atupule         27      Lovelyn Yunus          42    Sosimo Rarahoa
         13     Helena Voda            28      Luke Kiriau            43    Steward Teoga
         14     Irene Nanau            29      Mark Hoala             44    Tensley Sanau
         15     Ishmael Bresamana      30      Milfred Sau            45    Trevor Loloito
                                                              465

                                                                                                   Biosecurity Solomon Islands
                                                                                          Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock
                                                                                                                   PO Box G13
                                                                                                                    HONIARA
                                                                                                                     Tel. 24657
                                               SOLOMON ISLANDS

                                             SCHEDULE SIXTEEN

                           Biosecurity Landing Clearance
                       for Vessels Arriving in Solomon Islands
                                         (Section 15(2) Biosecurity Act 2013)

I ……………………………………………. (Biosecurity Officer) have inspected
the vessel …………………………voyage number …………… at .....................
on …………………….. and am satisfied that any issues of biosecurity concern are
being satisfactorily managed. All animals and plants on board are secured
satisfactorily, the Master has signed a Bond and Guarantee for each (if needed) and
has presented to me a fully signed Incoming Conveyance Biosecurity Certificate.


I hereby grant the vessel ………………….... Biosecurity Landing Clearance under
Section 15(2) of the Biosecurity Act 2013. The vessel may now berth and begin to
discharge cargo, crew and any passengers following biosecurity procedures.

For the avoidance of doubt all crew, passengers and cargo remain subject to
biosecurity control under the Act.


Issues for action while in Solomon Islands territorial waters: ……………………....
.....................................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................................
Signed: ……………………………………………….                                                                    Date: ………................
                         Biosecurity Officer
                                                 466

                                                                                                Sch. 16 Page 2
The Solomon Islands Biosecurity Act 2013

  17. (1)   The master or captain of every incoming vessel or aircraft must-

                   (e)    take the vessel or aircraft directly to a biosecurity port holding area as
                          directed by a biosecurity officer;

                   (f)    permit a biosecurity officer to board and search the vessel or aircraft in
                          accordance with section 47( 1);

                   (g)    provide to the officer the log, cargo manifest, bill of lading, stores list,
                          passenger list, crew list and any other document that is on or in and
                          relates to the vessel or aircraft and that the officer reasonably requests for
                          the purposes of this Act; and

                   (h)    complete an incoming conveyance biosecurity certificate, in the form specified or
                          approved by the Director, certifying that all garbage, live animals, meat or
                          animal products and plants or plant material on board the vessel or aircraft will
                          be lawfully disposed of.

            (9)    After inspecting relevant documents and conducting any necessary search of
                   an incoming vessel or aircraft, and if satisfied -

                   (c)    that the vessel or aircraft does not have on board any regulated article that
                          might pose a biosecurity threat to Solomon Islands; and
                   (d)    that the prescribed fee, if any, has been paid,

                   a biosecurity officer may grant biosecurity landing clearance to the vessel or aircraft.

            (10)   Biosecurity landing clearance means that a vessel or aircraft may land crew
                   members and any cargo or passengers on board, but the crew and any cargo or
                   passengers remain subject to biosecurity control under this Act.
            (11)   Biosecurity landing clearance must be refused if a biosecurity officer orders the
                   vessel or aircraft into port quarantine pursuant to section 16(3).
            (12)    master or captain who contravenes a provision of subsection (1) commits an
                   offence.
            (13)   A master or captain who lands any crew, cargo or passengers from a vessel or
                   aircraft without biosecurity landing clearance of a biosecurity officer, commits an
                   offence.
            (14)   A crew member or passenger who lands from a vessel or aircraft before it has
                   received biosecurity landing clearance, except with the permission of a
                   biosecurity officer, commits an offence.
            (15)   Biosecurity landing clearance of a vessel or aircraft may be granted with or
                   without conditions on entry into a bond to the Government, in the form
                   specified or approved by the Director, by the master of the vessel or captain of
                   the aircraft, for compliance with any requirements imposed pursuant to this Act
                   in respect of the vessel or aircraft or cargo.
                                                     467

                                    SCHEDULE SEVENTEEN

                      (Regulation 50 of the Biosecurity Regulations 2015)

                                              CONTENTS

        1.     Fees for Fumigation, Dusting & Dipping, Heat Treatment, Destruction of
               Plants/Plant Products Or Materials
        2.     Fees for Fumigation, Treatment, Destruction, Storage of Animal Products
        3.     Fees for Disinfection of Soil Infested Personal Effects
        4.     Fees for Post Entry Quarantine (PEQ)
        5.     Fees for Inspection of Plants & Plant Products
        6.     Fees for Inspection of Live Animals
        7.     Fees for Inspection of Animal Products
        8.     Fees for Inspection of Other Quarantine Risk Items
        9.     Fees for Import Permits (For Plants/Plant Products, Animal/Animal Products,
               Conveyances and Others)
        10.    Fees for Non-Compliances to Conditions
        11.    Fees for Clearance of Overseas Vessels and Aircraft
        12.    Fees for Inspection of Plants/Plant Products For Export, Issuance of
               Phytosanitary Certificate and Inspection Certificate
        13.    Fees for Inspection of Animal/Animal Products for Export and Issuance of
               Health Certificate or Inspection Certificate including Mammals, Reptiles,
               Birds, Insects, Crabs Etc.
        14.    Fees for Inspection of Conveyances for Export
        15.    Fees for Audit Inspection and Supervision
        16.    Fees for Assessment and Audit of Private Biosecurity Holding Areas
        17.    Overtime Charges for Biosecurity Officers Outside Official Hours
Note:    The following fees (unless stated otherwise) are for activities in or near normal operating areas,
         including designated air and seaports. Where activities are requested at other sites, actual time, travel
         and Government der diem costs (where needed) will be added to the fee.
                                         468

1. FEES FOR FUMIGATION, DUSTING & DIPPING, HEAT TREATMENT,
   DESTRUCTION OF PLANTS/PLANT PRODUCTS OR MATERIALS

   1.1. Fumigation using methyl bromide (MBr)

       For fees for supervision and auditing of MBr fumigation providers see Section 15.

   1.2. Dusting & Dipping

       Planting Materials (Export only, chemicals to be provided by the exporter)
              Charge per treatment up to 5 kg                                $150.00
              5.1 - 10 kg                                                    $200.00
              Subsequent kilogram or part thereof                             $10.00

   1.3. Garbage collection

             a.       Overseas Vessels Refuse
                      Up to 50Kgs                                           $350.00
                      50 – 100Kgs                                           $700.00
                      Subsequent 50Kgs or part thereof                      $250.00

             b.       Overseas Aircraft Refuse
                      Less than 10 passengers and crew                      $150.00
                      10 – 50 passengers and crew                           $300.00
                      More than 50 passengers and crew                      $500.00

   1.4. Destruction

             a.       Destruction (using Incinerator)
                      Up to 25 kg                                           $200.00
                      26 – 50                                               $300.00
                      51 – 75                                               $450.00
                      76 – 100                                              $750.00
                      101 – 125                                           $1,000.00
                      126 – 150                                           $1,100.00
                      Subsequent 5 kg or part thereof                        $70.00

             b.       Destruction (using other means)
                      Up to 25 kg                                           $250.00
                      26 – 50                                               $400.00
                      Subsequent 5 kg or part thereof                        $50.00
                                                469

2.    FEES FOR FUMIGATION, TREATMENT, DESTRUCTION, STORAGE OF
      ANIMAL PRODUCTS

     2.1. Fumigation using methyl bromide (MBr)

                For fees for supervision and auditing of MBr fumigation providers see
                Section 15.

     2.2. Treatment using formalin

                        Per treatment                                               $250.00

     2.3. Destruction

                a.      Using Incinerator
                        Same fees as for plants in Section 1, Subsection 1.5 (a).

                b.      Using other means
                        Same fees as for plants in Section 1, Subsection 1.5 (b)

     2.4. Storage (Detention items)

                a.      Non-commercial – in Biosecurity Freezer
                        Up to 25 kg                                                  $70.00
                        Charge per day                                               $30.00

                b.      Commercial using reefer container
                         Facility fees to be paid to the owner
                         Monitoring fee at approved ports on
                          weekends or after hours                                    $50.00
                          plus overtime, see Section 17.
                         Monitoring fee at approved site                            $50.00
                          Plus additional time and travel.

3.    FEES FOR DISINFECTION OF SOIL INFESTED PERSONAL EFFECTS

     3.1. Disinfection of soil infested items
                Shoes, boots, tents etc.                               $30.00/pair/pc

4.    FEES FOR POST ENTRY QUARANTINE (PEQ)

     4.1. Fees for Inspection & Maintenance of Plants under Government PEQ
                                            470

         Fees for inspection & maintenance of nursery stock, bulbs, corms, rhizomes, and
         tubers of plants (including germinated seed):

                         Establishment cost per plant:                            $10.00
                         Weekly maintenance per plant:                             $3.50

     4.2. Fees for Assessment and Audit of Private PEQ

                Within Honiara Town Boundary                    $80.00/hr/officer
                NB: Maintenance & running costs to be borne by owner.
     4.3. License to Operate Private PEQ (Plant)

                 Per year                                                      $1,500.00

     4.4. License to Operate Private PEQ (Animal)

                 Per year                                                      $1,500.00

5.    FEES FOR INSPECTION OF PLANTS & PLANT PRODUCTS

     5.1. Planting Materials

                a. Seeds
                      up to 1 kg                                                  $70.00
                      more than 1 kg but less than 5 kg                          $170.00
                      subsequent kg or part thereof                               $15.00

                b. Vegetative plant material (including tissue culture)
                      per plant or flask                                           $7.00

     5.2. Fruits & Vegetables at port or approved site
                        Charge per item (Homogeneous)                             $70.00

     5.3. Bulk Grain (Wheat, sorghum, rice) at processing facility
                       Per 20ft container                                        $200.00
                       Per 40ft container                                        $300.00

     5.4. Livestock Feed (Plant origin) in bags
                       Per 20ft container                                        $200.00
                       Per 40ft container                                        $300.00

     5.5. Sawn Timber
                        Treated                                             $15.00/cu.m
                                           471

                       Untreated                                           $30.00/cu.m

     5.6. Timber pallets to be taken out of the ports area
                        Pallets with ISPM 15 mark                                   Free
                        Pallets without ISPM 15 mark, reship,
                        destroy or fumigate.
                        Destruction fee                                $50.00 per pallet

     5.7. Wooden furniture - commercial consignment                             $50.00/item

     5.8. Handicrafts in commercial consignments                               $150.00

6.    FEES FOR INSPECTION OF LIVE ANIMALS

      6.1.1.   The following fees shall be payable for inspection of live animals

           a. Dogs & Cats (Male/Female)                           $225.00 (per animal)
              Subsequent animal
              of same owner                                         $60.00 (per animal)

           b. Large livestock (health check by Vet)
               inc. Horses, Cattle, Buffalo, etc.                  $225.00 (per animal)
               Subsequent 10 animals
               of same owner                                       $150.00 (per animal)
        (N/B: Minimum of 2 inspections are required if a vet considers a period of post
              entry quarantine is required)

           c. Small livestock (health check by Vet)
              inc. Sheep, Goats, Pigs
              Ducks, Geese, etc.                                  $225.00 (per animal)
              Subsequent 100
              Animals of same owner                                 $70.00 (per animal)

           d. Day Old Chickens (DOC) (Inspect by Biosecurity Officer)
              1 - 500                                   $100.00(per consignment)
              501 - 2000                                $125.00(per consignment)
              2001 – 5000                               $150.00(per consignment)
              Subsequent 1000 DOC
              or part thereof                            $30.00(per consignment)

           e. Wildlife exports only, inc. birds, lizards (health check by Vet)
              1 - 25                                                           $300.00
              26 - 50                                                          $220.00
                                           472

                 Subsequent 25 animals
                 or part thereof                                                $40.00

            f.   Reproductive material (documentation check by BO)
                 Semen, ova & fertilized eggs
                 Per consignment                                               $210.00

            g. Bee/Queen Bee (documentation check and inspection by Vet)
               Per consignment                                                 $300.00

            h. Live vaccines for animals
               (documentation check by BO)                                     $210.00

NOTE: No fees are charged for animal imports by Government.

7.    FEES FOR INSPECTION OF ANIMAL PRODUCTS

     7.1. Poultry: Eggs (documentation and hygiene checks by Biosecurity Officer)

                 0001 - 5000                               $200.00 (per consignment)
                 5001 – 10,000                             $300.00 (per consignment)
                 Subsequent 2000 eggs
                 or part thereof                            $70.00 (per consignment)

     7.2. Animal/Animal products including fresh frozen meat (excluding meat hermetically
          sealed in tins, glass, etc.)

                 Up to 25 kg                                N/A
                 26 - 1000                                  $500.00 (per consignment)
                 1001 - 2000                                $700.00 (per consignment)
                 Subsequent 500 kg
                 or part thereof                             $50.00 (per consignment)

     7.3 Livestock feed (Animal origin)
              Per 20ft container                         $200.00
              Per 40ft container                         $300.00



8.    FEES FOR INSPECTION OF OTHER QUARANTINE RISK ITEMS

     8.1. Number of Conveyances (e.g. cars and trucks) (Not requiring further cleaning)
                                             473

              Brand new vehicles
                  Per vehicle/inspection                                         $50.00

              Used vehicles
                  Per vehicle/inspection                                        $150.00

              Used trucks and buses
                  Per vehicle/inspection                                        $300.00

              Used agricultural, earthmoving or logging machines
                  Per vehicle/inspection                                        $500.00

     8.2. All shipping containers - Before leaving the wharf area

                External inspection – inc. tanktainers, flatracks etc.
                                              20ft container                    $200.00
                                              40ft container                    $300.00
                Internal inspection - empty containers only
                                              20ft container                    $100.00
                                              40ft container                    $150.00

     8.3. Personal Effects/Household Effects examination fee

                Air cargo                     per kg                             $20.00
                Sea cargo                     20ft container                    $200.00
                Sea cargo                     40ft container                    $300.00

9.    FEES FOR IMPORT PERMITS (FOR PLANTS/PLANT PRODUCTS,
      ANIMAL/ANIMAL PRODUCTS, CONVEYANCES AND OTHERS)

     9.1. Plant/Plant Products
                Plant materials including livestock feeds, grains, seeds, sawn timber,
                fruits/vegetables, propagation materials, seeds, and tissue culture, etc.
                                                     Commercial               Non-Commercial
                Single Entry                            $425.00                      $210.00
                Multiple Entry                        $1,120.00                           NA

     9.2. Animal/Animal Products
                                                 Commercial              Non-Commercial
                a.      Live Animals
                        Single Entry                  $1,120.00                  $325.00
                        Multiple Entry                $2,200.00                      NA
                                               474

                 b.       Animal Products
                          Single Entry                  $425.00                     $150.00
                          Multiple Entry              $1,120.00                         NA

                 Maximum weight for non-commercial – single entry is 25 kg
                 Commercial entry unlimited

      9.3. Others (Single Entry only)
                                                      Commercial             Non-Commercial
                  a.      Rocks, Earth                 $425.00                     $150.00

                  b.      Logging & Earthmoving Machinery
                          Single entry              $425.00

10.    FEES FOR NON-COMPLIANCES TO CONDITIONS
       E.g. expired or no Import Permit; non-presentation of original phytosanitary or health
       certificates. Release will be at the discretion of the Director of Biosecurity if the
       consignment complies with biosecurity requirements in all other respects.

                                                      Commercial             Non commercial
      10.1. Plants/Plant Products
               including logs, fresh produce, sawn timber
               seeds, grains, incl. rice               $5,000.00                    $500.00
               Plus must obtain a valid Import Permit prior to release.

      10.2. Animal/Animal Products
              including birds, stock feed,
              embryos, semen, etc.                   $5,000.00                      $500.00
              Plus must obtain a valid Import Permit prior to release.

      10.3. Others incl. machinery
               Earth, soil, sand, rock                $5,000.00                     $500.00
               Plus must obtain a valid Import Permit prior to release.

      10.4. Late notification of aircraft arrival
               Less than 60mins notice                  $2,000.00                 $1,000.00

11.    FEES FOR CLEARANCE OF OVERSEAS VESSELS AND AIRCRAFT

       Note: Staff overtime will be charged at the rates given in Section 17 for all vessel and
               aircraft clearances and callouts outside office hours.

       11.1.    Clearance of Overseas Vessels
                                             475

                                                                           Fees per vessel
               a.    Cruise, Tourist, Passenger boats                             $700.00

               b.    Vessels more than 50m                                          $500.00

               c.    Vessels less than 50m (inc. super yachts)                      $300.00

               d.    Others - Yachts                                                $200.00

      11.2.   Clearance of Overseas Aircraft
                                                                          Fees per aircraft
               a.    Aircraft with seating capacity of
                     up to 10 passengers                                            $250.00

               b.    Aircraft with seating capacity of
                     11-50 passengers.                                              $500.00

               c.    Aircraft with seating capacity of
                     more than 50 passengers.                                       $900.00

               d.    Aircraft (Cargo only)                                          $500.00

12.   FEES FOR INSPECTION OF PLANTS/PLANT PRODUCTS FOR EXPORT,
      ISSUANCE OF PHYTOSANITARY CERTIFICATE AND INSPECTION
      CERTIFICATE

NB: A valid Import Permit must be presented before any inspection can begin.

          Items                                Commercial               Non Commercial

          Plant/Plant Products               per consignment            per consignment



          Logs (ex Plantation)                  $5,000.00                           N/A

          Logs (ex Forest)                     $10,000.00

          Plus daily salary, overtime, per diem and travel costs of an inspector.
                                  476

Items                              Commercial       Non Commercial

Plant/Plant Products              per consignment   per consignment

Sawn timber (Treated or                 $420.00             N/A
Untreated)



Timber (Samples)                        $100.00             N/A



Furniture (Commercial)                   $50.00             N/A



Empty animal cages                      $200.00          $70.00



Artifacts

Up to 10 pcs                            $125.00          $30.00

11 – 20                                 $150.00          $50.00

21 – 30                                 $160.00             N/A

31 - 40                                 $175.00             N/A

every 5 in excess of 40                  $15.00             N/A



Dried cocoa, copra, copra meal,

palm kernel, chilies                    $210.00
green coconuts, coffee,
kava, nuts,
                                           477

         Items                              Commercial          Non Commercial

         Plant/Plant Products              per consignment      per consignment

         Trade samples                           $100.00                 N/A



         Planting materials - per homogenous lot

         (Cuttings, tubers, corn, bulbs,

         rhizomes, roots, seeds,                 $150.00             $70.00
         etc.)




         Fresh Fruits/Vegetables - per homogenous lot

         (including root crops)                  $150.00             $70.00



         Other Plant Products - per homogenous lot

         Incl. cooked food                       $150.00             $70.00




13.   FEES FOR INSPECTION OF ANIMAL/ANIMAL PRODUCTS FOR EXPORT
      AND ISSUANCE OF HEALTH CERTIFICATE OR INSPECTION
      CERTIFICATE INCLUDING MAMMALS, REPTILES, BIRDS, INSECTS,
      CRABS ETC.

       Items                                  Commercial           Non
       Commercial
       Animal/Animal Products                 per consignment      per consignment
                                            478

       Mammals (All)                               $450.00                      $70.00

       Birds(domesticated/wild)                    $450.00                      $70.00

       Reptiles                                    $450.00                      $70.00
       (Incl. Crocodiles, Lizards)

       Crabs (Hermit, Mangrove)                    $450.00                      $70.00

       Insects (dried/live)                        $450.00                      $70.00

       Animal By-Product                           $450.00                      $70.00
       (hides, skins, Furs)

       Animal Products                             $450.00                      $70.00
       (Beef, Pork, Poultry)

       Others                                      $450.00                      $70.00

14.   FEES FOR INSPECTION OF CONVEYANCES FOR EXPORT

      Issuance of Cleanliness Certificate
        Items                                                                  Charge
        Containers                                                            $300.00
        Trucks                                                              $1,000.00
        Cars                                                                  $500.00
        Trailers                                                            $1,000.00
        Logging equipment                                                      $5,000

15.   FEES FOR AUDIT INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION

      Fees for Auditing of Fumigation Providers

                     $80.00 /officer/hr
      Fees for Supervising/Monitoring Fumigation Providers

                      $60.00 /officer/hr

      For auditing or supervision outside Honiara, Noro, Munda, Kulitanai or Lata, time,
      travel and per diem costs will be charged at government rates. Any needed overtime
      will be charged at the standard rate given in Section 17.
                                            479

16.    FEES FOR ASSESSMENT AND AUDIT OF PRIVATE BIOSECURITY
       HOLDING AREAS

                      Assessment & Audit Fee:      $80.00 /officer/hr
                      License Fee:                 $1,500.00

       For assessment and auditing outside Honiara, Noro, Munda, Koliai or Lata, time,
       travel, and per diem costs will be charged at government rates. Any needed overtime
       and travel will be charged at the standard rate given in Section 17.

17.    OVERTIME CHARGES FOR BIOSECURITY OFFICERS OUTSIDE
       OFFICIAL HOURS

      17.1.    Methods of calculating Overtime Claims
               These charges are to be added to the Fees prescribed above.

                                                                    Rate
                Weekdays                                            x 1.5
                Saturdays/Sundays                                   x 2.0
                Public Holidays                                     x 2.5

                FORMULA = Basic Salary x Rate x Hours            = $**.**/hr
                             75


       Dated at Honiara this ……………….. day of …………………………….. 2015.




                   …………………………………………………………

                         HON. AUGUSTINE AUGA, MP
                 MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
