                                                                  G/SPS/N/THA/153/Rev. 1




           Notification of Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
     Re : Specification of plants from certain sources as restricted articles,
    of exceptions and conditions under the Plant Quarantine Act B.E. 2507
                                    B.E. 2550

                                  -----------------------------


               By virtue of Article 6 of the Plant Quarantine Act B.E. 2507, revised by the
Plant Quarantine Act (No. 2) B.E. 2542, the Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives,
through the recommendation of the Plant Quarantine Committee, hereby issue the
following notification.
               Item 1. The following Ministerial Notifications shall be repealed:
                        1.1 Notification of Ministry of Agriculture Re : Specification of
plants or carriers as restricted articles, of exceptions and conditions under the Plant
Quarantine Act B.E. 2507 (No. 2) dated 19 June B.E. 2507;
                         1.2 Notification of Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Re : Specification of plants or carriers as restricted articles, of exceptions and conditions
under the Plant Quarantine Act B.E. 2507 No. 2 (Restricted articles) B.E. 2529 dated 29
August B.E. 2529.
               Item 2. In this notification:
                         “Preserve food” means food derived from any plant part in a state
still considered as a plant and had passed the processed that could destroy plant pests and
diseases.
                 Item 3. Plants from any source listed with this notification are considered
as restricted articles.
               Item 4. Exceptions or conditions:
                        4.1   Preserve food;
                         4.2 The importation of certain restricted articles shall comply
with conditions stipulated by the Director-General of the Department of Agriculture before
import.
                                         2                 G/SPS/N/THA/153/Rev. 1


              This notification shall enter into force 60 days after the date of its
proclamation in the Royal Gazette, and shall remain valid henceforth.

                                         Given on 26 April B.E. 2550

                                                Thira Sutabutra

                                          (Professor Thira Sutabutra)
                                                    Minister
                                    Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
                                               3                     G/SPS/N/THA/153/Rev. 1


                          List of plants and carriers attached to the
                  Notification of Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
            Re : Specification of plants from certain sources as restricted articles,
      of exceptions and conditions under the Plant Quarantine Act B.E. 2507 B.E. 2550

                                  -----------------------------

1.      Tea, Camellia sinensis (L.) Kuntze i.e. dried tea leave
2.      Plants in genus Coffea spp. i.e. fresh coffee beans
3.      Plants in genus Gossypium spp. i.e. cotton lint
4.      Plants in genus Oryza spp. i.e. white rice, broken rice and par-boil rice
5.      Any part of the following plants in family Agaricaceae i.e. mushroom
6.      Any part of the following plants in family Apiaceae i.e.
               Coriandrum sativum L. (coriander)
               Daucus carota L. (carrot)
               Pastinaca sativa L. (parsnip)
               Petroselinum crispum (Mill.) Nyman ex A.W. Hill (parsley)
               Plants in genus Apium spp.
7.      Any part of the following plants in family Araceae i.e.
               Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott (taro)
               Plants in genus Aglaonema spp.
               Plants in genus Anthurium spp.
               Plants in genus Caladium spp.
               Plants in genus Dieffenbachia spp.
               Plants in genus Philodendron spp.
               Plants in genus Zantedeschia spp.
8.      Any part of the following plants in family Asteraceae i.e.
               Helianthus annus L. (sunflower)
               Lactuca sativa L. (lettuce)
               Plants in genus Aster spp.
               Plants in genus Chrysanthemum spp.
9.      Any part of the following plants in family Boraginaceae i.e.
               Plants in genus Myosotis spp.
10.     Any part of the following plants in family Brassicaceae i.e.
               Wasabia japonica (Miq.) Matsum. (wasabi)
                                             4                   G/SPS/N/THA/153/Rev. 1


             Plants in genus Brassica spp.
             Plants in genus Raphanus spp.
11.   Any part of the following plants in family Caryophillaceae i.e.
             Dianthus caryophyllus L. (carnation)
             Plants in genus Gypsophilia spp.
12.   Any part of the following plants in family Chenopodiaceae i.e.
             Spinacia oleracea L. (spinach)
13.   Any part of the following plants in family Convolvulaceae i.e.
             Plants in genus Ipomoea spp.
14.   Any part of the following plants in family Cucurbitaceae (excluding fruit) i.e.
             Citrullus lanatus (Thunb.) Matsum. & Nakai (water melon)
             Momordica charantia L. (bitter gourd)
             Plants in genus Cucumis spp.
             Plants in genus Cucurbita spp.
             Plants in genus Luffa spp.
15.   Any part of the following plants in family Cyperaceae i.e.
             Eleocharis dulcis (Burm. f.) Trin. ex Hensch. (Chinese water-chestnut)
16.   Any part of the following plants in family Dioscoreaceae i.e.
             Dioscorea batatas Decne. (yam)

17.   Any part of the following plants in family Euphorbiaceae i.e.
             Ricinus communis L. (castor bean)
18.   Any part of the following plants in family Fabaceae i.e.
             Arachis hypogaea L. (groundnut)

             Cajanus cajan (L.) Millsp. (pigeon pea)
             Cicer arietinum L. (chick pea)

             Glycine max (L.) Merr. (soybean)

             Phaseolus vulgaris L. (kidney bean)

             Pisum sativum L. (pea)

             Plants in genus Vigna spp.
19.   Any part of the following plants in family Geraniaceae i.e.
             Plants in genus Geranium spp.
                                                 5                   G/SPS/N/THA/153/Rev. 1


20.      Any part of the following plants in family Iridaceae i.e.
                 Plants in genus Gladiolus spp.
21.      Any part of the following plants in family Liliaceae i.e.
                Asparagus officinalis L. (asparagus)
                Plants in genus Allium spp.
                Plants in genus Lilium spp.
                Plants in genus Narcissus spp.
                Plants in genus Tulipa spp.
22.      Any part of the following plants in family Malvaceae i.e.
                Abelmoschus esculentus (L.) Moench. (okra)
23.      Any part of the following plants in family Orchidaceae
24.      Any part of the following plants in family Pedaliaceae i.e.
                Sesamum indicum L. (sesame)
25.      Any part of the following plants in family Poaceae i.e.
                Avena sativa L. (oats)
                Hordeum vulgare L. (barley)
                Panicum miliaceum L. (millet)
                Plants in genus Bambusa spp.
                Plants in genus Triticum spp.
                Plants in genus Zoysia spp.
26.      Any part of the following plants family Rosaceae i.e.
                Plants in genus Rosa spp.
27.      Any part of the following plants family Zingiberaceae i.e.
                Zingiber officinale Roscoe (ginger)

                                   ------------------------------




•     The Royal Gazette, Vol. 124, Special Part 66 D, Page 5, Dated 1 June B.E. 2550 (207)
•     This is an unofficial English translation. In case of any different in meaning between
      the Thai text and the English translation, the Thai text shall be applied.
