Source: https://cnmilaw.gov/docs/admincode/T85/T85-60.2.pdf
Full local original: ../sources/mp.pdf and ../sources/mp.txt
Read 2026-09-30. Exact extracted legal text, retaining source typographical errors.

§ 85-60.2-010            Definitions

For the purposes of the rules and regulations in this subchapter, unless context otherwise
requires, the following words, phrases, names, and terms shall be construed, respectively,
to mean:

(a)     “Agricultural Quarantine Facility” - Government facilities equipped and
specifically set aside for holding growing imported plant materials suspected of
harbouring pests and diseases.

(b)    “Approved Place for Performance of Quarantine” - Means a place other than a
quarantine station where the quarantine of goods may take place.

(c)    “As Prescribed” - Any procedure on treatment as detailed by the Chief of Plant
Industry or contained in a manual or official treatment schedule.

(d)    “Authorizing Official” - The Director for the Department of Natural Resources
and the Chief for the Division of Plant Industry or designees.

(e)     “Baggage” - Any goods brought into the country by a passenger arriving by air or
by sea from overseas.

(f)    “Chief” - The Chief for the Division of Plant Industry, Department of Natural
Resources, or any employee from the Division of Plant Industry to whom authority has
heretofore been delegated, or to whom authority may hereafter be delegated, to act in his
stead.

(g)    “CNMI” - The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, including the
government thereof, which lies within the area north of 14 degrees north latitude, south of
21 degrees north latitude, west of 150 degrees east longitude and east of 144 degrees east
longitude, as extended by the Marine Sovereignty Act.

(h)    “Contaminate” - Means infestation or infection by plant pest or disease of having
an association with unauthorized plant material or soil adhering to or with the articles.



© 2016 by The Commonwealth Law Revision Commission (August 30, 2016)        Page 4 of 30
      TITLE 85: DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND NATURAL RESOURCES

(i)  “Contraband Material” - Any material imported into or transported within the
CNMI by any person in contravention of Plant Quarantine Regulations in this subchapter.

(j)    “Conveyance” - Means any carrier such as a vessel, aircraft, small boat, or
shipping container.

(k)     “Culture” - Plant tissue on nutritive media or parts thereof.

(l)   “Cut Flowers” - The fresh cut portion of a plant that is imported for decoration or
ornamentation, including leis and bouquets.

(m)    “Declaration” - Refers to a written statement certifying as to plants, plant
materials, or other prohibited or restricted articles under the regulations in this subchapter
which accompany a person on their arrival from overseas.

(n)     “Delegation” - The Director may, in writing, delegate specific powers designated
in the regulations in this subchapter to the Chief of Plant Industry, and these delegated
powers will remain effective until revoked. The Chief of Plant Industry may in writing,
also delegate specific powers designated in this subchapter, to a nominated position
within the Department of Natural Resources, and these delegated powers will remain
effective until revoked.

(o)    “Department” - The Department of Natural Resources for the Commonwealth of
the Northern Marianas.

(p)   “Director” - The Director for the Department of Natural Resources, or any
employee for the Department to whom authority has heretofore been delegated, or to
whom authority may hereafter be delegated, to act in his stead.

(q)   “Division” - The Division of Plant Industry for the Department of Natural
Resources.

(r)     “Disease” - A condition caused by a pathogenic organism.

(s)    “Dunnage” - Any timber used in stowage of goods in conveyances such as vessel
or cargo containers.

(t)     “Export” - Means to take a thing or cause it to be sent out from the CNMI.

(u)   “First Port of Entry” - The seaport or airport in the Commonwealth in which the
conveyance or article first enters.

(v)     “Fresh Fruit and Vegetable” - Means the edible product of any plant whether
attached to the plants or not and includes any peel, skin, shell or seeds, whether edible or
not, as well as vegetables.




© 2016 by The Commonwealth Law Revision Commission (August 30, 2016)    Page 5 of 30
       TITLE 85: DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND NATURAL RESOURCES

(w)     “Filler and Greenery” - Fresh foliage used for decoration, such as fern and palm
fronds, asparagus fern plumes, pine sprays, willow branches, etc.

(x)      “Garbage” - All refuse waste materials derived in whole or in part from plants,
fruits, vegetables, or other plants or refuses of any character whatsoever that has been
associated with any such material on board any mean of conveyance, and including food
scraps, table refuses, galley refuses, food wrappers or packaging materials, and other
waste materials from stores, food preparation areas, passenger or crew quarters, dining
rooms or any other areas on vessels, aircraft, or other means of conveyance.

(y)     “Goods” - Mean any movable property.

(z)   “Graded Timber” - A commercial grading of timber strength based on absence of
sapwood; absence of bark; degree of sound and unsound knots.

(aa) “Import” - Means to bring a thing or cause it to be brought into the CNMI from
any place outside the country by any means of conveyance.

(bb) “Importer” - Any person who imports goods, and includes passengers on a
conveyance.

(cc) “Import Permit” - Written or oral authorization issued by authorized officer for
the movement into or transfer within the CNMI of any item requiring a permit under this
subchapter.

(dd) “Inspector” - An authorized employee from the Division of Plant Industry, the
Division of Animal Health Industry, U.S. Department of Agriculture to perform the
quarantine inspection services.

(ee)    “Infected” - Means any condition caused by a plant disease pathogen.

(ff)    “Infested” - Means presence of plant pests other than disease pathogen.

(gg) “Inspection” - The examination of regulated materials, conveyances containers or
other articles for the purpose of detecting infestation or contamination with plant pests or
diseases. Inspection may involve removal of regulated article or plant materials, goods,
soil, or a sample of them to a quarantine station or laboratory where special facilities are
available.

(hh) “Inspector” - An authorized employee from the Division of Plant Industry’s
agricultural quarantine inspection service or the Division of Animal and Health Industry.

(ii)    “Intermediate Quarantine” - The growing of plants intended for consignment to
CNMI by an approved overseas authority in an insect proof plant house where the plants
are thoroughly screened for plant pests including disease and certified by the responsible




© 2016 by The Commonwealth Law Revision Commission (August 30, 2016)   Page 6 of 30
       TITLE 85: DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND NATURAL RESOURCES

authority to the effect that the plants have been grown under insect proof conditions and
as far as can be determined are free of plant pests.

(jj)   “In Transit” - Regulated articles that arrive in the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands from outside and that are consigned to a destination outside the
Commonwealth, but that are transferred from one conveyance to another, irrespective of
the duration of the temporary stay in the Commonwealth.

(kk)    “Land” - Includes any surface area, building, wharf, or port facility.

(ll)    “Northern Marianas” - The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or
any island in this group.

(mm) “Noxious Weed” - Means any plant which either directly or indirectly causes
injury to the health of human beings, animals, or plants, which declared by notice of the
Director to be harmful and subject to quarantine control or plants listed noxious in 7 CFR
60.

(nn) “Owner” - The person, corporate body, or organization responsible for
importation and exportation of regulated articles.

(oo) “Person” - Shall be construed to mean both singular and plural, and shall include
individuals, corporations, companies, associations, and societies.

(pp) “Phytosanitary Certificate” - An official or document substantially in the form of
the model certificate of the International Plant Protection Convention of 1952 stating
facts about a plant or plant product and attesting to that article’s freedom from pests. The
document or certificate must be issued and attested by an authorized plant protection
official.

(qq) “Plant” - Means all species, varieties, and types of plants or parts thereof
including stems, branches, tubers, bulbs, corns, stocks, budwood, cuttings, layers, slips,
suckers, roots, leaves, flowers, fruits, seeds, and botanical specimen.

(rr)    “Plant Quarantine Permits” - Means a written authorization issued by the Chief of
Plant Industry for the movement into or transfer within the CNMI of any plants, plant
parts for propagative purposes, cultures, or items designated in the regulation as requiring
a permit.

(ss)    “Plant Material” - Means all material of plant origin, and includes timber and
other items manufactured wholly or in part from plants.

(tt)    “Plant Pest” - Means an organism of animal or plant origin which can directly or
indirectly cause injury or damage to plants including any living stage of insect, mite,
nematode, snail, slug or other invertebrate animal, bacteria, fungi, virus or similar




© 2016 by The Commonwealth Law Revision Commission (August 30, 2016)   Page 7 of 30
      TITLE 85: DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND NATURAL RESOURCES

organism, and includes noxious weeds known, or suspected or liable to be harmful to
plants.

(uu) “Quarantine” - Means a restriction imposed by duly constituted authorities,
whereby the production, movement or existence of plants, plant material, or whereby any
other article or material or the normal activity of persons is brought under regulations; in
order that the introduction or spread be controlled or eradicated, thereby reducing or
avoiding losses that would otherwise occur through damage done by the pest or disease
or through a continuing of control measures.

(vv) “Quarantine Area” - Any land where a specified quarantine pest or disease is
found together with specified adjoining land declared by the Director of Natural
Resources to be a quarantine area for a prescribed period of time.

(ww) “Quarantine Pest” - Means a pest of potential economic importance to the CNMI
endangered thereby and not yet present there or present, but not widely distributed, and
being actively controlled.

(xx) “Quarantine Station” - Includes a temporary quarantine station, a quarantine
check point, a post entry quarantine station, and all facilities and services related to a
quarantine station or check point.

(yy) “Regulated Material” - Means garbage, soil, plant pest, substances or articles (not
being plant or plant material) and other materials for the importation or movement of
which is prohibited or regulated under the provisions of the law or any regulations made
thereunder.

(zz) “Re-ship” or “Re-export” - In relation to any imported plant, plant material, or
regulated material, means to remove, or send it out from the CNMI by vessel or aircraft
as a means of removing the pest risk.

(aaa) “Seed” - The ripened ovule of plant, enclosing a rudimentary plant and food
necessary for its termination.

(bbb) “Soil” - Means the loose surface materials of the earth in which plants grow and
which may serve to harbor plant pests, in most cases consisting of disintegrated rock with
an admixture of organic material, and soluble salt.

(ccc) “Timber” - Includes logs, branchwoods, firewoods, barks, and all-woods which
have been split, hewn, sawn, or dressed, but not otherwise manufactured, including pre-
fabricated building units, poles wooden cases or boxes, and the like.

(ddd) “Treatment” - Means the employment of remedial measures to ensure removal of
injurious or objectionable materials or the elimination, sterilization, or killing of any plant
pest for the avoidance of contamination including among other measures such as




© 2016 by The Commonwealth Law Revision Commission (August 30, 2016)   Page 8 of 30
        TITLE 85: DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND NATURAL RESOURCES

cleaning, incineration disinfection, disinfestation of plants, plant materials, and/or
regulated materials or re-shipment thereof.

(eee)    “USDA” - The United States Department of Agriculture.

Modified, 1 CMC § 3806(d), (f), (g).

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).

Commission Comment: In subsections (d), (k), (o), (q), (dd), (ll) and (eee), the Commission inserted the
final period. In subsection (n), the Commission changed “power” to “powers.” In subsection (s), the
Commission changed “good” to “goods.” In subsection (x), the Commission changed “an” to “and.”
Finally, in subsection (ii), the Commission changed “oversea” to “overseas.” All of the foregoing were to
correct manifest errors. The Commission inserted quotation marks around terms defined.

With respect to the references to the Department of Natural Resources, see Executive Order 94-3 (effective
August 23, 1994) reorganizing the Commonwealth government executive branch, changing agency names
and official titles and effecting numerous other revisions. See also PL 10-57 and the general commission
comment to this subchapter.



§ 85-60.2-104              Required Declaration and General Prohibition


© 2016 by The Commonwealth Law Revision Commission (August 30, 2016)         Page 11 of 30
      TITLE 85: DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND NATURAL RESOURCES



(a)     Every person entering the Commonwealth shall be required to make a written
declaration in respect of plants, plant materials, soil, cultures, or other things subject of
this subchapter.

(b)     No person may introduce into the CNMI any plant, plant material, or any other
things subject to the regulations in this subchapter, unless, the provisions of this
subchapter have been duly complied with in respect of plants, plant materials, or other
regulated materials.

Modified, 1 CMC § 3806(d), (g).

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).

Commission Comment: The original paragraphs were not designated. The Commission designated
subsections (a) and (b).

In subsection (a), the Commission inserted the final period. In subsection (b), the Commission changed “of
the regulations” to “to the regulations” to correct a manifest error.

§ 85-60.2-106             Availability of Manifests and Movement Information

Cargo manifests and other similar documents concerning aircrafts and vessels traveling
into or within the CNMI will be made available to the quarantine inspectors upon request.
Those authorities having information as to the movement of aircrafts and vessels will
furnish such information to the inspectors upon request.

Modified, 1 CMC § 3806(f), (g).

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).

Commission Comment: The Commission corrected the spelling of “traveling.”

§ 85-60.2-108             Plant Quarantine Permits

(a)     Plant quarantine permits are required as a condition of entry into the CNMI. Both
oral and written permits are required for shipments of more than 12 plants; plants
requiring treatment as a condition of entry; and plants requiring post-entry growing.
Application forms for plant quarantine permits can be secured from the Plant Industry at
Kagman or other Plant Industry facilities on other islands. Application of permit for the
international importation of plants or plant products (PPQ form 587) can be obtained
from the listed address above, or from PPQ APHIS USDA, Box 87679, Tamuning Guam
96911. On the application form, the imported plants must write the names (common
English name, if any, and preferable the scientific name) and quantities of each item to be
imported or moved within the CNMI. The place of origin and destination of plants. must
also be specified on the application form.

(b)    Plant quarantine permits are required for those plants and cultures which are
allowed entry into the CNMI. The conditions of the granted entry for plants will be


© 2016 by The Commonwealth Law Revision Commission (August 30, 2016)           Page 12 of 30
       TITLE 85: DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND NATURAL RESOURCES

specified on the permit, and must be complied with, otherwise, the permit becomes
invalid. Permit may be issued for a single entry or multiple entries as necessary to
facilitate commerce.

(c)     In general, permits will be issued only for each separate importation. However, in
special approved cases by the Chief of Plant Industry, the continuing permits for a stated
period may be issued. Permits are required for the import of raw timber.

Modified, 1 CMC § 3806(d), (g).

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).

Commission Comment: The original paragraphs were not designated. The Commission designated
subsections (a) through (c).

In subsection (b), the Commission changed “compile” to “complied.”



§ 85-60.2-116            Release/Clearance of Plants, Plant Materials or Goods

With the compliance of all other requirements in this subchapter for imported plants and
the subsequent satisfactory conclusion of the prescribed treatment, the inspector shall
advise the importer or owner for the release of quarantined items with the amount of fee
to be paid for the services.
Modified, 1 CMC § 3806(f).

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).



§ 85-60.2-201            Import Permit

Import permit is required for the importation of regulated articles. Importation permit is
not required for all non-regulated articles. However, these non-regulated articles are
subject to inspection upon arrival. Persons interested in importation of plants and plant
products into the CNMI should contact: the Chief of Plant Industry, Department of
Natural Resources, Kagman Agriculture Station, Saipan, MP 96950.

Modified, 1 CMC § 3806(f).

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).

§ 85-60.2-202            Certificates

(a)     Phytosanitary certificates are required for the importation of:
(1)     Rooted plants and seedlings.
(2)     Cuttings and grafts of woody plants, ornamental plants, and other horticultural
plants.
(3)     Cut flowers.
(4)     Flower bulbs, corns, tubers, rhizomes, and other vegetative plant propagating
materials.
(5)     Fresh fruits of regulated plants.
(6)     Seeds meant for propagation purposes.
(7)     Soil.

(b)    Phytosanitary certificates must be issued by the Plant Protection Service from
country origin of the plants.

(c)    The certificate issued is not more than 60 days before the dispatch of the
consignment, and must be made up in English language.


© 2016 by The Commonwealth Law Revision Commission (August 30, 2016)        Page 18 of 30
      TITLE 85: DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND NATURAL RESOURCES



(d)     If the consignment imported into the CNMI is not the country of origin, the
consignment shall be accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate for the country of
origin, or an authorized copy therefore, together with a declaration or re-export, issued by
the country from where it was dispatched.

Modified, 1 CMC § 3806(f), (g).

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).

Commission Comment: In subsection (a)(7), the Commission inserted the final period.

§ 85-60.2-204            General Shipping Requirements

(a)     Each shipment of plants into the CNMI shall be marked to show name and
address, of the shipper or owner, name of consignee, contents and place of origin for the
grown contents. Any person transporting, receiving, or importing into the CNMI of any
plant, product, or soil must have an import permit.

(b)     At the port of entry, all shipments of plants and plant product regulated by this
subchapter will be examined, if the shipments are found infested with any pest liable to
be detrimental to agriculture. These shipments shall be destroyed, treated, or processed at
the owner’s expense. All shipped plants into the CNMI must be free of soil.

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).

Commission Comment: The original paragraphs were not designated. The Commission designated
subsections (a) and (b).



§ 85-60.2-238            Stored Dried Products

Stored dried products of human food products and animal feeds are the enterable into the
CNMI, but are subject to inspection as conditions of entry. They may be refused entry, if
found infested with storage pests and diseases.

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).



§ 85-60.2-501             Entry Via the Post Office

(a)     Any plant, plant material, and regulated material entering CNMI by means of the
postal service is liable to quarantine inspection and treatment, if necessary in accordance
with the regulations in this subchapter.

(b)    Fees for quarantine permits or any quarantine services and related activity can be
determined by the Chief of Plant Industry, and will be duly published.

Modified, 1 CMC § 3806(d), (f).

History: Adopted 11 Com. Reg. 6496 (Sept. 15, 1989); Proposed 11 Com. Reg. 6332 (July 15, 1989).

Commission Comment: The original paragraphs were not designated. The Commission designated
subsections (a) and (b).

Part 600 -       Penalties

