Retrieved 2026-09-30; tool-extracted primary-site text or access diagnostics.

from the provisions of this article: (https://uaelegislation.gov.ae/en/legislations/1160/download)
citeturn1662search0 [wordlim: 200] Published: 2.4 years ago; Food circulated for non-commercial purposes under the relevant legislation, including the following: ... Food imported for personal use.
from the provisions of this article:

1. Food circulated for non-commercial purposes under the relevant legislation, including the following:  
   a. Food imported for personal use.  
   b. Food samples imported for scientific studies and research that are not intended for human consumption.  
   c. Food samples intended for advertising and marketing study, that are not intended for sale, including free samples distributed to consumers, samples intended for compliance requirements, and any foods whose indication card is marked with "Free Sample" phrase.  
   d. Food samples used in exhibitions and festivals that are not intended for sale.  

2. Any food in respect of which a Resolution is issued by the Minister in coordination with the competent authority and the concerned bodies.  

Article (4)

Food Registration Procedures

Food shall be registered in the National Accreditation & Registration System announced by the Ministry, in accordance with the following procedures:

1. The food organization's officer shall submit the registration application online. The application shall meet all data and documents specified by the Ministry.  
2. The competent authority shall:  
   a. Look into the registration application referred to in clause 1 of this Article and audit the data contained therein.  
   b. Complete the necessary procedures for the registration of food according to the food group, main and subcategories, manufacturing processes and food additives.  
   c. Dispatch samples to the approved laboratories for being tested, identify the required tests, based on the risk assessment, and ensure that the tests results are registered with National Accreditation & Registration System by the concerned laboratory.  
   d. The Ministry shall approve the registration of food after ensuring that all

Cabinet Resolution of 2017 Concerning the Executive Regulations of Federal Law of 2015 Concerning Food Safety 7
