1 L.R.O. 2007                              Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268




                                    CHAPTER 268

                              PLANT PROTECTION

                            ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION


                                              PART I

                                      PRELIMINARY

   1.     Short title.

   2.     Interpretation.

                                              PART II

                                    ADMINISTRATION

   3.     Powers of the Minister.

   4.     Designation of Organisation.

   5.     Functions of Organisation.

   6.     Appointment of inspectors.

   7.     Duties of an inspector.

   8.     Designation of official laboratory and official analyst.

   9.     Establishment of Advisory Council.

  10. Resignation or removal of members of Council.

  11. Role of Council.




                                               THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                                 Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                       by the authority of the Government of Barbados
CAP. 268                        Plant Protection       L.R.O. 2007 2


SECTION


   12.    Sub-committees of Council.

   13.    Phytosanitary Emergency Fund.

                                       PART III

                                       IMPORTS

   14.    Restrictions on import.

   15.    Import permit.

   16.    Inspection on importation.

   17.    Detention or destruction of imports.

   18.    Release of imports.

   19.    Minister may restrict certain imports.

   20.    Plant quarantine stations.

   21.    Duty to report and detain certain imports.

                                       PART IV

                                       EXPORTS

   22.    Restriction on exports.

   23.    Inspection of exports.

                                        PART V

               CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION OF PESTS

   24.    Duty of occupier to notify Organisation.

   25.    Declaration of quarantine.
3 L.R.O. 2007                                 Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268


SECTION


   26.    Procedure when quarantine pest is on premises.

   27.    Service of quarantine notice in absence of occupier.

   28.    Duration of quarantine notice.

   29.    Declaration of phytosanitary emergency.

   30.    Lifting of quarantine.

   31.    Declaration of pest free or low pest prevalence area.

                                                PART VI

                                       ENFORCEMENT

   32.    Entry and search by an inspector.

   33.    Seizure and notice of seizure.

   34.    Storage or removal of affected items.

   35.    Confiscation and disposal of unclaimed items.

   36.    Offences.

   37.    Liability of officials.

   38.    Penalty.

   39.    Forfeiture.

   40.    Limitation on liability.

   41.    Compensation.




                                                  THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                                    Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                          by the authority of the Government of Barbados
CAP. 268                     Plant Protection   L.R.O. 2007 4


SECTION




                                  PART VII

                             MISCELLANEOUS

   42.    Documents.

   43.    Regulations.

   44.    Repeal.

   45.    Act binds Crown.
5 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                     ss.1-2




                           CHAPTER 268

                       PLANT PROTECTION

An Act to prevent the introduction and to control the spread of plant 2007-53.
    pests; to protect plant resources; to facilitate trade in plants and
    plant products; and to regulate other matters connected thereto;
    and to repeal the Plant Pest and Disease (Import Control) Act,
    Cap. 266.

                                                                      [December 20, 2007] Commence-
                                                                                                 ment.

                                      PART I

                           PRELIMINARY

  1. This Act may be cited as the Plant Protection Act.                                          Short title.


  2. In this Act,                                                                                Interpreta-
                                                                                                 tion.
"affected" means infected or infested with a pest;
"area" includes a place or site of production;
"area of low pest prevalence" means an area, identified by the
     competent authority, in which a specific pest occurs at low levels
     and which is subject to effective surveillance, control or eradica-
     tion measures;
"area under cultivation" includes a field, plantation, nursery, garden,
     green house and laboratory;
"beneficial organism" means any organism (including fungi, Billeria,
    viruses, virus-like organisms and invertebrate or other animals)
    which is identified by competent authority to be directly or
    indirectly advantageous to flora or agricultural production;



                                       THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                         Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                               by the authority of the Government of Barbados
      CAP. 268                  Plant Protection             L.R.O. 2007 6
s.2

      "consignment" means a quantity of plants, plant products or other
          regulated articles (which may be composed of one or more
          commodities or lots) being moved from one country to another
          and covered, when required, by a single phytosanitary certificate;
      "consignment in transit"means a consignment which passes through a
          country without being imported, and may be subject to
          phytosanitary measures;
      "contain" means to apply phytosanitary measures in and around an
           affected area to prevent the spread of a pest;
      "container" means a box, bag, wrapper, covering or other receptacle in
           which any plant, plant products or other regulated articles that
           may carry pests has been or is being transported;
      "control" means the suppression, containment or eradication of a pest
           population;
      "conveyance" means any vessel, aircraft, train, vehicle, cart, container,
          animal or other thing that can convey a plant, plant product, pest,
          beneficial organism or other regulated article from one place to
          another;
      "Council" means the Advisory Council established under section 9;
      "detain" means to keep a consignment in official custody or
           confinement for phytosanitary reasons;
      "endangered area" means an area where ecological Billors favour the
          establishment of a pest whose presence in the area will result in
          economically important loss;
      "entry",
           (a) in relation to a pest, means the movement of a pest into an
               area where it is not yet present, or present but not widely
               distributed and being officially controlled;
           (b) in relation to a consignment, means the movement of the
               consignment through a port of entry into an area;
7 L.R.O. 2007                       Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                  s.2

"eradicate" means to apply phytosanitary measures to eliminate a pest
     from an area;
"establishment" means the perpetuation, for the foreseeable future, of
     a pest within an area after entry;
"Fund" means the Phytosanitary Emergency Fund established by
    section 13;
"germplasm" means a plant intended for use in breeding or
    conservation programmes;
"import permit" under section 15(1) means an official document
    authorizing the importation of a commodity in accordance with
    specified phytosanitary requirements;
"import" means to bring into Barbados from another country any plant,
    plant product, pest, beneficial organism or other regulated article
    by means of a conveyance;
"importer" means anyone who, whether as owner, consignor,
    consignee, agent, broker or otherwise, is in possession of or in
    any way entitled to the custody of any plant, plant product, pest,
    beneficial organism or other regulated article landed or likely to
    be landed in Barbados from another country;
"inspection" means official visual examination of a plant, plant
     product or other regulated article to determine if pests are present
     or to determine compliance with phytosanitary regulations;
"inspector" means a person designated or appointed under section 6;
"introduction" means the entry of a pest resulting in its establishment
     in Barbados;
"IPPC" means the new Revised Text of the International Plant
    Protection Convention;




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
      CAP. 268                  Plant Protection             L.R.O. 2007 8
s.2

      "IPPC Secretariat" means the Secretariat of the Commission on
          Phytosanitary Measures established under the International Plant
          Protection Convention;
      "Minister" means the Minister responsible for Agriculture;
      "Ministry" means the Ministry responsible for Agriculture;
      "National Plant Protection Organisation" or "the Organisation" means
           the Government unit, department or office designated by the
           Minister under section 4;
      "occupier", in relation to any land or building, means a person in
          actual occupation thereof;
      "official control" means the active enforcement of mandatory
           phytosanitary regulations and the application of mandatory
           phytosanitary procedures with the objective of eradication or
           containment of quarantine pests or for the management of
           regulated non-quarantine pests;
      "outbreak" a recently detected pest population, including an
          incursion, or a sudden significant increase of an established pest
          population;
      "owner", in relation to any thing, includes any person having for the
          time being the possession, custody or control thereof;
      "packaging" means any material used in supporting, protecting or
          carrying a plant, plant product or other regulated article;
      "pest" means any species, strain or biotype of any plant, animal or
           pathogenic agent injurious to a plant or plant product;
      "pest free area" means an area in which a specific pest does not occur
           as demonstrated by scientific evidence and in which, where
           appropriate, this condition is being officially maintained;
      "pest risk analysis" means the process of evaluating biological or other
           scientific and economic evidence to determine whether a pest
           should be regulated, and the strength of any phytosanitary
           measures to be taken against it;
9 L.R.O. 2007                       Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                  s.2

"phytosanitary certificate" means a certificate patterned after the model
    certificate of the IPPC and issued under section 23;
"phytosanitary emergency" means an emergency declared under
    sections 19(c) and 29;
"phytosanitary measure" means any legislation, regulation or official
    procedure having the purpose of preventing the introduction or
    spread of quarantine pests, or limiting the economic impact of
    regulated non-quarantine pests;
"plant" includes a seed, germplasm and part of a plant;
"plant product" means any un-manufactured material of plant origin
     (including grain) and a manufactured product which, by its
     nature or that of its processing, may create a risk for the
     introduction and spread of a pest;
"port of entry" means an airport or seaport;
"pre-clearance" means phytosanitary certification and/or clearance in
     the exporting country, performed by or under the supervision of
     the Organisation;
"premises" means any land, building or other structure or conveyance
    situated within the territorial boundaries of Barbados;
"prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;
"processing" means the act of washing, peeling, scraping, mincing,
     scrubbing or any other method used on any plant, plant product
     or regulated article;
"quarantine pest" means a pest of potential economic importance to
    the area endangered thereby and not yet present there, or present
    but not widely distributed and being officially controlled and
    declared as such by regulations;
"regular business hours" means the normal working hours of a
    Government office in Barbados;




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
      CAP. 268                  Plant Protection             L.R.O. 2007 10
s.2

      "regulated article" means any plant, plant product, storage place,
           packaging, conveyance, container, soil and any other organism,
           object or material capable of harbouring or spreading pests,
           deemed to require phytosanitary measures, particularly where
           international transportation is involved, and includes a beneficial
           organism;
      "regulated non-quarantine pest" means any pest which is not a
          quarantine pest and whose presence in a plant for planting affects
          the intended use of the plant with an economically unaccepted
          impact and which is therefore regulated in Barbados and declared
          as such by Regulations;
      "regulated pest" means a quarantine pest or a regulated non-
          quarantine pest;
      "soil" means material wholly or partly derived from the upper layer of
           the earth’s crust which is capable of sustaining plant life and which
           contains solid organic substances such as parts of a plant, humus,
           peat or bark, but excluding any medium which is sterile,
           composed entirely of unused peat or otherwise incapable of
           harbouring or transmitting pests;
      "SPS Agreement" means the WTO Agreement on the Application of
          Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, to which Barbados is a
          party;
      "suppression" means the application of phytosanitary measures in an
          affected area to reduce a pest population;
      "surveillance" means an official process which collects and records
           data on pest occurrence or absence by survey, monitoring or other
           procedure;
      "treatment" means an officially authorised procedure for the killing,
           inactivation or removal of pests or rendering pest infertile or
           devitalisation;
      "WTO" means the World Trade Organisation established in 1995, of
         which Barbados is a member.
11 L.R.O. 2007                     Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                     ss.3-5

                                     PART II

                        ADMINISTRATION

   3. (1) The Chief Agricultural Officer shall have primary respon- Powers of
sibility for the administration of this Act.                        the Minister.


  (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Minister may in writing
delegate specific powers under this Act to the National Plant
Protection Organisation or other Government official or agency as he
considers appropriate.

   4. (1) The Minister shall in consultation with the Chief Designation
Agricultural Officer designate a Government unit, a department or of     Organisa-
                                                                      tion.
office in Barbados to serve as the Organisation of Barbados and shall
transmit the name of that department, to the IPPC Secretariat.
   (2) The Minister shall assign individuals from time to time to serve
as members of the Organisation.

  5. The functions of the Organisation shall include                                             Functions of
                                                                                                 the
  (a) the implementation of the IPPC and the SPS Agreement,                                      Organisa-
                                                                                                 tion.
      together with the following responsibilities:
       (i)   issuing phytosanitary certificates;
       (ii) carrying out surveillance of any ornamental and growing
            plant, including areas under cultivation and wild flora,
            and of any plant and plant product in storage or in
            transport, for the purpose of reporting the occurrence, out-
            break and spread of pests, and of controlling those pests;
       (iii) inspecting any consignment of a plant and plant product
             and, where appropriate, inspecting any other regulated
             article, for the purpose of preventing the introduction and
             spread of pests;




                                       THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                         Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                               by the authority of the Government of Barbados
      CAP. 268                Plant Protection           L.R.O. 2007 12
s.5

            (iv)   conducting pre-clearance inspections;
            (v)    supervision of the treatment and consignment of any
                   plant, plant product and other regulated article;
            (vi)   protecting endangered areas, and designating, maintain-
                   ing and surveying pest free areas and areas of low pest
                       prevalence;
            (vii) conducting pest risk analyses;
            (viii) providing information to other countries concerning
                   phytosanitary measures applied, either through pest risk
                   analysis or by reference to applicable international
                   standards;
            (ix)   notifying trading partners of relevant instances of non-
                   compliance with import requirements that may be
                   prescribed;
            (x)    ensuring the phytosanitary security of consignments
                   after certification and before export;
            (xi)   establishing auditing and trace-back procedures for any
                   plant, plant product and other regulated article for
                   phytosanitary certification;
            (xii) establishing minimum qualifications for and overseeing
                  training and development of inspectors and other
                  Organisation staff;
            (xiii) distributing information regarding regulated pests and
                   the means of their prevention and control;
            (xiv) proposing, reviewing, preparing and enforcing
                  phytosanitary measures and other necessary legislation;
            (xv) notifying phystosanitary measures to other countries in
                 accordance with international obligations; and
13 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                      ss.6-7

        (xvi) providing information regarding import and export
              regulations in force, and technical requirements for any
              plant, plant product and other regulated article, on the
              request of any interested international, regional or other
              national plant protection organisation;
  (b) the enforcement of this Act, as well as of any other legislation
      relating to plant protection as the Minister may direct;
  (c) the representation of this Act, as well as of any other legisla-
      tion relating to plant protection as the Minister may direct;
  (d) the development of pest diagnostic, investigative and
      analytical capabilities as well as the establishment of
      laboratories, plant quarantine stations and other phytosanitary
      facilities;
  (e) the establishment of procedures for accreditation of any plant
      quarantine station, official analyst, official laboratory or any
      other person or institution from the public or private sector
      involved in phytosanitary matters; and
  (f)   any other function that the Minister considers necessary for
        the purposes of this Act.

   6. The Minister may on the advice of the Chief Agricultural Appoint-
Officer by instrument in writing designate officers of the Organisation ment of
                                                                        inspectors.
to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act.

  7. (1) The duties of an inspector shall include                                                 Duties of an
                                                                                                  inspector.
  (a) inspecting any plant, plant product or other regulated article
      under cultivation, in storage or in transit, in order to report the
      existence, outbreak and spread of quarantine pests and
      regulated non-quarantined pests;
  (b) inspecting the consignment of any plant, plant product or other
      regulated article destined for import into or export from
      Barbados to determine whether it is affected, and where
      necessary verifying the pest status of consignments by the
      taking of samples or otherwise;

                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
      CAP. 268                  Plant Protection           L.R.O. 2007 14
s.7

        (c) ensuring the treatment of the consignment of any plant, plant
            product or other regulated article destined for import into or
            export from Barbados as well as its container, packaging,
            storage place and transport facility;
        (d) ensuring that no threat to plant resources in Barbados is caused
            by waste disposed from -
              (i)   an aircraft, ship, pleasure craft or any vessel or by any
                    other means arriving in Barbados; and
              (ii) premises where the processing of any plant, plant
                   product or other regulated article occurs;
        (e) inspecting and certifying exports of any plant, plant product
            and other regulated article from Barbados;
        (f)   issuing phytosanitary certificates on behalf of the
              Organisation;
        (g) carrying out detection activities and maintaining up-to-date
            information on the pest status of Barbados;
        (h) conducting surveillance and monitoring exercises in any land,
            premises or area as required under this Act;
        (i)   instituting inquiries and requesting information or documen-
              tation on reasonable suspicion that the provisions of this Act
              are being violated; and
        (j)   attending to such other matter as the Organisation may from
              time to time direct.
         (2) An inspector may carry out an inspection under sub-
      section (1)(b) on territory of an exporting country as a pre-clearance
      inspection, in accordance with the phytosanitary measures as
      established between the parties as outlined in the import permit with
      respect to specific commodities.
15 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                      ss.8-9

  (3) In carrying out any duty under subsection (1) or (2), an
inspector shall identify himself as an inspector by showing his
identification card or other proof of his appointment or designation as
an inspector.

  8. The Organisation shall designate                                                             Designation
                                                                                                  of official
  (a) a laboratory to be an official laboratory; and                                              laboratory
                                                                                                  and official
                                                                                                  analyst.
  (b) an analyst to be an official analyst;
for the purposes of this Act.

  9. (1) The Minister shall appoint an Advisory Council for the Establish-
purposes of exercising and performing the functions under sections 5 ment of
                                                                     Advisory
and 12.                                                              Council.

   (2) The Council shall consist of 11 members selected as
follows:
  (a) 3 staff members of the Ministry, including the head of the
      Organisation; and
  (b) one nominee from each of the following:
       (i)     the Ministry responsible for the environment;
       (ii)    the Ministry responsible for trade;
       (iii)   the Ministry responsible for legal affairs;
       (iv)    the Customs Department;
       (v)     the Royal Barbados Police Force;
       (vi)    the University of the West Indies or the University
               College of Barbados;
       (vii) the Barbados Chamber of Commerce;
       (viii) a farmers’ organisation.




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
              CAP. 268                 Plant Protection           L.R.O. 2007 16
ss.10-11

                (3) The members of the Council shall
                (a) be remunerated as the Minister may determine from time to
                    time; and
                (b) serve for a period not exceeding 3 years and be eligible for
                    reappointment.
                (4) 7 members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
                (5) The Council shall meet at least 3 times each year.
                 (6) The Council shall elect a Chairman at its first meeting, which
              shall take place within 3 months from the date of commencement of
              this Act.
                (7) Except as provided in subsections (1) to (5) and sections 12
              and 13, the Council shall regulate its own procedure.

Resignation      10. (1) The Chairman or a member of the Council may at any
or removal
of members
              time resign his office by instrument in writing addressed to the
of Council.   Minister and from the date of receipt of the instrument that person
              shall cease to be a member of the Council.
                 (2) The Minister may terminate the appointment of the Chairman
              or any other member of the Council.

Role of          11. The Council shall act in an advisory capacity to the Minister
Council.
              and the Organisation on issues of plant protection and shall be
              responsible for
                (a) recommending changes to relevant legislation and recom-
                    mending regulations, schedules, notices, orders to be made or
                    amended under this Act; and
                (b) assisting in the determination of criteria for the declaration of
                    a phytosanitary emergency under sections 19(c) and 29.
17 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                  ss.12-14

  12. The Council may appoint such sub-committees as it considers Sub-
necessary, to provide advice and technical support to the Council. committees
                                                                   of Council.

  13. (1) There is established a Phytosanitary Emergency Fund Phyto-
which shall be administered by the Ministry and into which funds, sanitary
                                                                    Emergency
donations, grants, awards and endowments given to the Council shall Fund.
be paid to facilitate the work of the Organisation.
  (2) All monies collected or received in accordance with sub-
section (1) shall be paid into the general account of the Fund in a bank
approved by the Minister of Finance and administered in accordance
with the Financial Rules.
  (3) The resources of the Fund shall be made available to the
Organisation on declaration of a phytosanitary emergency under
sections 19(c) and 29.

                                     PART III

                                  IMPORTS

  14. (1) A plant, plant product and other regulated article may be Restrictions
imported into Barbados only at a prescribed port of entry.          on import.


  (2) No person shall import a plant, plant product or other
regulated article into Barbados except:
  (a) by virtue of an import permit granted under section 15(1);
  (b) where the plant is accompanied by:
       (i)   an original phytosanitary certificate issued by the country
             of export that is dated not more than 30 days before the
             entry of the plant, plant product or other regulated article
             into Barbados; and

       (ii) any other documentation that may be prescribed; or




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
               CAP. 268                  Plant Protection            L.R.O. 2007 18
ss.15-16

                 (c) where all the prescribed requirements under section 15(2) are
                     satisfied.

Import           15. (1) Where an import permit is required under section 14(2)(a),
permit.
               an importer shall apply to the Organisation in the prescribed manner
               and may be granted a permit on payment of the prescribed fee.
                 (2) In evaluating an application for an import permit, the
               Organisation shall apply existing international standards or conduct
               pest risk analysis, to determine the applicable phytosanitary
               requirements.

Inspection       16. (1) A person who has imported a plant, plant product or any
on
importation.
               other regulated article into Barbados, shall present it for inspection by
               an inspector at the prescribed port of entry.
                  (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a plant, plant product or any
               other regulated article transported therein, may be inspected by an
               inspector at its final destination:
                 (a) on the application by an importer, and
                 (b) if the container has been sealed and marked as prescribed.
                  (3) An inspection carried out under subsection (1) or (2) is subject
               to the payment of the prescribed fee.
                  (4) An inspection referred to in subsection (1) or (2) shall be
               carried out during regular business hours, except where the plant, plant
               product or other regulated article is in transit or extremely perishable
               or where its entry has otherwise been delayed, in which case, on
               application by the importer and on payment of the prescribed fee, the
               Organisation may agree to an inspection being carried out at any other
               time.
19 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                  s.17

  17. (1) If, on an inspection that is carried out in accordance with Detention or
section 16, the inspector determines that the imported plant, plant destruction
                                                                      of imports.
product or other regulated article
  (a) is not accompanied by the relevant documentation required by
      section 14(2); or
  (b) presents any risk for the introduction or spread of pests,
the inspector shall detain the item and immediately serve written
notice on the importer that part or all of the imported plant, plant
product or other regulated article may be subject, within the time
period specified in the notice, to
       (i)   detention until the receipt of relevant documentation is
             presented within a reasonable time;
       (ii) appropriate treatment in order to remove the risk;
       (iii) re-exportation;
       (iv) confiscation; or
       (v) destruction.
  (2) The inspector may forgo notice and carry out any of the
actions listed under subsection (1) where in his opinion destruction of
the imported plant, plant product or other regulated article is urgently
required or the giving of notice is impracticable.
  (3) Where, after its entry into Barbados or after treatment, any
imported plant, plant product or other regulated article remains
unclaimed for a period of time, as may be prescribed, the Organisation
may take action to destroy the imported plant, plant product or other
regulated article.
   (4) The costs and responsibility for any action taken under
subsection (1), (2) or (3) shall be borne by the importer, except where
in exceptional cases the Organisation determines that the Crown should
take responsibility for the associated costs.




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
               CAP. 268                  Plant Protection             L.R.O. 2007 20
ss.18-20

                 (5) The Crown may assume financial responsibility under
               subsection (4) without prejudice to its right to recover costs from the
               importer as a debt.
                 (6) Where any action is taken under subsection (1), (2) or (3), the
               method used to calculate costs charged shall be in accordance with
               the prescribed procedure.
                 (7) The Crown shall not be liable for the confiscation, destruction
               or disposal of any plant, plant product or other regulated article
               carried out in accordance with this section.

Release of        18. Where on an inspection that is carried out under section 16 the
imports.       inspector determines that the imported plant, plant product or other
               regulated article does not present any risk for the importation and spread
               of pests, the inspector shall release the consignment to the importer.

Minister         19. The Minister may, on the advice of the Council and in order to
may restrict
certain
               protect plant resource, human and animal health or the environment,
imports.
                 (a) permit the entry into Barbados of any plant, plant product or
                     regulated article for scientific or experimental purposes,
                     subject to such terms and conditions that the Minister,
                     considers appropriate;
                 (b) prohibit or restrict the entry of any plant, plant product or other
                     regulated article;
                 (c) declare a phytosanitary emergency; or
                 (d) take any other necessary action to prevent the introduction or
                     spread of a quarantine pest and regulated non-quarantine pest.

Plant            20. The Organisation may
quarantine
stations.        (a) designate certain places as plant quarantine stations where a
                     plant, plant product or other regulated article may be kept for
                     phytosanitary observation, research, inspection, testing, treat-
                     ment, detention or destruction;
21 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                  ss.21-22

  (b) require that imported material be kept or cultivated at a plant
      quarantine station, or at any other location identified by the
      Organisation, and kept under the Organisation’s supervision
      for such time as the Organisation considers necessary.

  21. (1) A Postal Officer, Customs Officer, Police Officer or a Duty to
member of the Defence Force who has knowledge of the arrival or report  detain
                                                                               and

importation of any plant, plant product or other regulated article into certain
Barbados shall, in the absence of an inspector,                         imports.

  (a) detain the plant, plant product or other regulated article for
      inspection by an inspector;
  (b) as soon as practicable, notify the arrival or importation to the
      Organisation.
   (2) A detention carried out under subsection (1) shall be deemed
to be an action taken by or on delegation from the Organisation.
  (3) The Organisation shall take custody of any item detained
under subsection (1) within 3 days of its detention.

                                     PART IV
                                  EXPORTS
  22. A person shall not export a plant, plant product or other Restriction
regulated article from Barbados unless that person              on exports.


  (a) applies to the Organisation in the prescribed manner;
  (b) provides to the Organisation all documentations that are
      prescribed;
  (c) makes the consignment available for inspection under
      section 23;
  (d) pays the prescribed fees
and has been granted a phytosanitary certificate.




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
              CAP. 268                 Plant Protection           L.R.O. 2007 22
ss.23-25

Inspection      23. The Organisation shall, on application by an exporter under
of exports.
              section 22, cause an inspection of the consignment to be carried out
              and
                (a) issue a phytosanitary certificate, in a form as may prescribed,
                    where the consignment
                     (i)   meets the documentary and other requirements for
                           import of the country to which the consignment is to be
                           exported; and
                     (ii) satisfies any other requirement for export specified by
                          the Organisation or under any applicable law in
                          Barbados; or
                (b) deny the issue of a phytosanitary certificate where the require-
                    ment specified in paragraph (a) has not been met.

                                             PART V

                      CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION OF PESTS

Duty of          24. An occupier or owner of any premises who has knowledge of
occupier to
notify
              or reasonably suspects the presence of a quarantine pest thereon shall
Organisa-     immediately notify the Organisation.
tion.

Declaration     25. (1) The Minister may, on the advice of the Council,
of quaran-
tine.           (a) declare any premises or area that is affected or is suspected of
                    being affected with any quarantine pest to be under
                    quarantine;
                (b) prescribe measures for the treatment or disposal of a plant,
                    plant product or other regulated article, and the treatment of a
                    conveyance whether or not it has been found to be affected, in
                    order to limit the spread of any quarantine pest;
                (c) prescribe the period of quarantine.
23 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                         s.26

  (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), "quarantine" includes
  (a) the prohibition of the movement of a person, conveyance, plant,
      plant product or other regulated article from or to a specified
      location;
  (b) the prohibition of the planting or replanting of a specified
      location; or
  (c) the taking of any other measure that the Minister, acting on
      the advice of the Council, considers necessary under the
      circumstances.

  26. (1) When the Organisation believes that a quarantine pest is Procedure
present on any premises, the Organisation may, subject to section 32(2), when
                                                                         quarantine
                                                                                                  pest is on
  (a) authorise an inspector to                                                                   premises.

        (i)   enter the premises at any reasonable time,
        (ii) inspect any plant, plant product or other regulated article
             on the premises; and
        (iii) take a sample as he may consider necessary; and
  (b) require, by notice in writing, the owner or occupier of the
      premises, and where the Organisation deems it appropriate,
      the owner or occupier of any premises in the vicinity, to take
      within a specified period such measures on his premises as the
      Organisation considers appropriate to eradicate, contain or
      restrict the spread of the pest.
   (2) If any owner or occupier of premises fails to comply with any
term of a notice issued under subsection (1)(b), the Organisation may
direct an inspector or other authorised person to enter the premises in
question in order to carry out the requirements of the notice and, where
necessary, destroy the plant, plant product or other regulated article in
order to eradicate, contain or restrict the spread of the pest.




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
                CAP. 268                  Plant Protection             L.R.O. 2007 24
ss.27-29

                  (3) The owner shall be liable to pay the costs for any action taken
                under subsection (2), except where in exceptional cases the
                Organisation determines that the Crown should take responsibility for
                the associated costs.
                   (4) The Crown may assume financial responsibility under sub-
                section (3) without prejudice to its right to recover costs from the owner
                as a civil debt.
                  (5) Where the Organisation takes any action under subsection (2),
                the method used to calculate the costs shall be as may be prescribed.
                  (6) The State shall be liable for the destruction or disposal of any
                plant, plant product or other regulated article carried out in accord-
                ance with this section.

Service of         27. Where a person is not in actual occupation of any premises, or
quarantine      if the occupier cannot be found, service of any notice under this Act
notice in
absence of      may be made by affixing the same in a conspicuous place on the
occupier.       premises, and such affixing shall be deemed to be sufficient service of
                notice.

Duration of       28. (1) Any notice issued under section 26 or 27 shall remain in
quarantine      force until an inspector gives any affected owner or occupier a
notice.
                certificate in writing that the premises or area is free from pest.
                   (2) A person shall not remove, or allow or cause to be removed,
                any plant, plant product or other regulated article from the premises or
                area under quarantine while a notice issued under section 26 or 27 is
                in force.

Declaration       29. The Minister may declare a phytosanitary emergency based on
of
phytosanitary     (a) an inspection carried out under this Act; or
emergency.
                  (b) an analysis of a sample taken under section 26(1)(a)(iii).
25 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                  ss.30-31

  30. The Minister shall, on the advice of the Chief Agricultural Lifting of
Officer, serve written notice on all owners or occupiers of affected quarantine.
premises, lifting the quarantine where
  (a) the Minister determines that the relevant quarantine pest is no
      longer considered to be present; or
  (b) the Organisation determines that it is no longer appropriate for
      the quarantine to be maintained in respect of some or all of the
      affected premises.

   31. The Chief Agricultural Officer may, on the recommendation Declaration
of the Organisation,                                             of pest free
                                                                 or low pest
                                                                                                  prevalence
  (a) declare an area pest free where the the Chief Agricultural area.
      Officer is satisfied that
       (i)   a pest is not present in the area;
       (ii) phytosanitary measures have been implemented to keep
            the area free of the pest; and
       (iii) a surveillance system has been instituted to verify that
             the area remains free of the pest;
  (b) declare an area of low pest prevalence where he is satisfied
      that
       (i)   a pest is present at low levels in the area;
       (ii) phytosanitary measures have been implemented to keep
            the pest levels low; and
       (iii) a surveillance system has been instituted to verify that
             the pest levels remain low.




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
               CAP. 268                  Plant Protection            L.R.O. 2007 26
s.32

                                               PART VI

                                         ENFORCEMENT

Entry and        32. (1) For the purpose of detecting a regulated pest or ensuring
search by an
inspector.
               compliance with this Act, an inspector may
                 (a) stop and, without a warrant, search a person, container or
                     conveyance entering or moving within Barbados that the
                     inspector believes on reasonable grounds is harbouring such
                     pest;
                 (b) subject to subsections (2) and (3), at a reasonable time enter
                     and inspect any premises;
                 (c) open any container, receptacle or other thing that the inspector
                     believes on reasonable grounds contains anything in respect of
                     which this Act applies; or
                 (d) examine any thing in respect of which this Act applies and
                     take a sample of it.
                 (2) An inspector may not enter a dwelling except with the
               consent of the occupier or under the authority of a warrant issued by a
               Magistrate.
                 (3) An inspector may, with a warrant issued by a magistrate, enter
               and search any premises where there is reasonable cause to believe
               that an offence against this Act has taken place or is taking place.
                 (4) Where the seal on a sealed container containing a plant, plant
               product or other regulated article is to be broken, an inspector shall be
               present.
                 (5) An inspector may, in the performance of his duties under this
               section, be accompanied and assisted by a police officer.
27 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                  s.33

   (6) In the course of an inspection carried out under sub-
sections (1), (2) and (3), an inspector may, as he considers necessary,
seize, destroy, detain, treat or otherwise dispose of any plant, plant
product or other regulated article, or order that any such action be
taken, at the expense of the owner.

   33. (1) In the course of an inspection carried out under this Act, Seizure and
if an inspector believes on reasonable grounds that a provision of this notice  of
                                                                         seizure.
Act has been or is being contravened, or any plant, presents a plant
product or other regulated article risk of the introduction or spread of
a pest, the inspector may seize the plant, plant product or other
regulated article
  (a) by means of or in relation to which he believes on reasonable
      grounds that the contravention has been or is being
      committed;
  (b)    that he believes on reasonable grounds will afford evidence in
        respect of the contravention of the provision of this Act.
   (2) An inspector who seizes and detains a plant, plant production
or other regulated article under this Act
  (a) shall immediately provide to the owner of the plant, plant
      product or other regulated article a detention certificate in the
      prescribed form and shall, as soon as practicable, advise the
      owner that part or all of the plant, plant product or other
      regulated article may be subject within a specified time to any
      action specified in section 34; or
  (b) may forego advising the owner of the plant, plant product of
      other regulated article of the reason for the seizure if, in the
      opinion of the inspector, it is urgently required to destroy the
      plant, plant product or other regulated article or the given of
      the reason for the seizure is impractical.




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
               CAP. 268                  Plant Protection            L.R.O. 2007 28
ss34-36

Storage or       34. Where an inspector seized and detained a plant, plant product
removal of
affected
               or other regulated article under this Act, the inspector or any other
items.         person designated by the Organisation, may
                 (a) store, treat, quarantine or dispose of the plant, plant product or
                     other regulated article at the place where it was seized or move
                     it to any other place for storage, treatment, quarantine or
                     disposal;
                 (b) require its owner to store, treat, dispose of, export or move it
                     to any other place.

Confiscation     35. (1) An inspector may confiscate and dispose of
and disposal
of un-           (a) any plant, plant product or other regulated article that, after its
claimed
items.               entry into Barbados after treatment, remains unclaimed for a
                     prescribed time; or
                 (b) anything that the inspector believes on reasonable grounds
                     contains or harbours a quarantine pest or regulated non
                     quarantine pest.
                 (2) An inspector who confiscates a plant, plant product or other
               regulated article or a quarantine pest or regulated non quarantine pest
                 (a) shall, as soon as is practicable, advise the owner of the reason
                     for its confiscation; or
                 (b) may forego advising the owner of the plant, plant product or
                     other regulated article or pest of the reason for the confiscation
                     if the giving of reason for the confiscation is impractical.

Offences.        36. A person is guilty of an offence who
                 (a) grows, sells, offers for sale, transports or distributes in any
                     manner any plant, plant product or other regulated article
                     knowing that it is affected by a quarantine pest;
29 L.R.O. 2007                     Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                 s.36

  (b) assaults, resist, intimidates, threatens, abuses in any manner
      whatsoever, or obstructs an inspector exercising lawful
      powers under this Act;
  (c) tampers with any sample taken pursuant to this Act;
  (d) fails to comply with any order or direction lawfully made or
      given under this Act;
  (e) imports any plant, plant product or other regulated article at a
      port of entry that is not prescribed;
  (f)   imports any plant, plant product or other regulated article
        contrary to any other requirement that is prescribed;
  (g) intentionally permits, introduces or caused the introduction or
      spread of a quarantine pest;
  (h) exports any plant, plant product or other regulated article
      except in accordance with Part IV;
  (i)   fails to safeguard the phytosanitary security of a consignment
        after the issuance of a phytosanitary certificate under
        section 23(a);
  (j)   fails to allow a search or inspection of the taking of any
        sample authorised under this Act;
  (k) breaks the seal on a sealed container containing a plant, plant
      product or other regulated article except in the presence of an
      inspector;
  (l)   knowingly or recklessly provides information which is false,
        for the purpose of obtaining any document under this Act;
  (m) alters, forges, defaces or destroys any document issued under
      this Act;




                                       THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                         Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                               by the authority of the Government of Barbados
               CAP. 268                  Plant Protection           L.R.O. 2007 30
ss.37-39

                 (n) submits any written material for publication referring to the
                     occurrence of quarantine pest in Barbados without prior or
                     simultaneous communication of the existence of the pest to
                     the Organisation; or
                 (o) otherwise contravenes a provision of this Act.

Liability of     37. An inspector, official analyst or other Organisation staff is
officials.     guilty of an offence if he
                 (a) directly or indirectly asks for or takes any personal payment or
                     other reward in connection with any official duties;
                 (b) agrees to do, abstains from doing, permits, conceals or
                     connives at any act or thing which is contrary to the proper
                     execution of official duties under this Act, or otherwise
                     contrary to the laws of Barbados; or
                 (c) discloses any information acquired in the performance of his
                     official duties relating to any person, firm or business, except
                     when required by his supervisor in the course of official
                     duties, or where ordered to do so by any court.

Penalty.         38. A person who is guilty of an offence under this Act is liable,
                 (a) in the case of a first offence, on summary conviction, to a fine
                     of $1 500, or to imprisonment for a term of one year, or to
                     both;
                 (b) in the case of a second or a subsequent offence, to a fine of
                     $5 000, or to imprisonment for a term of 2 years, or both.

Forfeiture.       39. Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act the
               court may, in addition to any other penalty imposed, order that any
               thing used in the perpetration of the offence be forfeited to the Crown.
31 L.R.O. 2007                     Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                 ss.40-43

  40. (1) The costs of any action taken by an inspector under Limitation
section 33 shall be borne by the owner, except where in exceptional on liability.
cases the Organisation determines that the Crown shall bear the costs.
   (2) Subject to section 41, the Crown is not liable for loss resulting
from the destruction or disposal of any plant, plant product or other
regulated article carried out under this Act.

  41. (1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the Compensa-
Council, out of money voted for that purpose by Parliament, order tion.
compensation to be paid in respect of
  (a) the treatment required of affected premises;
  (b) the prohibition or restriction imposed under this Act on the use
      of premises.
   (2) Compensation is not payable to a person who is guilty of an
offence under this Act and claims compensation in respect of any
premises or things by means of or in relation to which the offence was
committed.

                                   PART VII

                         MISCELLANEOUS

   42. (1) A document required to be furnished to the Minister or an Documents.
inspector under this Act or any regulation or order made thereunder
may be furnished in electronic form.
   (2) Where a document referred to in subsection (1) is furnished in
electronic form, an original hard copy of the document must be
furnished to the Minister or an inspector within a reasonable period
after the documents are furnished in electronic form.

  43. (1) The Minister may, on the advice of the Council, make Regulations.
regulations to give effect to the provisions of this Act.




                                       THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                         Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                               by the authority of the Government of Barbados
       CAP. 268                 Plant Protection            L.R.O. 2007 32
s.43

          (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of
       subsection (1), Regulations made under subsection (1) may provide
       for all or any of the following matters:
         (a) procedures to be followed by an inspector in the exercise of
             his duties under this Act;
         (b) conditions for the import of any plant, plant product or other
             regulated article;
         (c) the designation of the ports of entry in Barbados that are
             appropriate for the import and export of any plant, plant
             product and other regulated article;
         (d) the circumstances under which phytosanitary requirements
             for import may be modified based on pest risk analysis;
         (e) procedure and guidelines for pre-clearance inspections;
         (f)   the manner in which permits and certificates shall be issued
               under this Act, and their form, content and language;
         (g) the procedure by which an importer may apply for inspection
             to take place at any location other than the port of entry, and/or
             outside of regular business hours, and pay any applicable fees;
         (h) the manner in which containers shall be sealed, marked and
             transported if they are to be inspected at their final destination
             rather than at the port of entry;
         (i)   the way in which any plant, plant product and other regulated
               article shall be stored or transported in Barbados;
         (j)   the procedures to be adopted for the treatment of any imported
               plant, plant product or other regulated article and the
               conveyance bringing it into Barbados;
         (k) the location, management and functioning of any plant
             quarantine station established under this Act;
33 L.R.O. 2007                      Plant Protection                                   CAP. 268
                                                                                                  s.43

  (l)   the requirements for the control and care of any plant, plant
        product and other regulated article kept or maintained at a plant
        quarantine station;
  (m) the manner in which an inspection shall be arranged for the
      destruction, removal, uprooting or treatment of any plant, plant
      product or other regulated article within an area or location
      declared as under quarantine;
  (n) the period within and conditions under which it shall not be
      lawful to plant or re-plant anything in all or part of an area
      declared as under quarantine;
  (o) the manner in which any sample being transported or in
      storage must be taken, marked and retained under this Act;
  (p) the operating procedures of any official laboratory designated
      under this Act;
  (q) the procedure by which an area may be declared pest-free or
      an area of low pest prevalence;
  (r) conditions for the export of any plant, plant product or other
      regulated article;
  (s) operating procedures for the inspection of any plant, plant
      product or other regulated article, and any physical structure
      or premises containing such a product or article, for purposes
      of export;
  (t)   the offences subject to the fixed penalty procedure outlined in
        section 38;
  (u) criteria for the declaration of a phytosanitary emergency under
      sections 19(c) and 29;
  (v) with the approval of the Ministry of Finance; determination or
      scale of fees to be charged;




                                        THE LAWS OF BARBADOS
                          Printed by the Government Printer, Bay Street, St. Michael
                                by the authority of the Government of Barbados
            CAP. 268              Plant Protection         L.R.O. 2007 34
ss.44-45

              (w) guidelines, policy directives or protocols promoting
                  cooperation between relevant departments relating to plant
                  protection;
              (x) any additional measures to be taken for the purpose of
                  preventing the introduction or spread of a pest.

Repeal.       44. The Plant Pest and Disease (Import Control) Act is hereby
Cap. 266.   repealed.

Act binds     45. This Act binds the Crown.
Crown.
