2026                   FOOD SAFETY                 ACT



    COMMONWEALTH OF DOMINICA

             ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

                            PART I

                       PRELIMINARY

Section
    1.    Short title and commencement .
    2.    Interpretation.
    3.    Application and non-application.
    4.    Objectives of the Act.
    5.    Act binds the State.

                           PART II

                    ADMINISTRATION

    6. Powers of the Minister.
    7. Food Safety Service.
    8. Establishment of the National Food Safety Advisory
          Body.
   9. Appointment of food inspectors.
   10. Investigative powers of a food inspector.
  11. Delegation of functions.
  12. Agreements and memoranda of understanding.
  13. Manuals.
  14. National reference laboratory.
  15. Official laboratories.
  16. Food analyst.
  17. Monitoring.
  18. Principles of food safety measures.
  19. Food standards and requirements.
2026               FOOD SAFETY                       ACT


                        PART III

        FOOD CONTROL AND EMERGENCY
               PREPAREDNESS

  20.   Traceability .
  21.   Recall of food.
  22.   Recall responsibilities and procedures involving an
           importer or exporter.
  23.   Inspection and seizure of suspected food .
  24.   Food hazard or disease in business premises.
  25.   Non-compliance by food business operator or owner
  26.   Food fraud.
  27.   Limiting or banning substances or processes in food.
  28.   Information to be provided to public.
  29.   Emergency response plan and early warning system.
  30.   Emergency measures.
  31.   Summary closure of food business premises.

                        PART IV

FOOD BUSINESSES AND STREET FOOD VENDING

  32.   Licensing of food business.
  33.   Suspension, revocation and cancellation of licences.
  34.   General obligations of food business operator.
  35.   Street food vending.
  36.   Certificate to work as a food handler.
  37.   Monitoring of medical conditions.
  38.   Medical practitioners’ duty to report.
  39.   Selling food not complying with food safety
        requirements.
  40.   Labelling and packaging.
  41.   Repackaging of food.
  42.   Falsely describing food.
2026                 FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


                          PART V

          IMPORT AND EXPORT OF FOOD

 43.    Import requirements.
 44.    Import inspections.
 45.    Re-labelling and reconditioning.
 46.    Export certification.
 47.    Report on activities.

                         PART VI

TREATMENT OF GOODS IN FREE CIRCULATION
     IN THE ECONOMIC UNION AREA

  48.   Treatment of food moving within the Economic Union
           Area.
  49.   Food health certificate.
  50.   Network of agriculture, health and food safety competent
           authorities .
  51.   Application of Common Procedures, Principles and
           Risk Management System.
  52.   Information Sharing.
  53.   Items not permitted to Move Freely in the Economic
           Union Area.

                         PART VII

                    ENFORCEMENT

  54.   Enforcement powers of a food inspector.
  55.   Objects of Inspection.
  56.   Duty not to disclose information.
  57.   Food unfit for consumption.
  58.   Certificate of condemnation.
  59.   Improvement notice.
  60.   Emergency hygiene prohibition notices.
2026                FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


  61.   Information to members of the public.
  62.   Offences and penalties.
  63.   Fixed penalty offences.
  64.   Procedure for offences.
  65.   Forfeiture.
  66.   Evidence.
  67.   Right of appeal.
  68.   Offences by officials and penalties.
  69.   Good faith defence.

                        PART VIII

                   MISCELLANEOUS



  70.   Service of notice.
  71.   Documents.
  72.   Presumptions.
  73.   Duty of other authorities to assist and cooperate.
  74.   Regulations.
  75.   Amendment of Schedules.
  76.   Repeal and savings.
        SCHEDULE 1
        SCHEDULE 2
        SCHEDULE 3
        SCHEDULE 4
        SCHEDULE 5
2026                 FOOD SAFETY                       ACT



  COMMONWEALTH OF DOMINICA
               ACT NO. OF 2026.

                            BILL




                           FOR



AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR FOOD SAFETY AND FOOD
     QUALITY IN DOMINICA, TO PROTECT
     CONSUMER HEALTH, TO PROMOTE TRADE
     IN FOOD THAT IS SAFE AND TO PROVIDE FOR
     RELATED MATTERS.

                       (Gazetted                     , 2026.)

                          PART I

                     PRELIMINARY

   1. (1) This Act may be cited as the -                        Short title and
                                                                commencement .

                 FOOD SAFETY ACT 2026.

       (2) This Act shall come into force on such date as the
Minister may appoint by Order published in the Gazette..
                  2026                  FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


Interpretation.       2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

                  “additive” —

                         (a) means any substance not normally consumed as a
                             food by itself and not normally used as a typical
                             ingredient of the food, whether or not it has nutritive
                             value, the intentional addition of which to food for a
                             technological (including organoleptic) purpose in the
                             manufacture, processing, preparation, treatment,
                             packing, packaging, transport or holding of such food
                             results, or may be reasonably expected to result,
                             directly or indirectly, in it or its by-products becoming
                             a component of, or otherwise affecting, the
                             characteristics of such foods;

                         (b) excludes contaminants or substances added to food
                             for maintaining or improving nutritional qualities;

                  “adulterate” means to make impure in order to give a false
                         impression or value or to hide defects, by the addition of a
                         foreign, inferior or inert substance to food, or by the
                         exclusion or removal of a valuable or necessary ingredient
                         of food, and “adulterated” and “adulteration” shall have a
                         corresponding meaning;

                  “advertisement” includes any representation, whether written,
                         pictorial, visual or otherwise, made for the purpose of
                         promoting directly or indirectly the sale or disposal of any
                         food or any substance represented as food, and “advertise”
                         shall have a corresponding meaning;

                  “batch number” means a reference number assigned by a food
                         business operator to a series of similar goods, or goods
                         produced under similar conditions, and is synonymous with
                         “lot number”;
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


“CAHFSA” means the Caribbean Agricultural Health and Food
    Safety Agency established by Agreement among member
    states of the Caribbean Community and signed in Dominica
    on March 12, 2010, and continued by the Revised CAHFSA
    Agreement signed on February 25, 2011;

“contaminant” means any substance not intentionally added to
      food which is present in such food as the result of the
      production, in operations carried out in crop husbandry,
      animal husbandry and veterinary medicine, manufacture,
      processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging,
      transport or holding of such food or as a result of
      environmental contamination, but excludes insect fragments,
      rodent hairs and other extraneous matter;

“competent authority” means –

       (a) the Food Safety Service;

       (b) a public authority or public officer of another country
           charged with the duty of administering the laws of
           that country with respect to the importation of goods;
           or

       (c) for the treatment of goods in free circulation in the
           Economic Union Area under Part VII the regional
           body established by the Organisation of Eastern
           Caribbean States to regulate matters relating to the
           importation, exportation and movement of goods;

“conveyance” means an aircraft, train, vessel, motor vehicle, or
      other thing used to transport food from one place to
      another.
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                        ACT


“counterfeiting” means manufacturing, processing, preparing or
      packaging a product or substance purporting to be a food,
      but that is only a likeness of the food it imitates;

“dispatch” means to take goods or cause goods to be taken outside
       Dominica to another OECS Protocol Member State;

“Director” means the Director of the Food Safety Service
      appointed under section 7 (1);

“Eastern Caribbean Economic Union” means the Economic
       Union established pursuant to Article 1 of the Protocol of
       the Eastern Caribbean Economic Union of the Revised
       Treaty of Basseterre;

“Economic Union Area” refers to the collective territorial
      jurisdictions of OECS Protocol Member States;

“Economic Union Protocol” means the Protocol to the Revised
      Treaty of Basseterre entitled the Protocol of Eastern
      Caribbean Economic Union;

“export” means to take goods or cause goods to be taken outside
      Dominica, to a third party country;

“exporter” includes a person who, whether as owner, consignor,
      consignee, agent or broker, is in possession of or in any
      way entitled to the custody or control of any food exported
      from or to be exported from Dominica;

“food” —

       (a) means any substance whether processed, semi-
           processed or raw, which is intended for human
           consumption and taken into the body to sustain life or
           to provide energy or nutrients;
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


       (b) includes drink, chewing gum and any other substance
           used in the manufacture, preparation or treatment of
           food but does not include cosmetics or tobacco or
           substances used only as drugs;

“food analyst” means a person or institution designated as a food
       analyst under section 16;

“food borne disease” means an infectious, toxic or other disease
       caused by agents that enter the body through the ingestion
       of food;

“food business” means any activity relating to or involving the
       production, distribution, manufacture, preparation,
       treatment, processing, packaging, transporting, handling,
       service, storage or, sale of food, whether for profit or not;

“food business operator” means any person authorised to operate
       as owner or person in charge of a food business;

“food fraud” means –
       (a) the adulteration of food;

       (b) the deliberate substitution, simulation, tampering,
           counterfeiting or misrepresentation of food, ingredients
           or packaging; or

       (c) false or misleading statements made about a food, or
           concealment of what ought to be disclosed,

       for financial gain;

“food handler” means any person who directly handles packaged
       or unpackaged food, food equipment and utensils, or food
       contact surfaces;
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


“food inspector” means a person appointed to act as such under
       section 9;

“food safety” means steps or procedures taken to ensure that
      food will not cause sickness or harm to a consumer when
      prepared, served or eaten according to its intended use;

“food safety rules” means rules made under this Act in relation to
       food safety;

“Food Safety Service” means the Food Safety Service established
      under section 7;

“free circulation” means the unhindered movement of goods
       within the Economic Union Area –

       (a) where the goods are of Economic Union Area origin;
           or

       (b) after the goods have entered into the Economic Union
           Area and, at the first port of entry in the Economic
           Union Area —

                 (i) have adhered to all applicable customs-related
                     procedures and requirements associated with
                     the clearance and release of goods upon
                     importation; and

                (ii) all duties or other charges having equivalent
                     effect which are payable on the goods have
                     been levied, and the goods have not benefitted
                     from any drawback of those duties or charges;

“goods” includes any tangible property, including personal property,
      livestock, conveyances, stores, baggage, documents,
      including in electronic form, currency and mail and packets
      imported by post, and includes prohibited or restricted
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


       goods and food;

“governmental entity” means a Ministry, Department, statutory
      body, or other government institution;

“HACCP” means the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control
    Points and refers to an internationally recognised system
    which identifies, evaluates and controls hazards significant
    for food safety;

“hazard” means a biological, chemical or physical agent in or
      condition of food with the potential to cause an adverse
      health effect;

“import” means to bring goods or cause goods to be brought into
      Dominica from a third party country;

“importer” includes any person who, whether as owner, consignor,
      consignee, agent or broker is in possession of or in any way
      entitled to the custody or control of any food landed or
      likely to be landed in Dominica;

“INFOSAN” means the International Network of Food Safety
     Authorities, a global network of national food safety
     authorities managed jointly by the Food and Agricultural
     Organisation and the World Health Organisation;

“ingredient” means any substance, including an additive, used in
       the manufacture or preparation of food and present in the
       final product although possibly in a modified form;

“inspection” means the examination, by any person authorized
       under this Act, of food or systems put in place for the
       control of raw materials, processing or distribution of food,
       and includes process and finished product testing to verify
       that they conform to the requirements of this Act or any
       other law;
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


“International Organisation for Standardization” means the
       international non-governmental organisation responsible
       for developing and publishing international standards;

“ISO/IEC17025” means the standard containing general
      requirements for the competence of testing and calibration
      laboratories issued by the International Organisation for
      Standardization;

“label” means any tag, brand, mark, pictorial or other descriptive
       matter, written, printed, stencilled, marked, embossed or
       impressed on, or attached to, a container of food; and
       labelling includes any written, printed or graphic matter
       that is present on the label, accompanies the food, or is
       displayed near the food, including that for the purpose of
       promoting its sale or disposal;

“licence” means a food business licence granted under section 32;

“lot number” means a reference number assigned by a food
       business operator to a series of similar goods, or goods
       produced under similar conditions, is synonymous with
       “batch number” and when used in relation to crops, the lot
       number is the crop harvesting date, as decided when the
       crop starts;

“Minister” means the Minister responsible for food safety;

“national reference laboratory” means a laboratory designated as
       such under section 14;

“OECS Member State” means a State or territory that possesses
     associate membership or full membership in the
     Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States as contained in
     Schedule 1, Part A;
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


“OECS Protocol Member State” means a State or territory that
     possesses membership to the Organisation of Eastern
     Caribbean States and is Party to the Economic Union
     Protocol as contained in Schedule 1, Part B;

“official” means established, authorized or performed by the Food
        Safety Service or by the Minister;

“official laboratory” means a laboratory designated as such under
       section 15;

“Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States” means the international
      organisation established by the Treaty of Basseterre
      signed on June 18, 1981 and continued under the Revised
      Treaty of Basseterre;

“owner” in relation to anything, includes any person having for the
      time being the possession, custody or control of the thing;
“person” means an individual or a body corporate;

“personal consumption” means for private consumption or use
      and not for sale, exchange or for gift;

“port of entry” has the same meaning as in the Customs Act;            Chap. 69:02.



“premises” includes any building, tent or other structure, permanent
      or otherwise, together with the land on which the same is
      situated and any adjoining land used in connection therewith,
      and includes any street, open space or place of public
      resort, or conveyance used for the sale, packaging,
      preparation, preservation, transportation or storage of any
      food;

“prescribed” means specified by this Act or any regulations made
       under this Act;
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


“reconditioning” means the process of turning imperfect,
      mislabelled, or contaminated foods into edible and profitable
      food;

“recall” means the action to remove food from the market at any
       stage of the food chain, including food already in the
       possession of consumers;

“repackaging” means dividing larger or bulkier packages of food
      into smaller units, and “repackaged” shall have a
      corresponding meaning;

“Revised Treaty of Basseterre” means the Revised Treaty of
      Basseterre establishing the Organisation of Eastern
      Caribbean States signed on June 18, 2010 in Gros Islet,
      Saint Lucia;

“risk analysis” means a process composed of risk assessment,
       risk management and risk communication in accordance
       with internationally accepted procedures and standards;

“risk assessment” means a scientifically based process consisting
        of hazard identification, hazard characterization, exposure
        assessment, and risk characterization;

“sell” includes to put up for sale, advertise, keep, store, display,
        transmit, consign, convey or deliver for sale, or to exchange,
        or to dispose of to any person in any manner for profit,
        exhibition, donation or public gathering, and “sold”, “selling”
        and “sale” have corresponding meanings;

“SPS Agreement” means the Agreement on the Application of
      Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures of the World Trade
      Organization entered into force with the establishment of
      the World Trade Organisation on January 1, 1995, as may
      be amended from time to time;

“staff” includes the Director of the Food Safety Service;
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                             ACT


“street food” means ready to eat food or drink sold by a vendor,
        in a street or public place, such as a market or fair, often
        sold from a portable food booth, food cart or food truck and
        meant for immediate consumption;

“third party country” means a country other than an OECS
       Protocol Member State;
“this Act” means this Act and any schedules, regulations, orders
       or notices made under it;

“traceability” means the ability to follow the movement of a food
       through specified stages of production, processing and
       distribution;

    3. (1) This Act applies to the safety of food at all stages in the    Application and Non-
                                                                          Application.
food chain including —

            (a) the production, processing, manufacturing or other
                preparation of food;

            (b) the handling, sale and distribution of food;

            (c) the import, transit and export of food;

            (d) the dispatch of food to Dominica from another
                Protocol Member State and from Dominica to
                another Protocol Member State;

            (e) the transport, packaging and storage of food;

             (f) any other activity related to the activities mentioned
                 in paragraphs (a) to (d);

            (g) the premises or location where food is prepared,
                whether on land or at sea; and

            (h) all food, notwithstanding the scope of legislation
                          2026                  FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                                          on fish and aquaculture products, meat or other
                                          specific food.

                                 (2) Notwithstanding the generality of subsection (1), this
                          Act does not apply to food that is produced, prepared, imported or
                          exported for personal consumption.

Objectives of the Act.        4. The objectives of this Act are —

                                     (a) to coordinate and integrate food safety at all
                                         stages of the food chain;

                                     (b) to ensure food safety while enabling a competitive
                                         and commercially supportive environment for
                                         food businesses;

                                     (c) to establish an integrated regulatory approach to
                                         food safety in order to provide for a more efficient,
                                         effective, transparent and coordinated
                                         administration throughout the food chain;

                                     (d) to regulate food quality;

                                     (e) to boost confidence in trade in food.

Act binds the State.          5. This Act binds the State.

                                                  PART II
                                              ADMINISTRATION

Powers of the Minister.      6. (1) The Minister has primary responsibility for the
                          administration of this Act.

                                  (2) The Minister may, in consultation with relevant public
                          authorities —

                                     (a) designate reference and official laboratories for
                                         the purposes of this Act;
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


           (b) designate food analysts and prescribe
               qualifications and experience required by food
               inspectors;

           (c) approve manuals developed by the Food Safety
               Service;

           (d) issue sanitary measures;

           (e) appoint the National Food Safety Advisory Body;

            (f) liaise with the Ministers of other OECS Protocol
                Member States, as necessary, to advance the
                implementation of the Eastern Caribbean
                Economic Union and the provisions of Part VI of
                this Act.

    7. (1) There is hereby established a Food Safety Service in       Food Safety Service.
the Ministry responsible food safety, which shall be headed by the
Chief Environmental Health Officer who shall be the Director.

       (2) The Director manages the operations of the Food
Safety Service and exercises the powers and performs the
functions assigned to him or her under this Act or any other
enactment.

        (3) The functions of the Food Safety Service are to —

           (a) establish a risk-based food safety and quality
               control framework to protect, enhance and ensure
               food safety and to protect consumers from food
               fraud;

           (b) carry out risk assessments based on available
               scientific evidence and in an independent, objective
2026             FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


           and transparent manner, and issue guidelines for
           risk assessment methodologies;

       (c) ensure that all food produced, distributed or
           marketed whether for domestic consumption or
           export, and whatever its origin, meets the
           standards required of food safety;

       (d) review, evaluate and audit the performance of
           governmental entities responsible for food safety;

       (e) carry out inspections for the purpose of preventing
           food safety risks;

       (f) develop and sustain effective food borne disease
           surveillance;

       (g) develop and coordinate a food safety early
           warning and emergency response system;

       (h) support the development of traceability systems;

       (i) prohibit or set limits for food additives usage,
           pesticide and veterinary drugs, residues,
           contaminants, heavy metals, and irradiation of
           food and such other substances and food
           processing methods as may be prescribed;

       (j) with regard to food businesses —

           (i) issue, suspend, revoke or cancel a food
               business licence;

           (ii) maintain an up-to-date registry of food
                businesses that includes the name and location
                of the food business and the name and current
                contact information for each food business
                operator;
2026              FOOD SAFETY                             ACT


          (iii) assign to each food business operator an
                identification number or another means of
                identifying and distinguishing that food business
                operator as determined by the Food Safety
                Service; and

          (iv) assign all of the locations from which the food
               business operates and assign to each location
               an identifier or another means of identifying
               and distinguishing that location;

       (k) issue, suspend, revoke or cancel food handler
           certificates;

       (l) coordinate and provide advice, information or
           assistance to any governmental entity with
           responsibility for any aspect of food safety and
           food trade;

       (m) develop import and export requirements and
           procedures for food;

       (n) establish standards for the design, construction
           and layout of food business premises;

       (o) evaluate equivalence of sanitary measures taken
           by trading partners;

       (p) provide justification to other countries concerning
           sanitary measures applied;

       (q) provide information regarding import requirements
           for food on request from any international, regional
           or local food safety organisation or person;

       (r) collaborate with INFOSAN in the implementation
           of a traceability system in Dominica and for other
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                matters relating to food safety; and

            (s) carry out such other activities as may be expedient
                to ensure compliance in all matters and activities
                considered necessary to achieve the objectives
                of this Act.

        (4) The Food Safety Service may develop programmes in
relation to —

           (a) monitoring, inspection and control of food safety
               systems;

           (b) food safety and quality systems;

           (c) analytical methods and laboratory quality
               assurance;

           (d) food vending and food handling; and

           (e) risk-based inspection and quality control systems
               for food businesses.

        (5) The Food Safety Service may, by notice in the Gazette,
issue food safety rules.

       (6) In exercising its responsibilities, the Food Safety
Service may —

           (a) in consultation with the Minister, negotiate and
               enter into agreements with other governmental
               entities; and

           (b) enter into any other transaction or operation
               which in the opinion of the Food Safety Service is
               necessary for the discharge of its responsibilities.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


    8. (1) There is hereby established a body to be called the         Establishment of the
                                                                       National Food Safety
National Food Safety Advisory Body which shall function as an          Advisory Body.
advisory body to the Minister and the Food Safety Service on
matters relating to food safety.

        (2) Schedule 2 applies as to the constitution and procedures
of the National Food Safety Advisory Body.
    9. (1) The Public Service Commission shall appoint qualified       Appointment of food
                                                                       inspectors.
persons as food inspectors under this Act.

       (2) A food inspector appointed under subsection (1) shall
perform such functions as may be required of him or her under this
Act.

        (3) The Minister shall, upon the advice of the Director of
the Food Safety Service, prescribe the qualifications and experience
required of a food inspector in Regulations.

        (4) The Director shall issue an identification card to every
food inspector under this Act.

    10. (1) For the purposes of investigating any matter in the        Investigative powers of a
discharge of his or her functions under this Act, a food inspector     food inspector.

may —

            (a) enter any food business premises in which food
                intended for sale or for other commercial use is
                being, or is suspected of being, produced,
                manufactured, treated, graded, packed, packaged,
                labelled, stored, handled, prepared, served or
                sold, or in which any other operation or activity in
                connection with such food is being, or suspected
                of being, carried out, and may, for the purpose of
                determining whether this Act is being contravened
                —

                 (i) inspect or search such premises, appliance,
                     product, material, object or substance which
2026             FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


               is being, or is suspected of being, used or
               intended for use in connection with the
               production, manufacture, treatment, grading,
               packing, packaging, labelling, storage, handling,
               preparing, serving or sale of any food;

           (ii) demand any information, records, or
                documents regarding the food business;

          (iii) weigh, count, measure, mark, open and take
                samples in the prescribed manner of any
                food, product, material, object or substance;
                or its package or container; or lock, secure,
                seal or close any door giving access to it;

          (iv) inspect any operation, record, document or
               process carried out on such premises, and
               demand any information regarding such
               operation or process from the owner of such
               premises or from any person carrying out
               such operation or process;

          (vi) read any values recorded by measuring
               instruments installed on the premises or by
               instruments in the possession of the food
               inspector;

          (vii) take any photographs;

       (b) stop and search any conveyance in which food
           intended for sale or any other commercial purpose,
           is being or is suspected of being transported,
           produced, manufactured, treated, graded, packed,
           packaged, stored, handled, prepared, served or
           sold or in which any other operation or activity in
           connection with such food is being, or is suspected
           of being, carried out, and may exercise any power
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


                in this subsection the food inspector considers
                appropriate; and

            (c) for a specified period, stop the distribution or sale
                of food which the food inspector has reason to
                believe is contaminated, unwholesome or
                otherwise unfit for human consumption.

       (2) A food inspector may only exercise the powers in
subsection (1) with the consent of the food business operator, or
owner or person in charge of any area or premises, or in the
absence of such consent, on the basis of a warrant issued by a
magistrate.

        (3) A food inspector exercising his or her powers under
this section —

           (a) shall identify himself or herself as a food inspector
               by showing his or her identification card or other
               proof of his or her appointment or designation as
               a food inspector;

           (b) may request the presence and assistance of a law
               enforcement officer as he or she considers
               necessary.

    11. (1) Subject to subsection (4), the Director of the Food         Delegation of functions.
Safety Service may, by instrument in writing, delegate to any
public or private person any functions under this Act, and any such
delegation may be made subject to such terms and conditions that
the Director determines.

        (2) The procedures for making a delegation under this
section shall be as prescribed.

       (3) An agreement must be concluded between the Food
Safety Service and the person to whom a function has been
delegated in this section with details of the terms and conditions
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


of the delegation, including at least the following —

           (a) the scope of any delegated functions to be
               performed, and the duration;

           (b) remuneration arrangements, where the delegate
               is a private person;

           (c) the means of supervision by the Food Safety
               Service;

           (d) the minimum qualifications required to perform
               the delegated function, if any; and

           (e) the conditions of withdrawal of the delegation.

       (4) The Director shall not delegate any of the following
functions —

           (a) developing and coordinating early warning and
               emergency response systems;

           (b) prohibiting and setting limits for food additives
               usage, pesticides, contaminants and other
               substances;

           (c) licensing and issuing of certificates;

           (d) liaising with public authorities and regional and
               international bodies on food safety issues;

           (e) developing import and export requirements and
               procedures for food;

           (f) advising the Minister in the exercise of his or her
               powers under section 6(2);
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                          ACT




             (g) approval of standards, requirements, rules or
                 sanitary measures; or

             (h) other functions as may be prescribed.

     12. The Food Safety Service shall, subject to the consent of      Agreements and
                                                                       memoranda of
the Minister, in order to facilitate the more efficient carrying out   understanding.
of the purpose and intent of this Act, enter into an agreement or
memorandum of understanding with other governmental entities,
which may —

             (a) provide generally for cooperation between or
                 amongst the parties;

             (b) specify duties, powers and functions on such
                 terms and conditions as may be agreed that one
                 party may exercise, carry out and perform for
                 another party;

             (c) be subject to such conditions, qualifications and
                 exceptions as may be specified; and

             (d) be varied from time to time, in writing.

    13. (1) For the guidance of a governmental entity that has         Manuals.

responsibilities under this Act, the Minister may approve manuals
developed by the Food Safety Service in relation to the execution
and enforcement of this Act.

          (2) A governmental entity referred to in subsection (1)
shall —

             (a) have regard to any relevant provision of any such
                 manual; and

             (b) comply with any requirement in a manual
                     2026                  FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


                                     developed under subsection (1), that requires the
                                     government entity to take specified steps in order
                                     to comply with such a manual.

National reference       14. (1) The Minister shall designate in writing at least one
laboratories.
                     laboratory, which may be in another country, public or private, as
                     a national reference laboratory for the purposes of this Act.

                             (2) A laboratory designated under subsection (1) must meet
                     the requirements prescribed in ISOIEC17025.

                            (3) The functions of a national reference laboratory are to —
                                (a) serve as a reference laboratory for comparative
                                    testing in the case of conflicting laboratory test
                                    results or in the case of contested results and
                                    ensure an appropriate follow-up of such
                                    comparative testing;

                                (b) collaborate with official laboratories designated
                                    under section 15, in their area of competence;

                                (c) ensure the dissemination to official laboratories of
                                    information relating to testing procedures in relation
                                    to food safety;

                                (d) provide scientific and technical assistance to the
                                    Food Safety Service for the implementation of
                                    this Act; and

                                (e ) carry out such other duties as may be set out in
                                     Regulations under this Act.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


     15. (1) The Minister shall designate in writing at least one       Official laboratories.

laboratory or testing facility, which may be in another country, and
which may be public or private, as an official laboratory for the
purposes of testing, analysis and other purposes as required under
this Act.

       (2) The Minister may cancel a designation under
subsection (1) in accordance with Regulations.

        (3) The Minister shall publish the names and addresses of —

            (a) any laboratories designated under subsection (1);
                and

            (b) any laboratories for which a designation is cancelled
                under subsection (2).

    16.(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Minister may, in writing,     Food analyst.
designate any qualified person or institution as a food analyst for
the purposes of this Act.

        (2) A person or institution designated as a food analyst
under subsection (1) shall possess such qualifications as prescribed.

        (3) A director, owner or employee of a food business, or
partner in a food business, who has any actual or reasonably
perceived interest in a matter or other action to be taken by the
Food Safety Service, whether such interest is direct or indirect,
shall not act as a food analyst.

        (4) The Food Safety Service shall publish a list of food
analysts who are designated to conduct inspections and tests for
the purposes of this Act.
                            2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT



Monitoring.                     17. (1) The Food Safety Service shall —

                                       (a) monitor and review the implementation of this
                                           Act;

                                       (b) set out the conclusions of its review in a report;
                                           and

                                        (c) publish the report in the Gazette.

                                     (2) The first report under subsection (1)(b) must be
                            published before the end of the period of five years beginning with
                            the day on which this Act comes into force and subsequent reports
                            at intervals not exceeding three years from the last publication.

Principles of food safety        18. (1) In meeting the objectives of this Act and in the
measures.
                            issuance of sanitary measures, the Minister shall have regard to
                            the principles contained in the SPS Agreement, including the
                            following principles —

                                       (a) harmonisation with international standards;

                                       (b) risk analysis or risk assessment and science-
                                           based actions; and

                                        (c) being least trade restrictive, necessary and
                                            proportional to the risk.

                                    (2) Where relevant scientific evidence is insufficient,
                            sanitary measures may be adopted on the basis of available
                            pertinent information, including information from international
                            organisations.

Food standards and             19. Any food sold, distributed or imported into Dominica shall
requirements.
                            comply with the HACCP system and with any food standards
                            Regulations made under this Act.
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                   PART III
         FOOD CONTROL AND EMERGENCY
                PREPAREDNESS

    20. (1)The Food Safety Service shall implement a traceability     Traceability.

system which has the capacity to —

           (a) trace back through all stages of processing to the
               supplier of ingredients, raw material and primary
               packaging materials, including transportation,
               storage and distribution;

           (b) trace forward from the supplier of ingredients,
               raw materials and primary packaging materials
               through all stages of processing, including
               transportation, storage and distribution, finally to
               sale to the consumer; and

           (c) enable the identification of all food throughout the
               food production chain.

      (2) A food business operator shall, in relation to food
manufactured, stocked or supplied by the food business operator —

           (a) establish and maintain records as prescribed,
               identifying both the immediate previous source
               and immediate subsequent recipient of a food;
               and

           (b) keep a record of an identification number and
               either a batch or lot number.

        (3) The food business operator shall make the records in
subsection (2) available upon request to the Food Safety Service
in accordance with the procedures prescribed.

    21.(1) Where a food business operator knows or reasonably         Recall of food.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


believes that a food which the food business operator has
imported, produced, processed, manufactured, holds or distributed
presents a food safety risk or is not otherwise in compliance with
this Act, the food business operator shall immediately take the
necessary measures to —

            (a) stop the distribution of the food;

            (b) notify the Food Safety Service and provide detailed
                information on the actions taken for recall and the
                information provided to consumers;

            (c) notify the public, consumers and relevant parties
                of the reason behind the food’s recall and
                withdrawal in accordance with the procedure
                established by the Food Safety Service;

            (d) withdraw from the market any food that may
                create a food safety risk or potentially mislead
                consumers; and

            (e) recall from consumers and other relevant parties
                the food already purchased if other measures are
                not sufficient to guarantee food safety.

        (2) Notwithstanding the grounds listed in subsection (1),
a food business operator may voluntarily initiate the recall actions
under subsection (1) due to deficiency in the quality of the food,
food labelling or packaging.

        (3) Where a food business operator receives a recall
notice from his or her supplier, the food business operator shall—

            (a) immediately inform the Director of the Food
                Safety Service and initiate recall of the food item
                for disposal;
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


            (b) advise the Director of actions taken to protect the
                consumer;

            (c) comply with all directives issued by the Director;
                and

            (d) liaise with the supplier from whom the food item
                was imported or to whom the food was exported.

        (4) The Food Safety Service shall approve and publish a
classification system for food depending on the risk to public
health.

         (5) The Food Safety Service shall issue a recall order in
writing to a food business operator where a food presents a food
safety risk or does not otherwise comply with the requirements of
this Act.

        (6) A recall order issued under subsection (5) must
include the actions to be taken by the food business operator in the
recall of the food, including, where applicable, the handling and
disposal of any returned food.

       (7) The food business operator is responsible for the costs
of compliance with a recall order issued under subsection (5).

         (8) Where the food business operator fails to comply with
his or her obligations under a recall order under subsection (5), the
Food Safety Service shall initiate a recall action and shall dispose
of the food in accordance with prescribed procedures.

         (9) In emergency cases, the Food Safety Service may
take a recall action under subsection (1) without giving prior notice
to the food business operator and may recover costs from the food
business operator subsequently.
                            2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                                    (10) Any food business operator that fails to comply with
                            the recall obligations under subsection (6) shall be responsible for
                            the costs of recall action incurred by the Food Safety Service.

Recall responsibilities          22. (1) Where an importer reasonably believes that a food
and procedures
involving an importer or    which he or she has imported is not in compliance with this Act,
exporter.                   or receives a recall notice from a supplier or a recall order from
                            the Food Safety Service, the importer shall —

                                        (a) carry out a recall in accordance with section
                                            21(1)(a) to (e);

                                        (b) provide the consignees with information necessary
                                            to make it possible to locate the food in its
                                            distribution system;

                                        (c) inform the Food Safety Service of where and how
                                            far into the supply chain the food has gone and
                                            whether any of the food has reached consumers;

                                        (d) notify the public, trading partners and consignees
                                            of a recall, in the form and manner prescribed.

                                     (2) For recall action involving exported food, the Food
                            Safety Service shall, at the request of the exporter or at its own
                            initiative, summarize and transmit essential information to the
                            competent authority in the importing country and the food
                            exporter shall inform his or her trading partner of the grounds for
                            the recall.

Inspection and seizure of       23. (1) A food inspector may at all reasonable times, without
suspected food .
                            warrant or consent, enter any premises and inspect any food
                            intended for human consumption which —

                                        (a) has been sold or is offered or exposed for sale; or

                                        (b) is in the possession of, or has been deposited with
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                or consigned to, any person for the purpose of
                sale or of preparation for sale.

       (2) Where a food inspector reasonably believes that a
food does not comply with food safety rules, he or she may —

           (a) give notice to the person in charge of the food that,
               until the notice is withdrawn, the food or any
               specified portion of it —

                 (i) is not to be used for human consumption, and

                (ii) either is not to be removed or is not to be
                     removed except to some place specified in
                     the notice;

           (b) seize the food; or

            (c) destroy or dispose of the food.

        (3) Where the food inspector exercises the powers
conferred by subsection (2)(a) he or she shall, as soon as is
reasonably practicable, determine whether or not he or she is
satisfied that the food complies with food safety rules and—

           (a) if the food inspector is so satisfied, shall
               immediately withdraw the notice; or

           (b) if he or she is not so satisfied, shall destroy or
               dispose of the food.

         (4) Any costs incurred in connection with the destruction
or disposal of food under this section shall be borne by the owner
of the food and legal proceedings may be instituted for the purpose
of recovery of such costs.

        (5) A food inspector exercising his or her powers under
                         2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                         this section —

                                     (a) shall identify himself or herself as a food inspector
                                         by showing his or her identification card or other
                                         proof of his or her appointment or designation as
                                         a food inspector;

                                     (b) may request the presence and assistance of a law
                                         enforcement officer as he or she considers
                                         necessary.

Food hazard or disease        24. Where the Food Safety Service reasonably believes that
on premises.
                         a food hazard or the threat of a food borne disease exists in respect
                         of any premises, it shall serve a written notice on the food business
                         operator or on the owner of the premises, which shall include —

                                     (a) a request that the food business operator or the
                                         owner of the premises takes such action as the
                                         Food Safety Service determines to eliminate the
                                         risk to public health and safety posed by the food
                                         hazard or food borne disease within the time
                                         specified in the notice; and

                                     (b) an invitation to the food business operator or
                                         owner of the premises to make representations to
                                         the Food Safety Service concerning the matters
                                         specified in the notice within a specified time.

Non-compliance by food       25. (1) Where a food business operator or owner of premises
business operator or
owner
                         on whom a notice has been served under section 24 fails to comply
                         with the requirements of that notice, the Food Safety Service may
                         direct a food inspector to enter the premises to carry out the
                         requirements of the notice and take other actions as are considered
                         necessary.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT




        (2) A food inspector under subsection (1) shall act as
directed by the Food Safety Service after obtaining a warrant
issued by a magistrate.

       (3) The Food Safety Service shall recover the costs of
any action taken under subsection (1) from the food business
operator or owner of the premises and may institute court
proceedings for this purpose.

    26. (1) Where food is intended for human consumption, a           Food fraud.
person shall not —

           (a) engage in food fraud in relation to the food; or

           (b) knowingly sell or possess the food in relation to
               which food fraud has been committed.

        (2) Where a food inspector reasonably suspects a
contravention of subsection (1) the food inspector may inspect the
food in question and may —

           (a) give notice to the person in charge of the food
               that, until the notice is withdrawn, the food or any
               specified portion of it —
                (i) is not to be used for human consumption; and

                (ii) is not to be removed or is not to be removed
                     except to some place specified in the notice;

           (b) seize the food; or

           (c) destroy or dispose of the food.

       (3) Where the food inspector exercises the powers
conferred by subsection (2)(a) he or she shall, as soon as is
                          2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                          reasonably practicable, determine whether or not he or she is
                          satisfied that food fraud has been committed and—
                                     (a) if the food inspector is so satisfied, shall
                                         immediately withdraw the notice; or

                                     (b) if he or she is not so satisfied, shall destroy or
                                         dispose of the food.

                                   (4) Any costs incurred in connection with the destruction
                          or disposal of food under this section shall be borne by the owner
                          of the food and legal proceedings may be instituted for the purpose
                          of recovery of such costs.

                                 (5) The Minister may make Regulations prescribing
                          procedures for the identification, assessment and control of food
                          fraud.

Limiting or banning           27. (1) The Food Safety Service may establish food
substances or processes
in food.                  requirements based on the standards issued under the Standards
Chap. 86:04.              Act on —

                                     (a) the presence of additives, biological or chemical
                                         contaminants and other residues; and

                                     (b) the types of food processes.

                                   (2) The Food Safety Service may ban or set limits on the
                          presence in food of additives, contaminants, veterinary drugs,
                          fertilizers, pesticides and other residues on the basis of a risk-
                          based approach.

Information to be             28. (1) A food inspector shall immediately notify the Director
provided to public.
                          of the Food Safety Service where action is taken by the food
                          inspector, in instances where it appears that any food is likely to
                          harm or cause harm to human health.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


         (2) The Director of the Food Safety Service shall
immediately notify the relevant governmental entities and other
entities so that all measures necessary to ensure the protection of
consumers, including public warnings, recall orders, marketing
restrictions, marketing bans or other appropriate measures, are
carried out.

    29. (1) The Food Safety Service in collaboration with other       Emergency response
                                                                      plan and early warning
relevant governmental entities, national non-governmental entities    system.
and regional authorities shall, in order to enable an effective and
rapid response to food borne diseases, hazards and emergencies,
implement —

           (a) mechanisms for an early warning system; and

           (b) a food safety emergency response plan.

        (2) The food borne emergency response plan implemented
under subsection (1)(b) must include the creation of a multi-
sectoral and multi-disciplinary response team specific to the
nature of the emergency, led and coordinated by the Food Safety
Service, and shall contain a clear structure for command and
implementation.

    30. (1) A person who reasonably suspects that a food hazard       Emergency measures.
or an outbreak of a food borne disease exists or is imminent shall
as soon as possible notify the Food Safety Service.

         (2) Where the Food Safety Service reasonably believes
that a food hazard or an outbreak of a food borne disease exists
on the basis of a risk-based approach, the Food Safety Service
may undertake any emergency response measures it considers
necessary to eliminate the risk to public health and safety,
including —

           (a) declaring in the print and electronic media, a food
               safety emergency;
                          2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                                     (b) prohibiting or stipulating conditions on the
                                         production, processing, handling or sale of the
                                         food suspected to be hazardous;

                                     (c) causing any food to be tested or examined as
                                         prescribed;

                                     (d) recalling food that has been distributed for sale or
                                         consumption;

                                     (e) cause any food to be held or isolated in any place,
                                         and prohibit the removal of food from that place
                                         for such time as prescribed;

                                      (f) ordering and monitoring the destruction of the
                                          food suspected to be hazardous;

                                     (g) requiring the making of alterations to structures
                                         and layout of food business premises;

                                     (h) requiring the disposal of food or the treatment of
                                         premises;

                                      (i) ordering the summary closure of food business
                                          premises, in accordance with section 31.

                                  (3) The owner of the food shall be responsible for the
                          costs associated with the taking of any measures that are required
                          under subsection (2) and the Food Safety Service may institute
                          legal proceedings to recover any such costs.

Summary closure of food         31. (1) Where the Food Safety Service orders the summary
business premises.
                          closure of food business premises under section 30, the Food
                          Safety Service shall —
                                     (a) cause to be served on the food business operator
                                         or owner of the premises, a summary closure
                                         notice; and
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


           (b) cause a copy of the summary closure notice to be
               affixed to a conspicuous place on the food business
               premises, until the order for summary closure of
               the food business premises is lifted.

       (2) A notice under subsection (1) must be in the prescribed
form, and must include —

           (a) the reasons for the summary closure; and

           (b) notification to the person served, of the right of
               appeal under subsection (5), and the manner in
               which the right may be exercised.

       (3) A notice under subsection (1) remains in effect until
the Food Safety Service reasonably determines that the reasons
for which the notice was issued have been resolved, and the
premises no longer poses a risk to public health and safety.

        (4) Where the Food Safety Service makes a determination
under subsection (3), the Food Safety Service shall issue a written
notice to the food business operator or owner of the premises that
the food business premises may be re-opened.

        (5) A person served with a notice under subsection (1)
may appeal to a judge in chambers, within 14 calendar days of
receipt of the notice against the notice on any of the following
grounds —

           (a) that the summary closure is not justified for the
               protection or in the interest of public health and
               safety;

           (b) that the Food Safety Service has refused,
               unreasonably, to allow corrective measures to be
               taken, which would negate the need for closure of
               the food business premises;
                    2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                                (c) that the reasons for the summary closure no
                                    longer exist or have been resolved and the Food
                                    Safety Service has refused to allow re-opening of
                                    the premises.

                            (6) A person who appeals under subsection (5) must
                    serve a copy of his or her notice of appeal on the Food Safety
                    Service, within 7 days of the date of filing of the appeal.

                            (7) An appeal filed under subsection (5) shall be heard
                    within 14 days of the date of filing of the appeal.

                           (8) An appeal brought under subsection (5) does not
                    operate as a stay of the order of summary closure, except where
                    ordered otherwise by a judge in chambers.

                             (9) On the determination of an appeal under subsection
                    (5), a judge shall make an order that he or she thinks fit, including
                    an order for the re-opening of the food business premises.

                            (10) An appeal brought under subsection (5) is final.

                                                PART IV

                    FOOD BUSINESSES AND STREET FOOD VENDING

Licensing of food       32. (1) A person shall not operate a food business except by
business.
                    virtue of a food business licence granted under subsection (5).

                           (2) A person may apply to the Food Safety Service for a
                    food business licence, in the form and manner prescribed.

                          (3) An application under subsection (1) must be
                    accompanied by the prescribed information and supporting
                    documents and shall be submitted together with the prescribed
                    fee.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


       (4) A food inspector shall carry out an inspection of the
premises indicated in the application, and shall evaluate the
application on the basis of the prescribed criteria.

         (5) Where the Food Safety Service is satisfied that
prescribed requirements for a food business are met, the Food
Safety Service shall grant to an applicant a food business licence
in the prescribed form, subject to such terms and conditions as the
Food Safety Service may impose.

     (6) The terms and conditions of a licence granted under
subsection (5) shall include —
           (a) that the food business operator shall grant access
               to the food business premises for the purposes of
               inspection at all times during hours of operation;

           (b) restrictions on the areas in which food may be
               prepared;

            (c) the obligation of food handlers employed in the
                food business to submit medical certificates as
                required under this Act;

           (d) that except where the food preparation activity is
               prescribed as low risk, preparation of food in a
               dwelling house is only permitted where the food
               is prepared in a purpose-built isolated or separate
               unit in the dwelling house;

            (e) any other conditions as may be prescribed.

        (7) Where the Food Safety Service considers that
prescribed requirements for a food business are not met, the Food
Safety Service shall deny the applicant the licence and provide the
reasons in writing.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


        (8) The Food Safety Service shall —

            (a) assign to each food business operator a food
                business identification number as determined by
                the Food Safety Service;

            (b) assign a location identifier that identifies and
                distinguishes each of the locations from which
                the food business operator grows, produces or
                distributes its food;

            (c) issue supplementary rules and record keeping
                requirements for particular food sectors where
                appropriate, for ensuring the effectiveness of the
                traceability system.
        (9) The Food Safety Service shall –

            (a) maintain an up-to-date register of food business
                operators that includes the name and address of
                each food business and the name and current
                contact information for each food business
                operator; and

            (b) keep the register under subsection (1) open to
                inspection by the public at the office of the Food
                Safety Service at all reasonable times.

        (10) The Food Safety Service may conduct informational
or training sessions on the requirements under the traceability
system for capacity building for food business operators, regulatory
officials and the public.

        (11) A food business operator shall display his or her or its
licence issued under subsection (5) in a prominent place on the
premises in respect of which the licence is issued.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


       (12) This section does not apply to street food.

     33. (1) The Director of the Food Safety Service may suspend        Suspension, revocation
                                                                        and cancellation of
or revoke a food business licence where he or she is satisfied that —   licences.


            (a) the food business operator has committed a serious
                violation of, or has a history of repeated violations
                of this Act or the conditions of the licence; and

            (b) it is in the public interest to do so.

        (2) Where the Director proposes to suspend or revoke a
licence, the Food Safety Service shall give the holder of the
licence at least 28 days’ notice of —

            (a) the intention to do so;

            (b) the terms of the suspension or revocation; and

            (c) the grounds upon which the suspension or
                revocation is proposed to be made.

        (3) Before the Director takes an action proposed under
subsection (2), her or she shall consider any representations made
by the holder of the licence before the expiration of the notice.

        (4) Notwithstanding subsection (2), the Director shall
take immediate action to suspend or revoke a food business
licence where the risk to public health requires immediate action.

        (5) The Director may cancel a food business licence at the
written request of the food business operator.

        (6) A person whose licence is suspended or revoked
under subsection (1) may appeal to a judge in chambers, within 14
calendar days of receipt of service of notification of the suspension
                          2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                          or revocation, in accordance with the procedure under section 31.

                                 (7) Where the Director revokes or cancels a food business
                          licence under this section, the food business operator shall
                          surrender the food business licence to the Food Safety Service –

                                 (a) where no appeal is made under subsection (6), within
                                     3 business days of service on the food business
                                     operator of written notice of the revocation or
                                     cancellation; or

                                 (b) where an appeal is made under subsection (6), within
                                     3 business days of the service of the appeal decision on
                                     the food business operator.
General obligations of         34. (1) A food business operator has primary responsibility
food business operator.
                          for ensuring the safety of food that is the subject of his or her or
                          its food business.

                                  (2) A food business operator shall ensure that appropriate
                          food safety procedures are identified, implemented, maintained
                          and reviewed by —

                                      (a) analysing the potential food hazards in the
                                          operations of the food business;

                                      (b) identifying the critical points in the operations
                                          under paragraph (a) where food hazards may
                                          occur;

                                      (c) implementing effective control and monitoring
                                          procedures at the critical points identified under
                                          paragraph (b); and

                                      (d) reviewing the analysis of food hazards, the critical
                                          points and the control and monitoring procedures
                                          periodically, and whenever the operations of the
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                 food business change.

       (3) In respect of any food handler in their employment, a
food business operator shall ensure —

             (a) that the person has received a food handler’s
                 certificate in accordance with section 36;

             (b) that the food handler is appropriately supervised
                 and instructed commensurate with their work
                 activities; and

             (c) the health status of the food handler does not pose
                 a risk to the safety of food.
        (4) A food business operator shall allow access to premises
and records by food inspectors lawfully carrying out their duties
under this Act.

       (5) A food business operator shall keep on the premises
written documentation of the food safety procedures under
subsection (2) and shall make such documentation accessible to
food handlers employed in the food business.

       (6) A food business operator shall keep records of the
food business operations under this Act and make available to the
Food Safety Service, the prescribed records for inspection.

    35. (1) A person shall not work in street food vending except      Street food vending.
by virtue of a food handler’s certificate issued by the Food Safety
Service under section 36.

          (2) A person who wishes to work in street food vending
shall —

             (a) register with the Food Safety Service; and
                           2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                                      (b) obtain a food handler’s certificate.

Certificate to work as a       36. (1) A person shall not work as a food handler except by
food handler.
                           virtue of a food handler’s certificate issued under subsection (2).

                                  (2) A person may make an application to the Food Safety
                           Service for a food handler’s certificate in the prescribed form.

                                   (3) On an application made by a person under subsection
                           (2) the Food Safety Service shall issue the person with a food
                           handler’s certificate in the prescribed form upon —

                                      (a) successful completion of food safety and hygiene
                                          practices training carried out by or authorised by
                                          the Food Safety Service; and

                                       (b) submission of a medical certificate of fitness from
                                           a medical practitioner.

                                  (3) A certificate issued under subsection (3) shall include
                           terms and conditions of the grant of the certificate including —

                                      (a) that the food handler shall submit to a health
                                          examination by a medical practitioner every six
                                          months following the grant of the food handler’s
                                          certificate;

                                      (b) that the food handler consents to the disclosure of
                                          the food handler’s health examination results
                                          under paragraph (a) to the Food Safety Service;

                                       (c) where the food handler prepares street food, that
                                           the food handler shall grant access to the premises
                                           in which the street food is prepared, for the
                                           purposes of inspection, at all reasonable times;

                                      (d) any other conditions as may be prescribed.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


       (4) The Director of the Food Safety Service may suspend
or revoke a food handler’s certificate if —

            (a) the food handler is found by a medical practitioner
                to be suffering from a communicable disease;

            (b) information given by the food handler in relation
                to his or her application has been found to be false
                in any material particular;

            (c) there has been a contravention of this Act or
                Regulations; or

            (d) there are grounds to believe that the food handler
                poses a risk to food safety.

       (5) The Director of the Food Safety Service may cancel
a food handler’s certificate at the written request of the food
handler.

    37. (1) A food handler —                                           Monitoring of medical
                                                                       conditions.

            (a) who knows or suspects that he or she is suffering
                from or that he or she is a carrier of a disease
                contained in the list of diseases published under
                subsection (5);

            (b) who is afflicted with an infected wound, a skin
                infection, sores, diarrhoea or with an analogous
                medical condition; or

            (c) in relation to whom there is any likelihood of him
                or her directly or indirectly contaminating food
                with pathogenic micro-organisms,

shall report that knowledge, suspicion or affliction to the operator
of the food business at which he or she works and shall immediately
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


cease work until he or she receives a medical certificate in
accordance with subsection (2).

         (2) A food business operator shall, upon receipt of a
report under subsection (1), report that fact to the Food Safety
Service and not permit the food handler to perform functions or
duties related to the handling of food until, a medical practitioner
certifies —

            (a) that the person is free from any infectious or
                communicable disease likely to contaminate food;
                and

            (b) that there is no likelihood of the food handler
                directly or indirectly contaminating food with
                pathogenic micro-organisms.

        (3) Where the results of a medical examination indicate
that the person is suffering from a disease likely to contaminate
food, the Food Safety Service may, for the purpose of safeguarding
the public health, by notice in writing —

            (a) prohibit that person from being employed as a
                food handler; and

            (b) suspend that person’s food handler’s certificate,

until the Food Safety Service receives a medical certificate in
accordance with subsection (2).

        (4) A person shall not disclose medical information
pertaining to a food handler, or a food handler’s medical examination
certificate or results, except in accordance with, and for the
purposes stipulated in this Act, or with the consent of the food
handler.

        (5) The Food Safety Service shall publish and keep
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


updated, the list of diseases for which reporting is required under
subsection (1)(a).

    38. (1) A medical practitioner shall report every incidence of       Medical practitioners’
                                                                         duty to report.
a food-related illness to the Food Safety Service and the Chief
Medical Officer.

        (2) A report by a medical practitioner under subsection (1)
must not reveal the name, or any other identifying information, of
the patient in relation to whom the report is made.

    39. (1)A person shall not sell for human consumption any             Selling food not
                                                                         complying with food
food which fails to comply with food safety requirements.                safety requirements.


       (2) For the purposes of this Part, food fails to comply with
food safety requirements if —

            (a) it has been rendered injurious to health by means
                of adulteration or other means;

            (b) it is unfit for human consumption;

            (c) it is so contaminated, whether by extraneous
                matter or otherwise, that it would not be reasonable
                to expect it to be used for human consumption in
                that state.

         (3) Where any food which fails to comply with food
safety requirements is part of a batch, lot or consignment of food
of the same class or description, it is presumed for the purposes
of this section, until the contrary is proved, that all of the food in
that batch, lot or consignment fails to comply with those
requirements.

      (4) In determining whether any food is unfit for human
consumption, regard shall be had to —

            (a) the normal conditions —
                2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                                 (i) at each stage of production, processing and
                                     distribution of the food, and

                                (ii) of use of the food by the consumer; and

                           (b) the information provided to the consumer, including
                               information on the label, or other information
                               generally available to the consumer concerning
                               the avoidance of specific adverse health effects
                               from a particular food or category of foods.

                        (5) In determining whether any food is injurious to health,
                regard shall be had to —

                           (a) the probable immediate, short-term or long-term
                               effects of the food on the health of a consumer
                               and subsequent generations of the consumer;

                           (b) the probable cumulative toxic effects of the food;
                               or

                            (c) any particular health sensitivities of a specific
                                category of consumers if the food is intended for
                                that category of consumers.

                         (6) In determining whether any food is unfit for human
                consumption, regard shall be had to whether the food is
                unacceptable for human consumption according to its intended
                use, for reasons of contamination, whether by extraneous matter
                or otherwise, or through putrefaction, deterioration or decay.

Labelling and       40. (1) Any packaged or pre-packaged food intended for
packaging.
                sale in Dominica shall comply with labelling and packaging
Chap. 86:04.    requirements under the Standards Act.

                         (2) Where food other than packaged food is displayed for
                sale, it must be labelled as prescribed.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                         ACT



   41. Repackaged food intended for sale in Dominica shall           Repackaging of food.
comply with repackaging requirements under the Standards Act .       Chap: 86:04.



    42. A person shall not sell food with a label, whether or not    Falsely describing food.
attached to or printed on the wrapper or container of the food, or
publish or cause to be published, an advertisement, which —

           (a) falsely describes the food; or

           (b) is likely to be misleading as to the nature or
               substance of the food.

                    PART V
           IMPORT AND EXPORT OF FOOD

    43. (1) Any food imported into Dominica shall comply with        Import requirements.

the requirements of this Act.

      (2) A person shall not import food into Dominica except in
accordance with this section.

      (3) A person who wishes to import food may apply to the
Food Safety Service in the prescribed form, and accompanied by
the prescribed fee.

     (4) An application under subsection (2) must be
accompanied by –
           (a) prescribed certificate of analysis, certificate of
               conformity or other required certification from
               the exporting country which indicates that the
               requirements of this Act have been met; and

           (b) an agreement or contract between the importer
               and trading partner in the country of origin which
               indicates that food which is subsequently found
                      2026                  FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


                                      not to be safe or not to meet the requirements of
                                      this Act will be re-shipped to the country of origin,
                                      or to another place the Food Safety Service may
                                      approve, or that the food will be otherwise
                                      destroyed.

                             (5) The Food Safety Service shall review an application
                      under subsection (2) to determine whether —

                                 (a) the importer has complied with the requirements
                                     of this Act;

                                 (b) a physical inspection or sampling shall be made by
                                     the Food Safety Service at the port of entry; and

                                 (c) the food may be released without physical
                                     inspection or sampling, to the importer.

Import inspections.       44. (1) A decision made by a food inspector to collect a
                      sample or to inspect food that is to be imported shall be based on
                      the basis of risk informed by —

                                 (a) the nature of the food;

                                 (b) the past history of the commodity or the importer.
                              (2) Where a food inspector —

                                 (a) determines that an inspection of the food is
                                     required —

                                      (i) the food shall not be released before a physical
                                          inspection, and where necessary, the
                                          collection of a sample for analysis is taken,
                                          and
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                (ii) the containers, packaging material, labelling
                     and ingredients of food imported into Dominica
                     may also be subject to sampling and inspection;
                     and

           (b) takes any sample under this section, the Food
               Safety Service shall send the sample to an official
               laboratory for analysis.

       (3) Where a sample is not required, upon completion of
documentary inspection or physical inspection where it is required,
where the food meets import requirements under this Act, the
food inspector shall release the food shipment to the Customs
Department for clearance.

       (4) Where the taking of a sample of food from a
consignment is required and the Food Safety Service finds that the
sample —

           (a) complies with the requirements of this Act, the
               Food Safety Service shall authorize the release of
               the consignment to the Customs Department
               and shall submit a written notice to the Customs
               Department and the importer to that effect;

           (b) does not comply with the requirements of this
               Act, the Food Safety Service —

                 (i) shall detain the consignment and issue a
                     written notice of detention to the Customs
                     Department and to the importer, or

                (ii) may issue a written notice ordering the
                     immediate destruction of the food.

        (5) Inspections shall be carried out —
                        2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                                    (a) during the normal business hours of the Food
                                        Safety Service or at any other reasonable time on
                                        agreement by the Food Safety Service;

                                    (b) either –

                                         (i) at the port of entry, or

                                        (ii) at the final destination in consideration of the
                                             perishability of the food, subject to prior
                                             approval and agreement of the Food Safety
                                             Service.

Re-labelling and             45. (1) Where any food sought to be imported would, if sold
reconditioning.
                        in Dominica, constitute a contravention of this Act, the Director
                        of the Food Safety Service may permit its importation solely for
                        the purpose of re-labelling or reconditioning as prescribed if to do
                        so would bring the food into compliance with this Act within a
                        specified period.

                                 (2) In the event that any re-labelling or reconditioning
                        permitted under subsection (1) is not carried out within the
                        specified period, the Director of the Food Safety Service may
                        direct the importer to re-ship the food to the country of origin, or
                        destroy the food at the importer’s expense.

                                (3) Where an importer fails to re-ship or destroy imported
                        food as required under subsection (2), the Director of the Food
                        Safety Service may order the destruction of the imported food.

                                (4) Any costs incurred under this section shall be borne
                        by the importer.

Export certification.       46. (1) A person shall not export food except in accordance
                        with this section.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


        (2) A person may apply to the Food Safety Service for an
inspection in the prescribed form and accompanied by the
prescribed fees.

        (3) A decision made by the Food Safety Service to collect
a sample or to inspect food that is to be exported shall be based
on risk analysis informed by —

            (a) the nature of the food;

            (b) the past history of the commodity or the exporter.

       (4) Following an inspection of the food, the food business
premises, records and any other aspect relating to the food as may
be required, and upon consideration of the requirements of the
importing country, the Food Safety Service shall —

            (a) issue an export certificate and any other required
                documentation, where the food meets the
                requirements; and

            (b) where the food does not meet the requirements,
                deny issuance of an export certificate and other
                documentation and provide the reasons in a written
                notice to the exporter, including where relevant,
                any remedial action or treatment that may be
                taken.

        (5) Where the exporter takes the remedial action or
treatment under subsection (4)(b), the exporter may apply for re-
inspection by the Food Safety Service.

     47. (1) Every importer and exporter shall, not later than           Report on activities.

forty-five days after the end of each operating year of the
business of the importer or exporter, as the case may be, submit
to the Food Safety Service a report relating to the activities for the
previous calendar year including —
                           2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                                       (a) types and quantities of food imported or exported;

                                       (b) prescribed data concerning shipments of food;

                                       (c) food found by an importing country not to be in
                                           compliance with the statutory requirements of the
                                           importing country;

                                       (d) food sought to be imported that was detained or
                                           rejected and destroyed;

                                       (e) a summary of any incidents or accidents that may
                                           have occurred and any action taken regarding
                                           food found not to be safe for export;

                                       (f) such other information as may be prescribed.

                                    (2) The first report for the purposes of subsection (1)
                           shall be submitted to the Food Safety Service no later than 45 days
                           after the end of the operating year commencing within one year
                           of the commencement of this Act.

                                   (3) In addition to the reporting requirement under subsection
                           (1), every importer and exporter has a duty of continuous
                           reporting to the Food Safety Service, throughout the year, the
                           information required to be reported under subsection (1).

                                                       PART VI

                           TREATMENT OF GOODS IN FREE CIRCULATION
                                IN THE ECONOMIC UNION AREA

Treatment of food moving        48. (1) Where food has been found compliant with all
within the Economic
Union Area
                           applicable import requirements under this Act, the Customs Act
                           and any other relevant enactments at the first port of entry in the
                           Economic Union Area, the food may circulate freely within the
                           territory of first entry and the Economic Union Area.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


        (2) Where food is dispatched from an OECS Protocol
Member State to Dominica the food may be subject to inspection
in accordance with the procedures under section 44 on arrival in
Dominica, unless the food is accompanied by a food health
certificate from the Competent Authority of the OECS Protocol
Member State of dispatch, issued within 72 hours of its arrival in
Dominica.

   49. (1) A person who intends to dispatch food from Dominica       Food Health Certificate.

may submit the food for examination by the Food Safety Service.

        (2) Following an inspection of the food and any records
or other aspect relating to the food as may be required, the Food
Safety Service shall —

           (a) where the food meets the requirements of this
               Act, issue a food health certificate in the form
               prescribed in Schedule 3 upon payment of the
               prescribed fee; and

           (b) where the food does not meet the requirements,
               deny issuance of a food health certificate and
               provide the reasons in a written notice to the
               person intending to dispatch the food, including
               where relevant, any remedial action or treatment
               that may be taken.

        (3) Where the person takes the remedial action or
treatment under subsection (2)(b), the person may apply for re-
inspection by the Food Safety Service.

        (4) Where the Food Safety Service issues a food health
certificate under this section, the Food Safety Service may send
advance notice to the receiving OECS Protocol Member State.
                          2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


Network of agriculture,       50. (1) The Food Safety Service shall liaise with the competent
health and food safety
competent authorities.    authorities for agriculture, health and food safety in Dominica and
                          OECS Protocol Member States to form a network for the
                          purposes of —

                                     (a) developing an agriculture, health and food safety
                                         risk management system for the Economic Union
                                         Area;

                                     (b) making recommendations for adoption by OECS
                                         Protocol Member States of agriculture, health
                                         and food safety Regulations, standards, guidelines
                                         and protocols in keeping with international
                                         requirements;

                                      (c) promoting the harmonisation of sanitary and
                                          phytosanitary standards in the Economic Union
                                          Area;

                                     (d) making recommendations for the modernisation
                                         of the agriculture, health and food sectors in
                                         OECS Protocol Member States;

                                      (e) developing and maintaining a database in respect
                                          of key aspects of agriculture, health and food
                                          safety in the Economic Union Area;

                                      (f) sharing with competent authorities and other
                                          relevant agencies, statistics and other relevant
                                          information required under this Act, from the
                                          database in paragraph (e); and

                                     (g) monitoring that sanitary and phytosanitary
                                         measures are implemented in a transparent and
                                         non-discriminatory manner.

                                  (2) The Food Safety Service, as part of the network of
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                       ACT


competent authorities under subsection (1), shall liaise with,
accept advice and implement recommendations from CAHFSA,
in relation to food safety matters.

   51. (1) The Food Safety Service shall collaborate with         Application of common
                                                                  procedures, principles
CAHFSA for the purposes of developing and implementing a          and risk management
                                                                  system .
common Risk Management System, which includes —

           (a) a common risk classification matrix;

           (b) common risk procedures;

           (c) common inspection procedures;

           (d) common import requirements and procedures in
               respect of certification, licensing and import
               permits;

           (e) a common pest list; and

           (f) a common list of prohibited products for
               importation.

       (2) The common Risk Management System shall be
approved by the Minister before implementation.

    52. The Food Safety Service may retrieve, update, and share   Information Sharing.

relevant information required under this Act through —

           (a) the OECS Customs Information System; and

           (b) any alert system developed for use regionally or
               internationally, and accessible to OECS Protocol
               Member States.
                          2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


Items not permitted to        53. (1) The food items listed in Schedule 4 may not circulate
move freely in the
Economic Union Area.      freely in the Economic Union Area and are subject to the import
                          and export procedures and requirements under Part V.

                                  (2) The Minister may, in consultation with the Food Safety
                          Service and with relevant Ministers of the other OECS Protocol
                          Member States, by order published in the Gazette, revise Schedule
                          4 to add, remove and update information related to food items
                          which are not permitted to move freely within the Economic
                          Union Area or a territory therein.

                                                    PART VII
                                                  ENFORCEMENT

Enforcement powers of a        54. (1) Where a food inspector has exercised an investigative
food inspector.
                          power under section 10, and has reasonable grounds to believe
                          that any operation or activity in connection with such food is being
                          carried out in violation of this Act, the food inspector may, without
                          warrant or consent —

                                      (a) enter any food business premises in which food
                                          intended for sale or other commercial use is
                                          being, or is suspected of being, produced,
                                          manufactured, treated, graded, packed, packaged,
                                          labelled, stored, handled, prepared, served or
                                          sold, or in which any other operation or activity in
                                          connection with such food is being, or suspected
                                          of being, carried out, and may, for the purpose of
                                          determining whether this Act is being violated —

                                           (i) examine, make copies of or take extracts
                                               from any book, statement or other document
                                               found at such premises which refers to or is
                                               suspected of referring to such food, and
                                               demand from the owner or any person in
                                               charge of the premises an explanation of any
                                               entry in it; and where such record or document
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                    is kept by means of computer to have access
                    to it or any associated apparatus or material;

                (ii) seize any food, appliance, product, material,
                     object, substance, book, statement or
                     document which appears to provide proof of
                     a contravention of any provision of this Act,
                     providing a signed receipt in the prescribed
                     form detailing the reasons for such action,
                     which shall be countersigned immediately by
                     the food business operator or owner of such
                     premises, food or object;

               (iii) destroy or dispose of seized food.

        (2) A food inspector exercising his or her duties under
this section, may request the presence and assistance of a law
enforcement officer as he or she considers necessary.

        (3) Where a food inspector takes an action under
subsection (1), he or she shall prepare a written notice and provide
a copy to the food business operator or owner of the premises as
prescribed.

         (4) Where a food inspector has reasonable grounds to
believe that a food business operator or owner of the premises has
failed to comply with this Act, he or she may serve a notice on that
owner or food business operator —

            (a) stating the food inspector’s grounds for believing
                that this Act is not being complied with;

            (b) specifying the measures which the food inspector
                deems that the owner or food business operator
                shall take in order to remedy the failures referred
                to in paragraph (a);
                         2026                   FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


                                     (c) requiring the owner or food business operator to
                                         implement those measures, or measures having
                                         an equivalent effect, within the time period
                                         specified in the notice.

                                (5) In carrying out any duty under this section, a food
                         inspector shall identify himself or herself as a food inspector by
                         showing his or her identification card or other proof of his or her
                         appointment or designation as a food inspector.

Objects of Inspection.        55. For the purposes of this Act, food inspectors may inspect
                         the following —

                                    (a) food, raw or processed, including as imported or
                                        exported consignments of food;

                                    (b) food ingredients, additives, disinfectants and any
                                        substances or processes used in the production,
                                        manufacturing, handling or packaging of food;

                                     (c) food business premises and their surroundings
                                         and installations, as well as means of transportation,
                                         equipment and materials;

                                    (d) personnel employed in the food business;

                                     (e) packaging material;

                                     (f) cleaning, disinfecting and maintenance at food
                                         business premises;

                                    (g) food labels;

                                     (h) all records and documents related to the food
                                         production chain; and

                                     (i) such other objects as may be prescribed.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                            ACT



    56. (1) A food inspector, food analyst, or other person or           Duty not to disclose
                                                                         information.
governmental entity under this Act shall not disclose to a third
party any information acquired in the performance of his or her
duties unless in accordance with this Act or otherwise ordered to
do so in writing by the Director of the Food Safety Service, the
Minister or by a court.

         (2) Where a food inspector, food analyst or other person
or governmental entity under this Act obtains information from a
person who asserts a claim that the information provided should
be treated as a trade secret or as confidential business information,
the food inspector, food analyst, or other person or entity to whom
or to which the information is disclosed, shall treat that information
as confidential.

     57. (1) Notwithstanding the responsibility of food business         Food unfit for
                                                                         consumption.
operators to recall products under this Act, where a food
inspector reasonably believes that any food is unfit for human
consumption or is likely to cause harm to human health, and that
the food business operator fails to withdraw the product from the
market, the food inspector shall —

            (a) seize and seal such food, and issue a notice to the
                owner or the food business operator that the food
                or any specified portion of it is temporarily not to
                be sold, removed, manipulated, tampered with or
                otherwise altered without the authorisation of the
                food inspector; or

            (b) issue a written notice —

                  (i) ordering the temporary removal of the food
                      to a specified place,

                 (ii) ordering the immediate destruction of the
                      food,
                 2026                  FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


                                (iii) temporarily detaining the food and leaving it in
                                      the place,

                                (iv) prohibiting the sale of the food.

                         (2) Where any action is taken under subsection (1)
                 because of a risk to human health, the food inspector shall
                 immediately notify the Food Safety Service which shall take
                 action to notify other relevant governmental entities and non-
                 governmental entities so that all measures necessary to ensure
                 public safety and the protection of consumers, including public
                 warnings, recall orders, marketing restrictions, marketing bans or
                 other appropriate measures, may be adopted.

                         (3) As soon as practicable, and in any event not later than
                 fourteen days, a food inspector acting under subsection (1) shall
                 review the situation to determine whether the circumstances that
                 caused the issue of the notice no longer exist, and where the food
                 inspector —

                            (a) finds this to be the case, he or she shall withdraw
                                the notice, and where appropriate, allow the
                                release of any food from the place where it is
                                stored;

                            (b) finds this not to be the case, he or she may order
                                that any such food be destroyed or disposed of so
                                as to prevent its use for human consumption, and
                                shall supervise the destruction or disposal.

Certificate of       58. Where a food inspector orders food to be destroyed or
condemnation.
                 disposed under section 57(3)(b), the food inspector shall issue a
                 certificate of condemnation in the prescribed form to the food
                 business operator or owner of the premises, informing the food
                 business operator or owner of the premises of the intention to
                 dispose of or destroy the food and the form of disposal or
                 destruction.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


    59. (1) Where a food inspector reasonably suspects that a          Improvement notice.

food business operator fails or neglects to comply with the
requirements of this Act, or the terms of the licence granted to the
food business operator under this Act, the food inspector may
serve on the food business operator an improvement notice under
subsection (2).

        (2) An improvement notice shall —

            (a) state the food inspector’s grounds for suspecting
                that the food business operator is failing to comply
                with the food safety requirements or the terms of
                the food business operator’s licence;

            (b) specify the matters which constitute the food
                business operator’s failure to comply;

            (c) specify —

                 (i) the measures which, in the food inspector’s
                     opinion, the food business operator must take
                     to prevent, decrease, control or eliminate a
                     food safety risk that has resulted from or is
                     likely to result from anything that the food
                     business operator has done or not done and to
                     ensure compliance, or

                (ii) that measures at least equivalent to those
                     indicated must be taken;

            (d) specify the period within which the measures
                referred to in paragraph (c) must be taken;

            (e) specify the time within which the person must
                report to the food inspector any measures taken;
                and
                         2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                                     (f) specify that the food business operator to whom
                                         the improvement notice is directed has the right to
                                         request a hearing by the Food Safety Service.

                                 (3) A food business operator who is served with an
                         improvement notice under this section shall comply with the
                         improvement notice within the period specified in the improvement
                         notice.

Emergency hygiene            60. (1) Where a food inspector is satisfied that a health risk
prohibition notices.
                         exists with respect to any food business, the food inspector may,
                         by a notice served on the food business operator, impose an
                         emergency hygiene prohibition.

                                (2) The criteria for determining a health risk for the
                         purposes of subsection (1) shall be prescribed.

                                 (3) Any person to whom an emergency hygiene prohibition
                         has been issued shall comply immediately with the requirements
                         stipulated therein.

Information to members       61. The Director of the Food Safety Service shall —
of the public.

                                    (a) at the request of the public or on his or her own
                                        initiative, provide and disseminate information
                                        and guidance concerning the implementation of
                                        this Act;

                                    (b) ensure the dissemination of all laws concerning
                                        food safety.

Offences and penalties       62. (1) A person who knowingly, personally or indirectly
                         through an employee or agent —

                                    (a) imports or exports food in contravention of this
                                        Act;
2026               FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


       (b) fails to ensure that all personnel of a food business
           follow prescribed procedures;

       (c) operates a food business without a licence or
           other authorisation required by this Act, or
           constructs food business premises or operates a
           food business except as specified under this Act;

       (d) engages in street food vending without being
           registered and without a certificate or other
           authorisation required under this Act;

       (e) fails to submit a report to the Food Safety Service
           required under this Act;

       (f) fails to provide access, samples or information to
           a food inspector upon request, where the person
           is under an obligation to do so;

       (g) tampers with any samples taken under this Act or
           breaks any seal or alters any markings made by
           a food inspector without permission;

       (h) alters, forges, defaces, or destroys any document
           issued under this Act;

       (i) knowingly or recklessly provides information to a
           food inspector which is false, for the purpose of
           obtaining any document under this Act;

       (j) in relation to food intended for human consumption,
           engages in food fraud or knowingly sells or
           possesses food upon which food fraud has been
           committed;

       (k) works as a food handler without a food handler’s
           certificate or other authorisation required under
           this Act;
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


           (l) sells for human consumption food which fails to
               comply with food safety requirements;

          (m) assaults, obstructs, resists, delays, refuses lawful
              entry to, intimidates or fails to ensure the safety
              of or otherwise interferes with a food inspector in
              the performance of his or her duties;

           (n) discloses medical information or medical
               examination results of a food handler, except as
               provided under this Act;

           (o) impersonates or falsely represents himself or
               herself to be a food inspector;

           (p) fails to comply with any lawful requirement of a
               food inspector, or with any order or direction
               lawfully made or granted under this Act;

           (q) acts as a food analyst while having an actual or
               reasonably perceived interest in an action to be
               taken by the Food Safety Service;

           (r) fails to surrender a food business licence where
               the person is under an obligation to do so;

           (s) being a medical practitioner, fails to report an
               incident of a food-related illness to the Food
               Safety Service and the Chief Medical Officer,

commits an offence.

          (2) A person who commits an offence under subsection
(1) is liable on summary conviction:

           (a) in the case of an individual to a fine of ten
               thousand dollars or to imprisonment for three
               months;
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


            (b) in the case of a body corporate to a fine of fifty
                thousand dollars.

        (3) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a body corporate and is proved to have been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect
or default on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other
similar officer of the body corporate, or any person who is
purporting to act in any such capacity, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer as well as the body corporate is guilty
of that offence.

       (4) A person who is found guilty of an offence under
subsection (3) is liable to the same extent as a person who
commits the offence under subsection (1).

   63. (1) The offences listed in Schedule 5 are designated fixed      Fixed penalty offences.
penalty offences for the purposes of this Act.

        (2) The Minister may make Regulations prescribing the
penalties for the fixed penalty offences in Schedule 5 which shall
not exceed 20% of the maximum penalty.

        (3) Where on any occasion a food inspector finds a
person who the food inspector has reason to believe is committing,
or has committed, a fixed penalty offence, he or she may serve on
that person a fixed penalty notice in the prescribed form.

        (4) Where a food inspector has served a fixed penalty
notice on a person, the food inspector shall –

            (a) inform the person that he or she has committed an
                offence under this Act; and

            (b) notify the person that, if he or she does not wish
                to be prosecuted for the alleged offence in court,
                he or she may pay to the clerk of the Magistrate’s
              2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                               Court in the district in which the offence was
                               committed the fixed penalty prescribed for the
                               offence in the fixed penalty notice within the time
                               specified.

                       (5) A person on whom a fixed penalty notice is served
              may decline to be dealt with under this section and where he or
              she fails to pay the fixed penalty within the time specified in the
              fixed penalty notice, or within such further time as may be allowed
              in a particular case, his or her conduct constitutes a declination to
              be dealt with under this section.

                      (6) A food inspector who serves a fixed penalty notice on
              a person alleged to have committed a fixed penalty offence shall
              send a duplicate of the fixed penalty notice to the Magistrate’s
              Court of the district in which the offence is alleged to have been
              committed.

                      (7) Where the fixed penalty is not paid within the time
              specified in the fixed penalty notice, the duplicate sent to the
              Magistrate’s Court under subsection (6) constitutes a complaint
              laid before the Magistrate to institute proceedings in accordance
Chap. 4:20.   with Magistrate Code of Procedure Act.

                     (8) A fixed penalty notice shall be signed by the food
              inspector and shall specify the following —

                          (a) the date, time and place of service of the fixed
                              penalty notice;

                          (b) the section of this Act creating the offence
                              alleged, and such particulars of the offence as are
                              required under this Act;

                          (c) the amount of the fixed penalty;
2026                     FOOD SAFETY                             ACT


             (d) the time within which the fixed penalty may be
                 paid which shall in no case exceed 21 business
                 days; and

             (e) the clerk of the Magistrate’s Court to whom, and
                 the address at or to which, the fixed penalty may
                 be paid or remitted.

        (9) Where a fixed penalty is not paid within the time
specified, proceedings in respect of the offence specified in the
fixed penalty notice shall thereafter proceed in the manner
prescribed by the Magistrate’s Code of Procedure Act.                       Chap.4:20.


        (10) A person upon whom a fixed penalty notice is served
may pay the fixed penalty in accordance with the fixed penalty
notice.

        (11) Where the fixed penalty is paid in accordance with
the fixed penalty notice, no person shall then be liable to be
convicted for the offence for which the fixed penalty notice was
served and the complaint laid before the Magistrate is null and
void.

         (12) In any proceedings for a fixed penalty offence, a
certificate that payment of the fixed penalty was or was not made
to the clerk of the Magistrate’s Court by the date specified in the
certificate shall, if the certificate purports to be signed by the clerk,
be sufficient evidence of the facts stated, unless the contrary is
proved.

     64. Where the Director of the Food Safety Service reasonably           Procedure for offences.
believes that a person has contravened any of the provisions of
this Act, he or she shall report the matter to law enforcement.

    65. (1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this            Forfeiture.
Act the court may, on its own motion or at the request of any party
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


to the proceedings, in addition to any penalty imposed, order that
any food or other thing by means of or in relation to which the
offence was committed or any proceeds realized from its
disposition, be forfeited to the State.

          (2) Where the owner of a food, or other thing to which a
conviction relates, is convicted of an offence under this Act and
a fine is imposed, the court may order that the food or other thing —

            (a) be detained until the fine is paid; or

            (b) be sold in satisfaction of the fine.

        (3) The owner under subsection (2) may appear before
the court at the hearing of the application and show cause why the
food or other thing to which the conviction relates should not be
forfeited.

         (4) Except by an order of the court under subsection (2),
where the court does not order the forfeiture of the food or other
thing, then the food or other thing must be returned to the owner.

        (5) Any food or other thing ordered to be forfeited under
this Act, at the expiry of 3 months following the order for forfeiture
and if no appeal is lodged, may be destroyed, sold, leased or
donated to a charitable organization.

        (6) The proceeds of any sale of any food or other thing
forfeited under this section shall be applied as follows:

            (a) to pay all the charges incidental to the sale,
                warehousing and carriage of the food or other
                thing; and

            (b) if any excess remains after the payments in
                paragraph (a) have been made, the excess shall,
                be paid by the Director into the Consolidated
                Fund.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


    66. (1) In any prosecution for an offence under this Act, a           Evidence.

declaration, certificate, report or other document purporting to
have been signed on behalf of the Food Safety Service, food
inspector, food analyst or police officer is, in the absence of
evidence to the contrary, proof of the matters asserted in it.

        (2) In any prosecution for an offence under this Act, a
copy of an extract from any record or other document made by the
Food Safety Service, food analyst, a food inspector or police
officer under this Act, that is certified as a true copy or extract, is
admissible in evidence.

    67. (1) Except as provided under sections 31 and 33, any              Right of appeal.
person aggrieved by an action or decision by a food inspector or
the Food Safety Service may, within 14 business days from the
date of the action or decision, appeal in writing to the Minister.

        (2) The Minister shall issue his or her decision in writing,
within 28 days of submission of an appeal under subsection (1).

        (3) The Minister may authorise a public officer in his or her
Ministry not below senior management rank, in writing, to consider
and decide an appeal made under subsection (1) on his or her
behalf, and the decision of the delegate is deemed to be the
decision of the Minister.

      (4) A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the
Minister may appeal to the High Court within 21 calendar days of
receipt of service by the person of the decision of the Minister.

      (5) An appeal under subsection (4) shall be made in
accordance with the rules of the High Court.

       (6) An appeal made under subsection (4) is final.
                            2026                   FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


Offences by officials and
penalties.
                               68. (1) A food analyst, food inspector or other staff of the
                            Food Safety Service who —

                                        (a) seizes food for any reason other than those
                                            specified in this Act;

                                        (b) discloses any information acquired in the course
                                            of exercising his or her official functions under
                                            this Act except in accordance with this Act or
                                            where required to do so by his or her supervisor
                                            in the course of official duties, or where ordered
                                            to do so by a court;

                                        (c) directly or indirectly procures any monetary or
                                            other benefit from a person affected by the
                                            exercise of official powers under this Act;

                                        (d) agrees to do or abstains from doing, permits,
                                            conceals, or connives in doing, any act or thing
                                            contrary to the proper execution of his or her
                                            official duties under this Act; or

                                        (e) otherwise abuses or acts outside the scope of his
                                            or her duties,

                            commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine
                            of twenty-five thousand dollars or to imprisonment for six months.

                                    (2) Upon conviction for an offence under subsection (1)
                            the person convicted shall be liable to dismissal and may be
                            ineligible for reappointment and shall be subject to such other
                            penalty as is applicable to public officers.

Good faith defence.              69. No staff of the Food Safety Service, food analyst or
                            official or reference laboratory or any governmental entity is liable
                            to suit for damages or to prosecution in respect of anything done
                            in good faith in the performance of official functions under this
                            Act.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                           PART VIII

                     MISCELLANEOUS

   70. A notice or other document to be served on a person             Service of notice.

under this Act may be served —

            (a) by leaving the notice or other document with that
                person;

            (b) by delivering it or sending it in a prepaid letter
                addressed to that person at his or her usual or last
                known place of abode or business;

            (c) in the case of a body corporate, by delivering it to
                the registered or principal office or by sending it
                in a prepaid letter addressed to that office; or

            (d) in the case of a document to be served on the
                owner or occupier of any premises, if the owner
                or occupier cannot be found, by affixing the
                document in a conspicuous place on the premises.

    71. (1) A document required to be furnished to the Minister,       Documents.

the Food Safety Service, or a food inspector under this Act or any
Regulations or Orders made thereunder may be furnished in
electronic form.

        (2) Where a document referred to in subsection (1) is
furnished in electronic form, an original hard copy of the document
must be furnished to the Minister, the Food Safety Service, or a
food inspector within a reasonable period after the document is
furnished in electronic form.

    72.(1) Any food or food ingredient or additive commonly            Presumptions.
used for human consumption shall, if offered for sale or distributed
for the purposes of sale or found on premises used for the
                            2026                  FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                            preparation, storage or sale of that food, be presumed, unless the
                            contrary is proved, to be intended for human consumption.

                                    (2) Where any person demands any food by a name
                            prescribed for a food for which there is a mandatory standard
                            prescribed, he or she is deemed to have demanded food which
                            complies with that mandatory standard.

Duty of other authorities       73. Customs, ports postal, police, consumer protection and
to assist and cooperate.
                            other governmental entities, shall assist food inspectors in the
                            performance of their functions under this Act by providing such
                            assistance as the Food Safety Service may request from time to
                            time.

Regulations.                    74. (1) The Minister may make Regulations for the purposes
                            of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.

                                   (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1),
                            the Minister may make Regulations for the following —

                                       (a) the procedures, criteria for approval and required
                                           forms for the issuance of certificates, licences
                                           and other authorisations required by the Food
                                           Safety Service under this Act, including the expiry,
                                           renewal, cancellation, suspension and revocation
                                           and conditions attached;

                                       (b) the procedures to be followed by food inspectors,
                                           food analysts and official laboratories in the
                                           exercise of their functions under this Act;

                                       (c) the procedures for audit of the Food Safety
                                           Service and governmental entities with a role in
                                           food safety control;

                                       (d) the production, manufacture, storage, transport,
                                           packing, packaging, labelling and sale of all types
2026              FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


           of food, including dietetic food or food intended
           for infants or other population groups;

       (e) the preparation, handling and serving of food,
           including technical requirements, standards,
           procedures or rules for good hygiene practices;

       (f) the requirements and obligations of food business
           operators;

       (g) the location, design, construction, alteration,
           operation, including hours of operation and
           maintenance, of premises, facilities, equipment
           and conveyances used in any food business;

       (h) procedures for the recall of food and traceability
           systems;

       (i) the control of street food;

       (j) procedures and conditions for the issuance of
           export certificates;

       (k) the requirements for the designation of official
           and reference laboratories;

       (l) the establishment, operation and maintenance of
           laboratories or laboratory activities;

       (m) the use or prohibition of chemicals, chemical
           compounds, hormones or additives in the
           production, harvesting, handling and processing
           of food;

       (n) the import and export of foods, including any
           documentation, procedures and inspections
           required;
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


           (o) the treatment, destruction and disposal of any
               food unfit for human consumption;

           (p) prescribing procedures for the identification,
               assessment and control of food fraud;

           (q) the qualifications, education, training and
               certification of a food inspector, food analyst or
               any other staff of the Food Safety Service;

            (r) designation of offences subject to the fixed penalty
                procedure under section 63;

            (s) the forms to be used for the purposes of this Act;

            (t) prescribing low risk food for the purposes of
                preparation in a dwelling house;

           (u) prescribing conditions for issuing of food business
               operator licences and food handlers’ certificates;

           (v) the fees payable in respect of this Act; and

           (w) any other matter required to be prescribed under
               this Act or for the better carrying out of the
               provisions of this Act.

        (3) The Minister may make Regulations prescribing
penalties to be imposed on summary conviction for contravention
of a regulation made under this section and a penalty prescribed
shall not exceed a fine of twenty thousand dollars and 6 months
imprisonment.

        (4) The Minister shall consult with governmental entities,
the food industry, consumer groups and such other persons as
may have an interest in or be affected by the proposed Regulations
during the development of Regulations.
2026                     FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


    75. The Minister may, on the recommendation of the Food               Amendment of Schedule.

Safety Service, by Order subject to negative resolution of the
House amend Schedules 3 and 4.

     76. (1) The provisions of the Environmental Health Services          Repeal and savings.
Act that relate to the production, manufacture, preparation,              Chap.42:01.
handling, storage, transportation, importation, exportation, sale or
distribution of food intended for human consumption are repealed.

       (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Environmental
Health Services (Food Hygiene) Regulations and the
Environmental Health Services (Restaurants) Regulations and
any regulation or other subsidiary legislation made under the
Environmental Health Services Act relating to food safety or food
hygiene shall, to the extent that it is not inconsistent with this Act,

         (3) Any order, notice, licence, permit, certificate, approval
or other instrument made, issued or granted under the Environmental
Health Services Act relating to food safety or food hygiene, and
which is in force immediately before the commencement of this
Act, shall to the extent that it is not inconsistent with this Act,
continue in force as if made, issued or granted under this Act, and
may be amended, suspended or revoked accordingly.
2026                FOOD SAFETY       ACT


                      SCHEDULE 1

                        (Section 2)


                          Part A

               OECS MEMBER STATES

Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
British Virgin Islands
Commonwealth of Dominica
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
St. Christopher and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

                          Part B

        OECS PROTOCOL MEMBER STATES

Antigua and Barbuda
Commonwealth of Dominica
Grenada
Montserrat
St. Christopher and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


                         SCHEDULE 2

                            (Section 8)


    NATIONAL FOOD SAFETY ADVISORY BODY
        (1) The Minister shall appoint a National Food Safety
Advisory Body of no less than eleven members and no more than
fifteen members to hold office for a term not exceeding three
years under such terms and conditions of service as the Minister
may fix in the instrument of appointment.

       (2) A member of the Advisory Body is eligible for re-
appointment.

        (3) The Minister may appoint any person or agency with
relevant knowledge or experience to the Advisory Body including
persons from the fields of health, testing laboratories, agriculture,
fisheries, nutrition, trade, customs, bureau of standards, food
processing, food distribution, public health sectors, consumer
groups or local government.

        (4) The Minister shall, on the recommendation of the
Advisory Body, appoint one of the members of the Advisory Body
to be the Chairperson.

     (5) The Advisory Body shall select from among its
members a Deputy Chairperson and a Secretary.

       (6) The Advisory Body shall meet at least once in each
month and at such other times as the Chairperson determines is
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.

       (7) The Advisory Body shall determine its own procedure
and may make rules governing such procedure as are considered
necessary.
       (8) The Minister may remove a member of the body if the
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


member—

           (a) becomes incapable, by reason of mental or
               physical incapacity, of carrying out his or her
               duties;

           (b) is convicted of a criminal offence;

           (c) is guilty of misconduct in relation to the member’s
               duties;

           (d) is absent, except on providing reasons to the
               Advisory Body, from all meetings of the body
               held during two consecutive months or during any
               three months in any period of twelve months;

           (e) fails to comply with paragraph (9).

        (9) Any member of the Advisory Body who has any
interest, directly or indirectly, in any matter before the body—

           (a) shall disclose the nature of the interest to the
               Advisory Body ; and

           (b) shall not take part in any deliberations or decisions
               of the Advisory Body with respect to that matter.

       (10) A disclosure under paragraph 9 shall be recorded in
the minutes.

        (11) Any member of the Advisory Body other than the
Chairperson, may at any time resign his or her office by notice in
writing addressed to the Minister and transmitted through the
Chairperson and from the date of the receipt by the Minister of
such notice such member shall cease to be a member of the
Board.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                           ACT


      (12) The Chairperson may at any time resign his or her office
by giving notice in writing addressed to the Minister and such
resignation shall take effect as from the date of the receipt of such
notice by the Minister.

       (13) If any vacancy occurs in the membership of the
Advisory Body, such vacancy shall be filled by the appointment
of another member who shall, subject to this Schedule, hold office
for the remainder of the period for which the previous member
was appointed.

       (14) A vacancy shall be deemed to arise in the membership
of the Board in case of—

            (a) the death of a member;

            (b) resignation of a member; or

            (c) the removal of a member by the Minister.

       (15) The members of the Advisory Body are eligible for
remuneration, whether by way of fees, travelling or other
allowances, as the Minister may determine.

        (16) The Advisory Body may appoint sub-committees for
the purpose of advising it on any specialised area of food safety.

        (17) Persons may be appointed to such sub-committee
mentioned in paragraph (16) for a period of two years but any
person so appointed shall be eligible for reappointment.
                    2026                    FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


                                    SCHEDULE 3

                                      (Section 49)

                          FOOD HEALTH CERTIFICATE


 COMMONWEALTH OF DOMINICA                        Certificate Number:

       FOOD SAFETY SERVICE                       Date of issue:
    [Insert address and contact details]         Expiry date:

 FOOD HEALTH CERTIFICATE

                           (For dispatch of food)

I, the undersigned, certify that I have inspected the undermentioned food for
dispatch within the Economic Union and the food is wholesome and fit for human
consumption.

Food item:                              Port of dispatch:
Net weight:                             Port of arrival:

Consignee:                              Intended end use
Address/contact:                        Comments:
State:

Dispatched by:
Address/contact:                      Conditions of grant of certificate (if applicable):
Food business cert # (if applicable):
State:

………………………………..
Food inspector                               [seal/stamp of Food Safety Service]

This certificate is valid for a period of 72 hours from the date of issue.

*Certificate to be issued on date of inspection
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                        ACT




                       SCHEDULE 4

                         (Section 53)

Items which are not permitted to move freely within the Economic
Union Area or a territorial jurisdiction therein
2026            FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


                  SCHEDULE 5

                   (Section 63)

           FIXED PENALTY OFFENCES


Section    Offence Description
62(1)(b)   Fails to ensure that all personnel follow
           prescribed procedures.
62(1)(c)   Operates a food business without a licence or
           constructs premises without authorisation.
62(1)(d)   Engages in street food vending without
           registration or authorization.
62(1)(e)   Fails to submit a required report to the Food
           Safety Service.
62(1)(f)   Fails to provide access, samples, or information
           to inspector
62(1)(k)   Works as a food handler without a valid
           certificate.
62(1)(p)   Fails to comply with any lawful requirement or
           order under this Act.
62(1)(r)   Fails to surrender a food business licence
           when required
62(1)(s)   Medical practitioner fails to report a food-
           related illness
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT



                OBJECTS AND REASONS

This Bill has been developed in keeping with international best
practices and standards. As such, the objects of this Bill are:

·       to coordinate and integrate food safety at all stages of
        the food chain from production, to manufacture, to
        import and consumption of food;
·       to ensure food safety while enabling a competitive and
        commercially supportive environment for food
        businesses;
·       to establish an integrated approach to food safety
        among the OECS Protocol Member States in order to
        provide for a more efficient, effective, transparent and
        coordinated administration throughout the food chain;
·       to regulate food quality; and
·       to boost confidence in trade in food.

The Bill is a key component of the legal and regulatory framework
governing the quality infrastructure and overall safety of food.
The Bill also sets out provisions governing the dispatch of food
from one OECS Protocol Member State to another and is
congruent with the principles and objectives of the Revised Treaty
of Basseterre and the Eastern Caribbean Economic Union.

The purpose of the Bill is to provide for food safety and food
quality and to protect consumer health, to promote trade in food
that is safe and to provide for related matters. More particularly,
the Bill provides for consistency within OECS Protocol Member
States, thus facilitating free circulation of goods Economic Union
Area, and allows for the application of less prescriptive and
outcome based requirements on food businesses, so that businesses
have more flexibility to determine the best way to comply with
those requirements, while at the same time ensuring that food
safety is not compromised.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                            ACT


                           PART 1
                        PRELIMINARY

Clauses 1 – 4 provide for the short title, the interpretation of words
and terms used in the Bill and Application of the Bill to plants, plant
products and regulated articles in free circulation.

Clause 1 contains the short title and the commencement date of
the Bill.

Clause 2 has the definitions of terms used in the Bill.

Clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill provide for the application and non-
application of the Bill and the objectives of the Bill respectively,
and in relation to the former, provides that the Bill does not apply
to food that is produced, prepared, imported or exported for
personal consumption.

Clause 5 State that the Bill binds the State.

                          PART II
                      ADMINISTRATION

Clauses 6 – 19 provide for the administration of the Bill.

Clause 6 establishes the Minister as the person responsible for the
general administration of the Bill and sets out the powers of the
Minister.

Clause 7 provides for the Food Safety Service and its functions,
while Clause 8 provides for the establishment of the National Food
Safety Advisory Body as an advisory body to the Minister and the
Food Safety Service.

Clauses 9 and 10 provide for the appointment of food inspectors
and the investigative powers of food inspectors respectively, with
food inspectors requiring a warrant or consent before exercising
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


their investigative powers.

Clause 11 provides for the delegation of its functions by the
Director of the Food Safety Service and restricts the Director
from delegating certain specified functions.

Clauses 12 and 13 provide for agreements and memoranda of
understanding with other government entities, and the approval by
the Minister of manuals developed by the Food Safety Service.

Clause 14 provides that the Minister may designate laboratories
as reference laboratories and sets out the functions of a reference
laboratory.

Clause 15 provides that the Minister shall designate at least one
laboratory or testing facility as an official laboratory for the
purposes of testing and analysis.

Clause 16 provides for the designation of a qualified person as a
food analyst Clause 16 provides for the monitoring of this Act.

Clauses 17-19 provide for the monitoring of the Act, set out the
principles of food safety measures and provide for the food
standards and requirements respectively.


                           PART III

         FOOD CONTROL AND EMERGENCY
                PREPAREDNESS

Clauses 20-31 address issues relating to food control and
preparedness for food emergencies.

Clause 20 provides that the Food Safety Service shall implement
a traceability system.
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


Clauses 20 and 21 provide for the recall of food products and the
recall responsibilities and procedures involving an importer or
exporter.

Clauses 23 and 24 provide for inspection and seizure of suspected
food and the procedures for addressing food hazards and diseases
in premises.

Clause 25 provides for measures to be taken in relation to non-
compliance by a food business operator or an owner of premises
in which a food business operates.

Clause 26 prohibits food fraud to protect consumers from
unscrupulous practices including the sale of food that has been
tampered with or that misleads the public.

Clauses 27 and 28 provide for limiting and banning certain
substances or processes in food and for information to be provided
to the public in relation to food hazards.

Clauses 29 and 30 provide for an emergency response plan, early
warning system with respect to food borne diseases, hazards and
emergencies and emergency measures to prevent or control the
spread of food borne diseases.

Clause 31 provides for the summary closure of food businesses
and the procedure for appeal of the summary closure by the food
business operator or owner of the premises.


                           PART IV

        FOOD BUSINESS AND STREET FOOD

Clauses 32-42 provide for a licensing regime for food businesses,
certification of food handlers and makes provision for persons
engaging in the sale of street food.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


Clauses 32 and 33 provide for the licensing of food businesses and
for suspension and revocation of food business licenses.

Clause 34 imposes general obligations on food business operators.

Clause 35 provides that a person who wishes to engage in street
food vending must register with the Food Safety Service and
obtain a food handler’s certificate and Clause 36 provides the
regime for certification of food handlers.

Clauses 37 provides for the monitoring of medical conditions of
food handlers and Clause 38 imposes a duty on medical practitioners
to report incidences of food related illness.

Clause 39 prohibits the selling of food which does not comply with
food safety requirements.

Clauses 40, 41 and 42 provide for labelling and packaging of food
intended for sale, repackaging of food and false labelling.

                            PART V

           IMPORT AND EXPORT OF FOOD

Clauses 43 to 47 provide for the import and export requirements
of food.

Clauses 43 and 44 provide import requirements for importation of
food and for inspection of imported food by the Food Safety
Service.

Clause 45 makes provision for re-labelling or reconditioning of
food.

Clause 46 provides for export certification of food.

Clause 47 imposes reporting requirements on importers and
exporters of food.
2026                  FOOD SAFETY                         ACT


                           PART VI

TREATMENT OF GOODS IN FREE CIRCULATION
          IN THE ECONOMIC
             UNION AREA

Clauses 48 to 53 deal with the treatment of goods in free
circulation, and provides for mechanisms for facilitating the free
movement regime.

Clause 48 provides for the treatment of food moving within the
Economic Union Area, including food in free circulation.

Clause 49 provides for the issuing of a food health certificate
following examination of food before dispatch of the food from
one Protocol Member State to another, which is intended to
facilitate expedited clearance at the destination Protocol Member
State.

Clause 50 provides for the formation of a network of OECS
Agriculture Health and Food Safety competent authorities for the
exchange of information, and to provide guidance and
recommendations to Food Safety Services of the OECS.

Clause 51 provides for the development and implementation of
common procedures, principles and risk management system to
facilitate the free circulation of goods in the Economic Union
Area.

Clause 52 provides for information sharing through the OECS
Customs Information System and any other rapid alert system
accessible to the OECS Protocol Member States.

Clause 53 provides for food items not permitted to move freely in
the Economic Union Area.
2026                   FOOD SAFETY                          ACT


                           PART VII

                      ENFORCEMENT
Clauses 54- 69 contain provisions for the enforcement of the Act.
Clause 54 provides the enforcement powers of a food inspector,
including powers of entry and search.

Clause 55 sets out the items subject to inspection, being food and
food-related items.

Clause 56 is a prohibition on food inspectors making unauthorised
disclosures to third parties.

Clauses 57 provides an enforcement procedure for food that is not
fit for human consumption.

Clauses 58, 59 and 60 provide for issuing of a certificate of
condemnation, an improvement notice and an emergency hygiene
prohibition notice respectively.

Clause 61 provides for the giving of information and guidance to
members of the public concerning food safety laws and the
implementation of the Act.

Clauses 62, 63, 64 and 65 provide for offences and penalties, fixed
penalties, procedure for offences and forfeiture.

Clause 66 provides for the acceptance into evidence of signed
documents of the Food Safety Service, a food analyst, a food
inspector or a police officer as proof of the matters asserted in
those documents, in the absence of evidence to the contrary.

Clause 67 provides for the right of appeal against the decisions of
the Food Safety Service.

Clauses 68 and 69 provide for offences by officials under the Act
and penalties, and a good faith defence.
2026                    FOOD SAFETY                             ACT




                            PART VIII

                       MISCELLANEOUS

Clauses 70-76 address miscellaneous matters.

Clause 70 makes provision for the various methods of service of
notices and other documents under the Act.

Clause 71 enables the furnishing of documents in electronic form.

Clause 72 provides for presumptions applicable to food offered or
distributed for sale.

Clause 73 imposes a duty on Customs, ports, airports, airline,
postal, shipping, police and other authorities to assist food inspectors
in the performance of their functions under the Act.

Clause 74 empowers the Minister to make regulations to give
effect to the provisions of the Act.

Clause 75 provides for the amendment of schedules 3 and 4

Clause 76 provides for the repeal and savings.


                                                  LEVI A. PETER
                                                   Attorney General



Chambers of the Attorney General
Ministry of Justice, Immigration and National Security
Financial Centre
Roseau
COMMONWEALTH OF DOMINICA
