FALKLAND ISLANDS
BIOSECURITY
PROTECTING OUR HOME, ENVIRONMENT & ECONOMY



             A Guide To
           Importing Goods
                                   Biosecurity & Imports
The Falkland Islands are free from many of the pests and diseases which affect plants and animals
in other parts of the world. However, the relatively pristine environment and unique wildlife is
vulnerable to the introduction of invasive species, pests and diseases.

Biological invasions continue to increase globally, resulting in huge negative impacts on native
biodiversity and agriculture, and sometimes threats to public health. Once an invasive species
becomes established, eradication is often not possible and continuous control efforts are costly.
Therefore, biosecurity as the sum of risk management practices in defence against biological
threats is essential to minimise the risk of invasions.

Imported goods may carry such organisms and pose a threat not only to the environment but also
the economy through negative effects on agriculture, tourism and fisheries.

This guide is designed to give you more information on the classifications of imported goods. For
more information or to apply for an import permit contact the biosecurity officer at the Department
of Agriculture.

To protect the Falkland Islands imports are regulated and fall into three categories;

PROHIBITED - Goods are not permitted entrance into the Falkland Islands.

RESTRICTED - Goods must satisfy certain criteria before they may enter the country.

ALLOWED - Goods can be imported without restriction.
                                     PROHIBITED
 Plants, animals or other biological material injurious to the health or well being of people,
                         animals or plants of the Falkland Islands.
               RESTRICTED - REQUIRING IMPORT PERMIT
      ANIMALS            Live animals can only enter the Falkland Islands under Import License and
                         accompanied by veterinary health certification—Contact the Veterinary
                         Service
   MEAT & MEAT           Meat (fresh or frozen) and products containing meat require a Food Of
    PRODUCTS             Animal Origin (FOAO) Import Permit and must be accompanied by
                         zoosanitary certificate OR see PERSONAL IMPORTS.
 DAIRY PRODUCTS          Dairy products (except some UHT products see below) require FOAO
                         Import Permit and must be accompanied by zoosanitary certification OR
                         see PERSONAL IMPORTS.
        EGGS             Eggs require a FOAO Import Permit and must be accompanied by
                         zoosanitary certification OR see PERSONAL IMPORTS.
  PLANT MATERIAL         ALL plant material require a Plant Import Permit and must be
FRUIT & VEGETABLES       accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate OR see PERSONAL
                         IMPORTS.
   PRODUCTS OF           Unprocessed products of biological origin may require an Import Permit
BIOLOGICAL ORIGIN        and be accompanied by relevant certification. Feathers, skins, leathers,
                         wool, bone, embryos, semen, veterinary products - check with the DoA.

             RESTRICTED - NOT REQUIRING IMPORT PERMIT
    SHEARING             Used shearing equipment including clothing & footwear. Must be free from
   EQUIPMENT             organic matter.
  AGRICULTURAL           Used agricultural equipment including clothing & footwear. Must be free
   EQUIPMENT             from organic matter.
 OUTDOOR SPORTS          Used outdoor sports equipment. Fishing & camping gear, golf clubs, hiking
   EQUIPMENT             poles etc. Must be free of organic matter.
   PLANT SEEDS           Seeds must be in commercial packaging, clearly labelled with species and
                         quantity. Some species of plant (eg. Japanese Knotweed) are prohibited.

                                       ALLOWED
   PROCESSED             Tinned or Highly processed cooked meats or meat products. Must be in
  MEATS & MEAT           sealed packaging, detailing type of product, processing method,
   PRODUCTS              manufacturer and country of origin. Tinned meats and ready made meals.
     UHT DAIRY           UHT milk and UHT yoghurts of any origin. Must be in sealed packaging,
                         detailing type of product and clearly marked UHT.
    PRODUCTS
     PROCESSED            Highly processed or cooked dairy products and foodstuffs containing such.
  DAIRY PRODUCTS          Dried milk powder, puddings, baby foods.
    PROCESSED             Processed plant material. Must be in sealed packaging, detailing type of
       FRUIT              product, processing method, manufacturer and country of origin. Dried
    VEGETABLES            fruits & vegetables, dried herbs & spices, rice, nuts and canned products.

        FISH & FISH       Fish and fish products, fresh, frozen or processed.
       PRODUCTS

                                       Personal Imports
Certain fruits, meats and dairy produce may be carried to the Falklands as a Personal Import
without the need of an import permit or sanitary certificate. This allows each passenger to carry a
maximum of 5kg of goods providing certain conditions are met.
Personal Imports must be declared to Customs on arrival and are subject to a biosecurity
inspection.
Fruit
       Only the fruits listed below may be imported under Personal Imports and must be
        purchased from either the United Kingdom or Chile.
       They must be commercially packaged (or labelled), be free of soil, insects and other
        organic matter.
       Accompanied by a proof of purchase (receipt) showing the name of the supplier, date of
        purchase, item & quantity of units.

Permitted Fruits: Apples, Apricot, Avocado, Pear, Bananas, Bergamot, Cherry, Clementine,
Coconuts, Figs, Grapes, Grapefruit, Guavas, Kiwifruit, Lemon, Lime, Lychee, Mandarin, Mangos,
Nectarine, Orange, Papaya, Peach, Pears, Pineapples, Plum, Satsuma, Tangerine.

Meat, Eggs & Dairy Products
       Meat, eggs and dairy products must be sourced from within the European Union.
       Meat and meat products must be in the original sealed packaging and bear the EU symbol.
       Meat and meat products sourced from a country outside the European Union can be
        sourced          from          a          Non-EU            approved          establishment
        (https://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/international_affairs/trade/non-eu-countries_en) and be
        accompanied by a receipt.
       Milk and milk products must be clearly labelled as UHT.
       Eggs must bear the British Lion mark on the shell, be free of all faecal and other organic
        material and must not exceed 12 per person.



                                         Import Permits
Some restricted items can only be brought into the Falklands under an Import Permit. Import
Permits contain a list of conditions that must be fulfilled prior to import.

Import Permits are issued by the Department of Agriculture and are available in several formats to
suit both commercial and private operators.

There are several types of import permit but the most common are for ‘Plant Materials’ including
fruit and vegetables, and ‘FOAO’ (Foods Of Animal Origin) which includes meat, meat products,
dairy and eggs.

Import permits can cover any quantity or type of product within that classification, for example
several types of fruit and vegetable can be imported on a single import permit, however an import
containing both meat and fruits would require two import permits (one for plant material and one
for FOAO).



                                             Commercial         Private

              Annual Import Permit           £132.80            N/A


              Single Import Permit           £16.10             £4.20




NOTE: If importing goods under an annual import permit you are required to send a completed
‘Notification of Arrival’ to the DoA at least three working days prior to the import taking place.

Importing Live Animals

The importation of live animals is controlled to prevent the introduction of unwanted organisms,
pests or diseases. For more information about importing live animals please contact the Veterinary
Service directly on (+500) 27366.


                        Phytosanitary & Zoosanitary Certificates
Import Permits stipulate that plants and animal products are inspected or health checked by the
relevant authority prior to being imported into the Falkland Islands. Following the health check a
certificate is issued to show that the products are free from pathogens.

Health certificates for Plant or Food Of Animal Origin are called phytosanitary and zoosanitary
certificates respectively. They are issued by the exporting country’s plant & animal health
organisations (DEFRA in the UK or SAG in Chile for example).

Export health checks and the provision of health certificates is usually arranged by the supplier or
exporter. It can be costly and is usually only undertaken for larger quantities of goods.

                                   Clearance Certificates
Containers with notifiable goods may not be released from the port or shipper without a clearance
certificate. Clearance Certificates will be issued by the Biosecurity Officer on receipt of health
certificates (copies if necessary) and invoices.

                                          Inspections
Imported goods are subject to inspection on arrival to the Falklands.
Before your goods arrive contact us to arrange a biosecurity inspection. Inspections should take
place during normal working hours Monday to Friday 0800-1630 unless otherwise arranged with
the Biosecurity Officer. Containers should not be opened prior to inspection.

Goods are inspected for the presence of pests, diseases and invasive species which could be on the
imports or otherwise hidden among packing materials or in the container itself.

If there is any outstanding paperwork it should be handed to the Biosecurity Officer during the
inspection.




                                     Importers Checklist
1. Does your import require an Import Permit? - If in doubt contact the Biosecurity Officer.


  - If the answer is ‘yes’, continue to step 2.
  - If the answer is ‘no’, check that your import fulfils all other relevant criteria and continue
  with your import.

2. Contact the Biosecurity Officer for an Import Permit application form.

3. Arrange for your goods to have an inspection and correct health certification.

4. Ensure that all import requirements as stated in the Import Permit are fulfilled before
   shipping the goods to the Falkland Islands.

5. If you have opted for an annual Import Permit ensure that at least three working days prior
   to the import you send a ‘Notification of Arrival’ to the Biosecurity Officer.

6. On arrival contact the Biosecurity Officer to arrange an inspection, and obtain a Clearance
   Certificate if required.
Biosecurity
  Department of Agriculture
          Stanley
      Falkland Islands
         FIQQ 1ZZ


    Phone: (+500) 27355
      Fax: (+500) 27352
E-mail: biosecurity@doa.gov.fk

  www.fig.gov.fk/agriculture
