                       GRENADA
                   ACT NO. 19 OF 1986

             T assent.

                                         PATlL SCOON
 8th April, 4984                         Governor-General.
An Act to provide for the control of diqc;:scs and
   pests injurious to plants and to prevent the
   introduction of exotic species of the sswe.

  Ee it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty.
by and with the advice and colisent of the Senate and
House of R.epresentatives of Grenada and by the
authoiity of thc same ns follo~vs:
    1. This ,4ct n-tay be cited as the                       Short title
                                                             and
                                                             cammencc-
         Pt,4;2TT
               - P? OTECTTON ACT. 1986                       rntnt.


and shall come into force on such a day as the Minister
may apnoint bv not.i:e in the Gnzetrc.
 2. In this Act-                                          Inttrpreta-
                                                          tion.
      cc
         carrier" refers to aircraft. vessels vehicles or
             any cther menns of transport:
"designated officer" means an officer of the
     Ministry designated under section 16;
"fruits and vegetables" includes trees, shrubs,
     vines. cul-tings, gra f'fs, scions, buds, buI bs,
     roots, seeds, and any other plant part cap.
     abIe of propagation;
":Ministeru means the Minister charged with
    resporlsibility for Agriculture agd Ministry
    shalI be construed accordinply:
"notifiable plant pest" Ineans any plant pests of
     substantial economic importance for which
     measures must be ta!cen for its eradication,
     control or to prevent its furtlier spread:
"occupier" in relation to any land or building
     means the person in actual occupation or,
     where there is no such person, the o w n a of
     the land cr building;
L1~~ner       " to the person who is for the time
          refers
     being entitled to reccive the rent of any
     land or who, where the 1.md let t o a tenant,
     would be entitled to receive the rent;
"planting material" includes trees, shmbs. vines,
                                 h!lcl.<.17!11hs, roots.
     cuttin$s. %rafts, S C ~ Q ~ S .
     seeds. 2nd anv other plants r ) a ~ tcapable of
     propasation :
 '"plant pest" means any %-\ring stage of any
      insect. mite. nematode, stus. snail. protozo;i
      or other invertebrate or i.ertebrate animal,
      bactesum, f u n g ~ s . -pi\rasitic plant ur
      reproductive part thereof, vinises. myco-
      pla~f~1  or~ .7q?1 p y r s ~ r l ; c r i ~;,rnilqrr\r a l l ; ~ d
      with anv of the f c r e o o i n ~ csnable of '



      causing aarnage to any nlar7t or plarlt
      ~roduct
        "plant product" means any substance, materid
             or article of vegetable origin, incl~tding
             pollen, either processed or unprocessed,
              which is capable of transporting plant pests;
        "Plant Quarantine Services" means the Plant
              Quarantine Services established under
              section 16;
         'Yeceptacle" incIudes any package, box, con-
              tainer, covering, wrapper or any article in
              which plants are, or have been imported,
              kept or conveyed, or which can serve to
              transport plant pests;
         "soil" refers to the loose surface material of the
              earth in which pIants grow, in most cases
               consisting of disintegmted rock with a n
               adniixture of organic matter and soluble
               salts.
  3. Whenever the Minister shall determine that the Limiting
unrestricted importation into or movement within power.
Grenada of any plunting material. fruits, vegetabIes,
pIant products. p l a i ~ tpests, soil, or any other non-plant
articIe I-ilay res!.llt in the entry or movement of plant
pests, he is autllorised to prohibit or otherwise restrict
the irnportatisr: or n~ovcmentof such p ! a ~ ~ t i ~ l g
                                                      material.
h i t s and vegetables. plant products! plant pests, soil or
uon-plant products to protect the agricultl.lral resources
of Grenada.

  4. The Minister may, by order published in th:: Prornulgn,tion
Gozstre, make rules and regulations as may be ~ ~ ~ ~ ' Y ' l '
necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
   5. Products and articles named in section 3 moving Me]L
in the niail shall be subject to regulations administered
jointIy by the Postal Service and the PIant Quarantine
Service.
 Oficiai              6. Planting material, plant pests or h e . beneficial
 in3l!orrations.   orga~~isms  may be imported by thl: Ministry for cxpcri.
                   mental purposes only under such conditions and regula.
                   tions specified by the Minister.

 Pe:mit               7. No person may import or offer for entry into the
requirenlents.     State any planting material, fruits, vegetat?les, piant
                   products, plant pests, predators or parasites oi plant
                   pests, or soil except under a p e r m i l issued by the
                   ivlinister. The Minister m a r issue such a perillit subject
                   t o t h e conditions prescribed b y this Act and the
                   Regulations made thereunder.

Emergency             8. The Minister may issue an emergency permit for
~ c r mts.i        the entry of certain pre-determined planting material,
                   fruits, vegetables and plant products offered far entry
                   and for which no permit was previously granted
                   provided the articles are found to be free of plant pests
                   and its introduction is justifiable.

(+crtlflcatfon
rcquircnlcnts.
                       9. All planting material, fruits. vegetables, plant
                    ~roducts,plants pets, lil-e beneficial orgarlis~nc,or soil
                   i~iiported intr: Grenada must be accon~parliedby a
                   shytosanitary certificate issued by the appropriate
                   ~;overnrnental azency of the e s ~ o r t i n g country that
                   :onforms to the ~~loclel    acl~ptcilby t b e International
                   Piant Prntectiorl Convention of ] ? S 1 or w11ich Grenada
                   i s signatory a n d to any arnendrnents thereto or to any
                   Convention in substitution therefor accepted by
                   ~renada.
                   P




post-cntq              10. The Minister may by order-
quarantine.
                           (01 limit the iinportation of planfins material.
                                fruits. vegetables_ plant pi-oducts. piant
                                pests, and sail 01. any of them as he m3?
                                 deem necessary;
      (6) require that Irnported planting material be
           grown in det~ntionby or under the su.per-
           vision of the Ministry and if found infested
           or infested with plant pests, to prescribe
           remedial measures as may be necessary to
           prevent their establish~nentand spread.

  11. When a permit has been granted in the importa- Order       nloJi1~-
                                                          tng permit.
[ion of plafitiug material, fruits, vegetables, plant
products, plant pests, live beneficial organisms or soil,
but an order affecting this perinit is subsequently made
under section 4 the permit may be revoked or modified
as may be required so as to have the entry requirements
of the material or articles under consideration conforln
to the order under consideration.

  12. It sl~allb~ the d u t y of the Cl~mptrollerof Customs Arri\d
a d Excise through an authorized officer tl) pranlptly noL'tiC"l"O"
notify the PIant Quarantine Service of the arrival of any
planting material? fruits, vegetables, plan! products.
plant ;lests, soil, or otller arliclcs regulated by this Act at
the port of arrival and, further not tc relensr. or dispose
3f the rnaterial or article unless so authorized by the
Plant Quarantine Service.
   13, Articles or products which are prohibited or Salcguards.
subjected to restricted entry for i ~ n p o r t a t i o ~ ~ the
                                                      under
provisions cf this Act or orders thereunder if tem-
porarily in the State or territorial waters are subject to
such orders as may be deemed necessary bv the Min-
ister to carry out the purposes of this Act. This also
applies t:, carriers, their stores and furnishings.
   14. The Minister may make regulatio~ls or orders export
                                                     ccrtificatic,n.
 as he deems necessary to provide for the inspection
 of domestic plants and plant products offered for
 export and to certify to shippers and interested
               parties as to the freedom of such products from
               injurious plant pests according to the phytosa& '5'
               requirements indicated on the model certificate adopted
               by the International Plant Protection C o ~ ~ v e n t i o ~
               1951, or as amended or replaced by a new Convention
               and accepted by Grenada.

Exclusion of     15. No liability may be attached to the Government
"a"h'ty.      of Grenada for the destruction of material brought into
              the State in violation of this Act or the Orders issued
              pursuant thereto. Likewise, the Government is under
              no liability for any damage done, or delays incurred by
              treatments or other quarantine action deemed necessary
              and performed under existing Iaws. All such treat.
              ments are performed at the sole risk of the importer.
                 16. The Minister may establish PIa~lt Protection
Establishment and Plant Quarantine Services as Inay be required to
u i services.
              proiect the agricultural resources of Grenada and, in
              writing, desigrlate officers of his Ministry to administer
              and enforce the provisions OF this Act.
                 17. Any designated officer shall be furnished with
              suitable identification arid may-
Enforcen~ent         ( 0 ) if he has cause to believe that any person,
authority.
                             receptacle or carrier co~ninginto or ~lloving,
                             within Grenada possesses, contnil-is
                             carries any planting material, fruits, vege-
                             tables, plant products. plant: pests, soil or
                             non-plant articles that constitutes a risk to,


                             the agriculture of Grenada, the entry of
                             which is prolalibited or restricted by the prod
                             vision of this Act or orders issuecl pursuant
                             thereto, may stop, and wjthout warrant,
                             search and esarnine such person, recept*
                             cles or carriers and seize, detain, treat*
                             destroy or otherwise dispose of such plallt.
                             ing . material, fruits, vegetables, plant
          products, plant pests, soil or other articles
          brought into or moving within the State in
          violation of this Act; and

     (b) if he has cause to believe that a notifiable
           plant pest may be present on any land, enter
           on such land and without warrant carry
           out survey and detection programmes as
           well as treat, destroy or remc.lrrc plar~ti~ls
           materials, fruit?, ve9etables. plant prcducts,
           plant pests and soil. but he shall i~forn-rthe
           occuoier. if present at the time, a[ h i s inten-
           tion to enter, search, exami~ie and if
           necessary to treat, con fisca tz or destroy.

  IS. The Minister may make orders necessary to g;~;tion
prevent the spread of plant pests in Grenada and
therein may :

     (D) identify the notifiable pest tlnder considern-
         tian;

     (h! determine the land or nursery to he nlaced
          under quarantine and advise the occupier
          or o\mer in writing acccrdinglv:

        set forth the action tr, be takzn by Covern-
         ment a n d the occupier nr owner in order to
         contrcl the nlant uest as w e l l as dispose of
         the p1x-1tin? rnsterial. fn.lits. vcpetabl~sand
         plant w-oducts r\ii the I ~ n dor nursery under
         avarantine: and

     (4 restrict. vrohibit PT ccntrol the cultivation
         and harvestinp cf any nlant' o n land or
         wrserv under quarantine.
occupicr         19. The occupier or owner of any land or nursery
               on which a suspected or identified identifiable pest is
               fcund shall, as soon as possible, advise the Ministry
               accordingly.
pest control     20. Any designated officer may, by notice in writing
notice.
               served upon the occupier or owner of a n y land 01
               nursery and which describes the measures to he taken
               to prevent further spread and to control or eradicate
               the notifiable pest mentioned therein. require the
               occunier or owner to :
                       (a) a't his own expense and within the time as
                            specified in the notice take such measures
                            as may be recomn~ended or required to
                            prevent the spread, control or eradicate the
                            notifiable pest:
                        (h) be responsible for the implementation of
                             control nr eradication measures even if they
                             are not stipulated in the written notice.
Failurc to.      22. Where an occupier or owner fails to take any
notice
comply         measures which he is required to take by notice given
               under sectioi~20: upiln expiration of the time specified
               therrlin, a designated officer may enter the land or
               nursery and implement or cause to be implen-tented the
               measures to he taken.

 Rc:ml.umc-         22. Any e.xpenses incurred by a designated officer
 merit of cosh.inconnection with those measures shaII be reimbursed
               by the occupier or owner, and may be recovered by the
               Chief Plant Protection Oficer as a civil debt.

 nrrin,, or      23. The Minister may waive repayment of exoenses
 exwnscs.      incurred under section 22 for any justifiable reason as
               may be determined by him and based upon silb.
               stantiated facts submitted in writing.
  24. The notice served to the occupier or owner of Duration       of
                                                         quarantine.
land or a nursery u n d ~ rsection 20(b) shall remain in
fme until the Ministry gives the occupier or owner a
certificatein writing declaring that the land or nursery
   longer is under quarantine.
  25. While the notice served under section 20(b) is Removal oE
in force, it shall be unlawful to remove or have re- ~ ~ ~ ~ n ~ ~ d , e r
 moved any planting rn~ferial,fruits, vegetables, plant
products or soil from the land or nursery under quaran-
the unless so aut!~~rized  in writing by the Ministry.
  26. It shall be the responsibility of the Ministry Fq$iF;-tioo
to determine if any notifiable pest has been eradicated tion.
and any inspections of land or nurseries to determine
this shaIl be carried out by an authorised officer or
officers a t no cost tn the occupier or owner.
  27. Where no person is in actual occupation of any Inabll:(y to
land or where the occupier or owner cannot be ,          ,,,,,,,,,
                                                        locntc.
located, service of any notice under this Act may be owner.
made by afixing thz notice to a c~nspicuousplace on
the Iand and such a s x i n g shall he considered as an
authorised service of notice.
   28. The Minister ie authorised to compensate. out Cornpcnsa-
 of moneys voted for that purpose by Parliament,
. o ~ c u ~ i ea nr d~ owner3 of lands ancl nurseries whose
healthv p!ants. nlantincr material, f r ~ ~ i f s ~
                                               verretahleq qr?d
                      have been destroyed ir: order to achieve
 food n r o d ~ ~ c t s
 ~radication or nresrent the further spread of an
 identifiable pest.
  29. T h e Ministpr shall appoint fi Plant Protection Plant Protec-
Board
.
         (hereinafter referred to as "The Board") whic? tion Board.
shall consisf of the f n l l n ~ ~ l i n ~
                                    members:
        ( 0 ) the Chicf Plant Prcteclion OFcer who also
               shall senre as Chairman of the Board;
                       ((I)   an entomologist and a plant p a t h o l ~ ~ ~ ~
                               attached to the Pest Management Unit of
                               the Ministry;
                       (C) the officer in charge of the Plant Quarantine
                              Service who also shall serve as Secretary to
                              the Board;
                       (6) a senior Extension Officer of the Ministry
                            of Agriculture;
                       (e) a Government legal officer noininated by
                            the Attorney General.
Appointment       30. Where a member of the boara I S unable to serve,
ofnlterllatcs. the  Minister may appoint an alternate to the Board
                who shall serve in his stead, excepmt that in the case
                of (e) of section 29 the alternate shall be nominated by
                the Attorney General.
Board dutic,.     31. The duties of the Board are to advise thc
                Minister on all mattcrs covered under this Act and in
                particular to advise on :
                       (a)making or amending orders or reguIations
                           authorized under this Act;
                       ( b ) the declaration of any plant pest as a
                              notifiable plant pest;
                       (C) the  status of planting . material, fruits,
                           vegetables, plant products, pIant pests and
                           soil that are being offered or may be offered
                           for importation; and
                       (4 the management, operation and physip~l
                           requirements of the Plant Quarantine
                           Service.
  32. As concerns meetings of the Board :                   Board
                                                            meetings.

      (a) they must be convened at such times as may
           be necessary or expedient for the efficient:
           performance of its functions a 11 d a S the
           Chairman may direct;
      (b) four members shall constitute a quorum;
      (c) when the Chairman or his alternate is unable
           to preside, the members forming a quorum
           may elect a Chairman from among their
           number to preside over that meeting; and
      ((C) the decisions of the Board are by a majorit!,
            of votes of the members present and in
            case of a tie, the person presiding shall, in
            addition to his original vote, cast the tie-
            breaking vote.
   33. The Board may co-opt any one or more persons Advisers to
to attend Board meetings for the purpose ot' assisting or Board.
advising the Board, but who shall have no risht to vote.
  34. A member of the Board appointed under section Duration o f
29 and 30 may :                                       appointment
                                                      to Board.
      (a) hold office for the period specified in his
             instrument of appointment;
      ( h ) be eIigible for re-appointment; and
      (C) at any time resign his office by submitting an
             jnstrument in writing to the Secretary of
             the Board.
  35. Any person who-                                    Penalties.

      (a) violates any provision of this Act;
                  (b) alters, forges, counterfeits, defaces or des trays
                         any document or certificate provided for in
                         this Act;

                   (C)   obstructs, impedes, assaults or causes bodily
                          harm to any employee of the Ministry in
                          the execution of his powers under this Act,

            shall be guilty of an offence and liable on summary
            conviction to a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars
            or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding twelve
            months or to both.
Rep4          36. The Plant Protection Ordinance, Cup. 220 is re-
Cap. 220,   pealed.


             Passed by the House of Representatives this 28th day
            of February, 1986.
                                      CURTIS V. STRACHAN
                             Clerk to the House of Representntiv~s.


              Passed. by the Senate this 27th day of March, 1986.
                                       CURTlS V. STR ACHAN
                                              Clerk to the Ser~nre.
