              CHAPTER 110
           FOOD AND DRUGS ACT

             • Act • Subsidiary Legislation •


                          ACT

                   Act No. 14 of 1986


          ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

                         PART I

                         General
1.    Short title.
2.    Interpretation.
3.    Power of Minister to require particulars relating to the
      composition, use and effects of substances used in food, drugs or
      cosmetics.
4.    Prohibition against advertising cures for certain diseases and other
      ailments.

                        PART II

                          Food
5.    Offence to sell harmful, unfit, adulterated or insanitary food.
6.    Offences in connection with description of food.
7.    Maintenance of food standards.
8.    Food prepared, etc., under insanitary conditions.
9.    Application of Part to animal feeds.

                        PART III

                          Drugs
10.   Offence to sell insanitary or adulterated drugs.
11.   Prohibition against various forms of misleading representation with
      respect to drugs.
12.   Maintenance of drug standards.
13.   Drugs prepared, etc., under insanitary conditions.
14.   Prohibition on distribution of drug samples.

                        PART IV

                        Cosmetics
15.   Offence to sell harmful or insanitary cosmetics.
16.   Maintenance of standards for cosmetics.
17.   Cosmetics prepared, etc., under insanitary conditions.

                        PART V

                         Devices
18.                     Offence to sell injurious devices.
19.                     Prohibition against various forms of misleading representation with
                        respect to devices.
20.                     Maintenance of standards for devices.

                                         PART VI

                              Administration and Enforcement
21.                     Appointment of analysts and inspectors.
22.                     Power of inspector to enter premises, examine, take samples, make
                        copies of documents, demand information and seize articles.
23.                     Provisions concerning imported goods to which Act applies.
24.                     Forfeiture.
25.                     Analysis.
26.                     Regulations.
27.                     Food Advisory Committee and Drug Advisory Committee.
28.                     Offences by bodies corporate.
29.                     Place of prosecution and trial.
30.                     Defence.
31.                     Evidence by certificate of analyst, and costs of attendance.
32.                     Presumptions.
33.                     Requirements concerning manufacturer’s declaration, and
                        importation certificate.
34.                     Penalties.
35.                     Time limit on prosecutions.
36.                     Prosecutions by inspectors.
37.                     Application of provisions of this Act to the Crown and the
                        Government.
38.                     Act does not derogate from Chapter 263.
First Schedule          Diseases and Ailments Prohibited from Advertising their Cures
Second Schedule         Pharmaceutical Labels
Third Schedule          Drugs Prohibited from Distribution as Samples




                                   CHAPTER 110
                                FOOD AND DRUGS ACT
An Act relating to foods, drugs, cosmetics and therapeutic devices.
                                    [Act No. 14 of 1986.]

                                     [11th April, 1986.]

                                          PART I

                                          General

1. Short title
      This Act may be cited as the Food and Drugs Act.

2. Interpretation
      In this Act—
   “advertisement” includes any representation by any means whatsoever for the
purpose of promoting directly or indirectly the sale or disposal of any food, drug,
cosmetic or device;
   “analyst” means a person appointed under section 21 as an analyst;
   “animal feeds” means feed for sale, for consumption by animals, fish or birds, but
does not include food fit, and commonly used, for human consumption;
    “cosmetic” includes deodorants, perfumes and any substance or mixture of
substances manufactured, sold or represented for use in cleansing, improving or
altering the complexion, skin, lips, hair, fingernails, toenails or teeth;
   “device” means any instrument, apparatus or contrivance (including the component
parts and accessories thereof) manufactured, sold or represented for use in the
diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of a disease, disorder, abnormal state of
health, or the symptoms thereof, in man or animal, or used or intended to be used for
the prevention of uterine conception;
   “drug” includes any substance or mixture of substances manufactured, sold or
represented for use in—
   (a)   the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of a disease, disorder,
         abnormal state of health, or the symptoms thereof, in man or animal;
   (b)   restoring, correcting or modifying organic functions in man or animal;
   (c)   disinfection in premises in which food is manufactured, prepared, preserved,
         packaged or stored for sale or sold, or for the control of vermin in such
         premises; or
   (d)   the control of plant or animal pests;
    “food” includes any article manufactured, sold or represented for use as food or
drink for man, chewing gum, and any ingredient that may be mixed with food or drink
for any purpose whatsoever;
    “importer”, in relation to an imported article, includes any person who, whether as
owner, consignee, agent or broker, is in possession of the article or in any way entitled
to the custody or control of it;
   “insanitary conditions” means such conditions or circumstances as might
contaminate a food, drug or cosmetic, as the case may be, with dirt or filth or render it
injurious to health or unsafe for use;
   “inspector” means a person appointed under section 21 as an inspector;
   “label” includes any legend, word or mark attached to, included in, belonging to or
accompanying any food, drug, cosmetic, device or package;
   “manufacturer” means a person who, under his or her own name, or under a trade,
design, or word mark, trade name or other name, word or mark controlled by him or
her, sells a food, drug or cosmetic to the general public or to a wholesaler or other
distributor for resale to the general public;
   “Minister” means the Minister responsible for health;
   “package” includes anything in which any food, drug, cosmetic or device is wholly
or partly contained, placed or packed;
    “preparation”, in relation to any food, drug or cosmetic, includes manufacture and
all forms of treatment and packaging;
   “sell” includes offer for sale, expose for sale, have in possession for sale, and
distribute.
3. Power of Minister to require particulars relating to the composition, use and
effects of substances used in food, drugs or cosmetics
    (1) For the purpose of enabling him or her to exercise his or her functions under this
Act the Minister may, by Order, require every person who, at the date of the Order or at
any subsequent time, carries on a business which includes the production, importation or
use of a substance of any class specified in the Order, to furnish to an analyst, within such
time as may be so specified, such particulars as may be so specified of the composition
and use of such substances which in the course of that business are used, or sold for use,
in the preparation of food, drugs or cosmetics.
   (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), an Order made thereunder
may require the following particulars to be furnished in respect of a substance, that is to
say—
      (a)    particulars of the composition and chemical formula of the substance;
      (b)    particulars of the manner in which the substance is used or proposed to be
             used in the preparation of food, drugs or cosmetics;
      (c)    particulars of any investigations carried out by or to the knowledge of the
             person carrying on the business in question, for the purpose of determining
             whether and to what extent the substance, or any product formed when the
             substance is used as aforesaid, is injurious to, or in any other way affects,
             health;
      (d)    particulars of any investigations or inquiries carried out by or to the
             knowledge of the person carrying on the business in question, for the
             purpose of determining the cumulative effect on the health of a person
             consuming the substance in ordinary quantities.
   (3) Any person who, without the previous consent in writing of the person carrying on
the business in question, discloses particulars furnished in accordance with an Order
under this section or information relating to an individual business obtained by means of
such particulars, except—
      (a)    in accordance with directions of the Minister so far as may be necessary for
             the purpose of this Act; or
      (b)    for the purposes of proceedings for an offence under this Act or of a report
             of such proceedings,
is guilty of an offence.

4. Prohibition against advertising cures for certain diseases and other ailments
   (1) Except as prescribed or exempted by regulations, a person who advertises any
food, drug, cosmetic or device to the general public as a treatment, preventive or cure for
any of the ailments listed in the First Schedule is guilty of an offence.
   (2) Except as prescribed or exempted by regulations, a person who sells any food,
drug, cosmetic or device—
      (a)    that is represented by label; or
      (b)    that he or she advertises to the general public, as a treatment, preventive or
             cure for any of the ailments listed in the First Schedule is guilty of an
             offence.

                                          PART II

                                            Food
5. Offence to sell harmful, unfit, adulterated or insanitary food
   A person who sells an article of food which—
      (a)    has in or upon it any poisonous or harmful substance in excess of the
             specified limits;
      (b)    is unfit for human consumption;
      (c)    consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, rotten, decomposed or
             diseased animal or vegetable substance;
      (d)    is adulterated; or
      (e)    was manufactured, prepared, preserved, packaged or stored under insanitary
             conditions,
is guilty of an offence.

6. Offences in connection with description of food
   (1) A person who labels, packages, treats, processes, sells or advertises food in a
manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression
regarding its character, value, quantity, composition, merit or safety, is guilty of an
offence.
   (2) An article of food that is not labelled or packaged as required by regulations made
under this Act, or is labelled or packaged contrary to such regulations, shall be deemed to
be labelled or packaged contrary to subsection (1).

7. Maintenance of food standards
   Where a standard has been prescribed for a food, a person who labels, packages, sells
or advertises any article in such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken for such food is,
unless the article complies with the prescribed standard, guilty of an offence.

8. Food prepared, etc., under insanitary conditions
   A person who manufactures, prepares, preserves, packages, or stores for sale any food
under insanitary conditions is guilty of an offence.

9. Application of Part to animal feeds
   The provisions of this Part apply to animal feeds.

                                         PART III

                                           Drugs

10. Offence to sell insanitary or adulterated drugs
   A person who sells any drug which—
      (a)    was manufactured, prepared, preserved, packaged or stored under insanitary
             conditions;
      (b)    is adulterated; or
      (c)    has passed its expiry date or has lost its potency,
is guilty of an offence.
11. Prohibition against various forms of misleading representation with respect to
drugs
   (1) A person who labels, packages, treats, processes, sells or advertises a drug in a
manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression
regarding its character, value, quantity, composition, merit or safety, is guilty of an
offence.
   (2) A drug that is not labelled or packaged as required by regulations made under this
Act, or is labelled or packaged contrary to such regulations, shall be deemed to be
labelled or packaged contrary to subsection (1).

12. Maintenance of drug standards
    (1) Where a standard has been prescribed for a drug, a person who labels, packages,
sells or advertises any substance in such a manner that is likely to be mistaken for such
drug is guilty of an offence.
   (2) Where a standard has not been prescribed for a drug but a standard for the drug is
contained in any publication mentioned in the Second Schedule, a person who labels,
packages, sells or advertises any substance in such a manner that it is likely to be
mistaken for such drug is, unless the substance complies with such standard, guilty of an
offence.
    (3) Where a standard for a drug has not been prescribed and no standard for the drug
is contained in any publication mentioned in the Second Schedule, a person who sells
such drug is guilty of an offence unless—
      (a)    it is in accordance with the professed standard under which it is sold; and
      (b)    it does not resemble, in a manner likely to deceive, a drug for which a
             standard has been prescribed or is contained in any publication mentioned in
             the Second Schedule.

13. Drugs prepared, etc., under insanitary conditions
   A person who manufactures, prepares, preserves, packages or stores for sale any drug
under insanitary conditions is guilty of an offence.

14. Prohibition on distribution of drug samples
   (1) Subject to subsection (2), a person who distributes or causes to be distributed any
drug as a sample is guilty of an offence.
   (2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the distribution of samples of drugs, whether by
mail or otherwise, to duly registered medical practitioners, dentists, veterinary surgeons
or Government pharmacists, or to an entomologist, or to the distribution of drugs (other
than those mentioned in the Third Schedule) to registered pharmacists for individual
redistribution to adults only, or by a distributor in compliance with individual requests, or
by a manufacturer of drugs to a person acting as a distributor of drugs on behalf of such
manufacturer.

                                         PART IV

                                         Cosmetics

15. Offence to sell harmful or insanitary cosmetics
   A person who sells any cosmetic which—
      (a)    has in or upon it a substance that may cause injury to the health of the user
             when the cosmetic is used—
                (i) according to the directions on the label or accompanying the cosmetic,
                    or
               (ii) for such purposes and by such methods of use as are customary or
                    usual therefore; or
      (b)    consists in whole or in part of any filthy or decomposed substance or of any
             foreign matter; or
      (c)    was manufactured, prepared, preserved, packaged or stored under insanitary
             conditions,
is guilty of an offence.

16. Maintenance of standards for cosmetics
    Where a standard has been prescribed for a cosmetic, a person who labels, packages,
sells or advertises an article in such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken for such
cosmetic is, unless the article complies with the prescribed standard, guilty of an offence.

17. Cosmetics prepared, etc., under insanitary conditions
   A person who manufactures, prepares, preserves, packages or stores for sale any
cosmetic under insanitary conditions is guilty of an offence.

                                         PART V

                                         Devices

18. Offence to sell injurious devices
   A person who sells any device which, when used according to directions or under such
conditions as are customary or usual, may cause injury to the health of the purchaser or
user thereof, is guilty of an offence.

19. Prohibition against various forms of misleading representation with respect to
devices
   (1) A person who labels, packages, treats, processes, sells or advertises any device in
a manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous
impression regarding its character, value, composition, merit or safety, is guilty of an
offence.
    (2) A device that is not labelled or packaged as required by regulations made under
this Act or is labelled or packaged contrary to such regulations, shall be deemed to be
labelled or packaged contrary to subsection (1).

20. Maintenance of standards for devices
    Where a standard has been prescribed for a device, a person who labels, packages,
sells or advertises an article in such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken for such
device is, unless the article complies with the prescribed standard, guilty of an offence.

                                         PART VI

                             Administration and Enforcement
21. Appointment of analysts and inspectors
   (1) The Minister may appoint fit and proper persons to be analysts or inspectors for
the purposes of this Act and notice of every such appointment shall be published in the
Gazette and officially and judicially noticed.
   (2) The Minister shall furnish every person appointed by him or her under
subsection (1) with a certificate signifying his or her appointment.

22. Power of inspector to enter premises, examine, take samples, make copies of
documents, demand information and seize articles
   (1) An inspector may at any reasonable time—
      (a)   enter any place where on reasonable grounds he or she believes an article to
            which this Act applies is manufactured, prepared, preserved, packaged or
            stored for sale or sold, and examine the article and take samples thereof, and
            examine anything that he or she reasonably believes is being, or capable of
            being, used for the manufacture, preparation, preservation, packaging or
            storing thereof;
      (b)   open and examine any receptacle or package which on reasonable grounds
            he or she believes to contain an article to which this Act applies;
      (c)   examine any books, documents or other records found in a place mentioned in
            paragraph (a) which on reasonable grounds he or she believes to contain or to
            be likely to contain information relevant to the enforcement of this Act with
            respect to an article to which this Act applies, and may make copies thereof or
            extracts therefrom; and
      (d)   seize and detain for so long as may be necessary for the purposes of an
            examination, investigation, trial or inquiry, an article by means of or in
            relation to which he or she reasonably believes a provision of this Act has
            been contravened.
   (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the expression “article to which this Act
applies” includes—
      (a)   any food, drug, cosmetic, device or animal feeds;
      (b)   anything used for the manufacture, preparation, preservation, packaging or
            storing thereof; and
      (c)   any labelling or advertising material associated with any article mentioned in
            paragraph (a) or (b).
   (3) An inspector on entering a place pursuant to subsection (1) shall produce to the
person in charge thereof his or her certificate of appointment.
   (4) The owner or person in charge of a place entered by an inspector pursuant to
subsection (1) and every person found therein shall give the inspector all reasonable
assistance in his or her power and furnish him or her with such information as he or she
may reasonably require.
   (5) A person who—
      (a)   fails to comply with subsection (4);
      (b)   obstructs an inspector in the carrying out of his or her duties under this Act;
      (c)   knowingly makes a false or misleading statement, whether verbally or in
            writing, to an inspector engaged in carrying out his or her duties under this
            Act; or
      (d)   without the authority of an inspector, removes, alters or interferes in any way
            with an article seized under this Act,
is guilty of an offence.
    (6) An article seized under this Act may at the option of an inspector be kept or stored
in the building or place where it was seized, or may at the direction of an inspector be
removed to any other proper place and, when an article is so removed, the inspector shall
issue a receipt therefor.
   (7) Where an inspector in exercise of his or her powers under this Act has taken a
sample of any food, drug, cosmetic, or device and it appears from an examination or
investigation by an analyst or the inspector that the sale of any such food, drug, cosmetic
or device would not be in contravention of this Act, the inspector shall, unless the sample
can be returned to the owner without detriment to the owner, pay compensation to the
owner if the owner requests compensation.
    (8) An inspector shall release every article seized by him or her in respect of which he
or she is satisfied that the provisions of this Act are complied with.

23. Provisions concerning imported goods to which Act applies
   (1) An inspector has the right to examine customs entries relating to the importation
of foods, drugs, cosmetics or devices, to take samples thereof, and to submit samples to
an analyst for analysis or examination.
   (2) The bulk of the food, drug, cosmetic or device from which a sample has been
taken pursuant to subsection (1) shall not be delivered to the importer until the analyst has
reported upon the samples taken, and the analyst must report within a reasonable time.
   (3) If it appears from the report of an inspector, or where a sample is taken if it
appears from the report of an inspector or an analyst, that the sale of the food, drug,
cosmetic, or device in question—
      (a)    would be in contravention of this Act if sold in Grenada, the food, drug,
             cosmetic or device shall not be admitted in Grenada for use as a food, drug,
             cosmetic or device;
      (b)    would not be in contravention of this Act if sold in Grenada, the food, drug,
             cosmetic or device shall, subject to the provisions of any other written law,
             be admitted in Grenada for use as a food, drug, cosmetic or device.

24. Forfeiture
   (1) Where an inspector has seized an article under this Act and the owner thereof, or
the person in whose possession the article was at the time of seizure, consents to the
destruction thereof the article shall thereupon be forfeited and destroyed or otherwise
disposed of as the Minister may direct.
   (2) Where a person has been convicted of an offence against this Act, the court may
order that all articles in respect of which the offence was committed shall be forfeited,
whereupon the articles shall be forfeited and destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the
Minister shall direct.

25. Analysis
   (1) An inspector may submit any article seized by him or her or any sample therefrom
or any sample taken by him or her to an analyst for analysis or examination.
   (2) Where an analyst has made an analysis or examination he or she shall issue to the
inspector a certificate or report setting forth the results of his or her analysis or examination.

26. Regulations
    (1) The Minister may make regulations for carrying the purposes and provisions of
this Act into effect, and in particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing, may make regulations—
      (a)   declaring a food or drug or class of food or drug to be adulterated if a named
            substance or class of substance is present therein or has been added thereto
            or extracted or omitted therefrom;
      (b)   respecting—
              (i) the labelling and packaging and the offering, exposing and advertising
                  for sale of any food, drug, cosmetic or device,
             (ii) the size, dimensions, fill and other specifications of the packaging of
                  any food, drug, cosmetic or device,
             (iii) the sale or the conditions of sale of any food, drug, cosmetic or device,
                   and
             (iv) the use of any substance as an ingredient in any food, drug, cosmetic
                  or device,
            for the purpose of ensuring that consumers or purchasers thereof are not
            deceived or misled as to its quantity, character, value, composition, merit or
            safety or subjected to risk of injury to their health;
      (c)   prescribing standards for the composition, strength, potency, purity, quality
            or other constituent property of any food, drug, cosmetic or device;
      (d)   governing the importation of food, drugs, cosmetics and devices in order to
            ensure compliance with this Act;
      (e)   controlling or prescribing methods of preparing, manufacturing, preserving,
            packing, storing, and testing any food, drug, cosmetic or device in the
            interest of, or for the prevention of injury to, the health of consumers or
            purchasers;
      (f)   requiring persons who sell food, drugs, cosmetics or devices to maintain
            such books and records as may be prescribed or as the Minister considers
            necessary for the proper enforcement and administration of this Act and to
            produce such books and records to any person authorised in that behalf by
            the Minister;
      (g)   respecting the duties of inspectors and analysts and the taking of samples
            and the seizure and detention of articles;
      (h)   exempting any food, drug, cosmetic or device from all or any of the
            provisions of this Act and prescribing the conditions of such exemption;
      (i)   prescribing forms for the purposes of this Act;
      (j)   providing measures for the analysis of food, drugs or cosmetics at the
            request of members of the public and a tariff of fees to be paid for such
            analysis;
      (k)   providing for the making of special schedules of drugs and for the listing or
            describing of drugs therein, and for the imposition of conditions of
            manufacture of such drugs relating to the premises wherein they are
            manufactured, the qualifications of technical staff engaged thereupon, and
            any other matters necessary to ensure that a drug so listed or described will
            not be unsafe for use;
      (l)   amending any of the Schedules in the interest of, or for the prevention of
            injury to, the health of consumers or purchasers;
      (m)   requiring proof of safety regarding the use of any substance, in whole or in
            part, in any food, drug or cosmetic;
      (n)    restricting the use of any class of additives for foods, drugs or cosmetics to a
             prescribed list of members of that class;
      (o)    prescribing anything authorised or required to be prescribed under this Act.
   (2) Regulations made under this section may prescribe in respect of a contravention
thereof a fine of five hundred dollars and imprisonment for three months on summary
conviction.

27. Food Advisory Committee and Drug Advisory Committee
   (1) The Minister may establish—
      (a)    a Food Advisory Committee to assist and advise him or her with respect to
             food standards, labelling and other matters connected to the manufacture and
             distribution of foods in the interests, and for the protection, of public health;
      (b)    a Drug Advisory Committee to assist and advise him or her with respect to
             drug standards, schedules of drugs, conditions of sale of drugs, standards for
             cosmetics and any other matters connected therewith in the interests, and for
             the protection, of public health.
    (2) The committees mentioned in subsection (1) shall be representative of lay and
professional interests and shall comprise persons who, by reason of their knowledge,
interest and experience, are considered by the Minister to be suitable for appointment.

28. Offences by bodies corporate
   If a body corporate commits an offence against this Act, the chairperson and each
director and officer thereof concerned in the management of the body corporate is guilty
of the offence unless he or she proves that the act or omission constituting the offence
took place without his or her knowledge or that he or she exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission thereof.

29. Place of prosecution and trial
   A prosecution for an offence against this Act may be instituted, heard and determined
in the place in which the offence was committed or where the subject matter of the
prosecution arose or in any place in which the accused is apprehended or happens to be.

30. Defence
    (1) Subject to subsection (2), in a prosecution for an offence in respect of an article
alleged to be in contravention of this Act, it shall be a defence if the accused proves to the
satisfaction of the court that—
      (a)    he or she purchased the article from another person in packaged form and
             sold it in the same package and in the same condition the article was in at the
             time he or she purchased it; and
      (b)    that he or she could not with reasonable diligence have ascertained that the
             sale of the article would be in contravention of this Act.
    (2) Subsection (1) does not apply unless the accused, on or before the day fixed for the
trial, has given to the prosecutor notice in writing that he or she intends to rely upon the
defence afforded by that subsection and has disclosed to the prosecutor the name and
address of the person from whom he or she purchased the article and the date of purchase.

31. Evidence by certificate of analyst, and costs of attendance
    (1) A certificate of an analyst stating that he or she has analysed or examined an
article or a sample submitted to him or her by an inspector and stating the result of his or
her examination is admissible in evidence in any proceeding in a magistrate’s court for an
offence against this Act and is evidence of the statement contained in the certificate, and
if an analyst is called as an expert, the party calling him or her shall, unless the magistrate
otherwise orders, pay all costs occasioned by his or her having been so called.
   (2) Proof that a package containing any article to which this Act applies bore a name
or address purporting to be the name and address of the person by whom it was
manufactured or packaged is evidence in a prosecution for an offence against this Act that
the article was manufactured or packaged, as the case may be, by the person whose name
or address appeared on the package.
    (3) In a prosecution for an offence against this Act it is sufficient proof of the offence
to establish that it was committed by an employee or agent of the accused whether or not
the employee or agent has been prosecuted for the offence; and for the purposes of this
subsection, any person selling shall be presumed to be employed to sell.
   (4) In proceedings for an offence against this Act a copy made pursuant to
section 22(1)(c) of any book, document or record or extract therefrom certified to be a
true copy by the inspector who made it is receivable as evidence of the contents thereof.
   (5) Where a person is prosecuted under this Act for having manufactured an
adulterated food or drug for sale, and it is established that—
      (a)    the food or drug has by regulation been declared to be adulterated if any
             prescribed substance has been added thereto; and
      (b)    such person had in his or her possession or on his or her premises any such
             prescribed substance,
the onus of proving that the food or drug was not adulterated by the addition of such
substance shall be on the accused.

32. Presumptions
   For the purposes of this Act—
      (a)    any article commonly used for human consumption shall, if sold, be presumed,
             until the contrary is proved, to have been sold for human consumption;
      (b)    any article commonly used for human consumption which is found on
             premises used for the preparation, storage, or sale of that article and any
             article commonly used in the manufacture of products for human
             consumption which is found on premises used for the preparation, storage, or
             sale of those products, shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be
             intended, as the case may be, for sale, or for manufacturing products for sale,
             for human consumption;
      (c)    any substance capable of being used in the composition or preparation of any
             article commonly used for human consumption which is found on premises
             on which that article is prepared shall, until the contrary is proved, be
             presumed to be intended for such use.

33. Requirements       concerning     manufacturer’s      declaration,    and    importation
certificate
   (1) The Minister may require a manufacturer to furnish him or her with a declaration
in prescribed form that an article has been manufactured in accordance with the
requirements of this Act. A person who fails to comply with such a requirement is guilty
of an offence.
  (2) Except as provided by regulations, no food, drug, cosmetic or device shall be
imported into Grenada unless it conforms entirely to the law of the country in which it
was manufactured or produced and is accompanied by an authentic document in
prescribed form certifying that the article does not contravene any known requirement of
the law of that country and that its sale therein would not constitute a contravention of the
law thereof.

34. Penalties
   Every person who commits an offence against this Act is liable—
      (a)    on summary conviction for a first offence to a fine of five hundred dollars
             and to imprisonment for three months, and for a second or any subsequent
             offence to a fine of one thousand dollars and to imprisonment for six
             months;
      (b)    on conviction upon indictment to a fine of five thousand dollars and to
             imprisonment for three years.

35. Time limit on prosecutions
   A prosecution for an offence punishable under section 34(a) may be instituted at any
time within twelve months from the date of the offence.

36. Prosecutions by inspectors
    Inspectors may institute prosecutions under this Act before courts of summary
jurisdiction and an inspector may conduct prosecutions instituted by him or her
notwithstanding that he or she is not a barrister or a solicitor.

37. Application of provisions of this Act to the Crown and the Government
   (1) The Minister may, by Order, provide for the application to the Crown and the
Government of such of the provisions of this Act as may be specified in the Order, with
such adaptations and modifications as may be so specified.
    (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), an Order under this section
may make special provision for the enforcement of any provisions applied by the Order,
and, where any such provision imposes liability on a person by reason that he or she is the
occupier or owner of premises, or the owner of a business, or the principal on whose
behalf any transaction is carried out, the Order may make provision for determining, in a
case where the premises are occupied or owned, or the business is owned, by the Crown
or the Government, or the transaction is carried out on behalf of the Crown or the Govern-
ment, the person who is to be treated as being so liable.

38. Act does not derogate from Chapter 263
   This Act does not derogate from the provisions of the Public Health Act.

                                      First Schedule

                                FOOD AND DRUGS ACT

             Diseases and Ailments Prohibited from Advertising their Cures
                                         [Section 4.]

   Aids
   Alcoholism
   Alopecia (Baldness)
   Anxiety state
Appendicitis
Arteriosclerosis
Arthritis
Bladder diseases
Blood diseases
Blood poisoning
Blood pressure (high or low)
Cancer
Depression
Diabetes
Diphtheria
Disorders of the prostate gland
Dropsy
Dysentery
Epilepsy
Eye diseases
Filariasis
Gall bladder disease
Gangrene
Gastro-enteritis
Glaucoma
Goitre
Haemorrhoids (piles)
Heart disease
Hernia (rupture)
Kidney disease
Leprosy
Liver disease
Lumbago
Menstrual disorders
Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy
Nervous diseases and disorders
Obesity
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
Pleurisy
Pneumonia
Poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis)
Psychiatric disorders
Sexual impotence
     Spinal meningitis
     Stroke
     Tetanus (lockjaw)
     Tuberculosis
     Tumours
     Typhoid fever
     Ulcer of the gastro-intestinal tract
     Venereal disease

                                                        Second Schedule

                                                 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT

                                                    Pharmaceutical Labels
                                                             [Section 12.]
                                             Name                                                  Abbreviation
Pharmacopoea Internationalis ..........................................................            Ph.I.
The British Pharmacopoeia ..............................................................           B.P.
The Pharmacopoeia of the United States of America ......................                           U.S.P.
The British Pharmaceutical Codex ...................................................               B.P.C. (latest edition and
                                                                                                   addenda)
The Canadian Formulary ..................................................................          C.F.
The National Formulary ...................................................................         N.F.
The British National Formulary .......................................................             B.N.F.
Codex Français .................................................................................   Codex




                                                         Third Schedule

                                                 FOOD AND DRUGS ACT

                                 Drugs Prohibited from Distribution as Samples
                                                             [Section 14.]

                                                                PART I
Amitriptyline and its salts
Appetite suppressment agents (anoretics) except those specifically exempted by the regulations,
      amphitamine, its derivatives and their salts
Barbituric acid, any derivative thereof and any salt thereof
Bemegride
Benzediazepine derivatives — the following and their salts—
          Diazepam
          Nitrazepam
          Oxazepam
Bromal and the following derivatives—
          Bromal hydrate
       Brometone
       Bromoform
Carbromal and the following derivatives—
       Acetylcarbromal
       Allylisopropylacetylurea
       Bromisoval
       Diethylbromacetamide
Carisoprodol
Chloral and the following derivatives—
       Butyl chloral hydrate
       Alpha-chloralose
       Chloral hydrate (except in preparations for external use containing not more than one per cent)
Cinchophen and its salts
Clofibrate
Clominphene and its salts
Cyclizine
Cycolphosphamide
2,4—Dinitrophenol and its salts
Diphonylmethane derivatives, the following and their salts—
       Azacylonol
       Benactyzine
       Captodiamine
       Hydroxyzine
       Piperliate
Diuretics, excluding caffeine and its salts
Emylcamate
Ergot alkaloids and their salts and derivatives
Ethionamide and its salts
5-Flurouracil and its salts
Haloperidol
Hydralazine and its salts
Indomethacin
Isoniazid
Liothyronine
Mebanazine and its salts
Mephenoxalone and its salts
Meprobamate
6-Mercaptopurine
Mustine (or Meclorethamine) and its salts
Neocinchophen and its salts
Oral hypoglycaemic drugs for the control of diabetics
Pargyline and its salts
Phenothiazine derivatives — the following and their salts—
       Acepromazine
       Fluphenazine
       Levomepromazine (or Mepromazine or Methotrimeprazine)
       Perphenazine
       Pecazine (or Mepazine)
       Promazine
       Thiethylperazine
       Thioproperazine
       Thiopropasits
       Thioidazine
       Trifuloperazine
       Triflupromazine
       Trimeprazine
       Phenylbutazene and its salts
       Prethipendyl hydrochloride
       Pyrazinamide
           Chloralformamide
           Chloralimide
       Chlordiazepoxide and its salts
       Chlorphentermine and its salts
       Disulfiram
       Glutethimide
       Imipramine and its salts
       Iproniazid and its salts
       Isocarboxizid and its salts
       Lysergide
Mefenamic acid
Mephentermine and its salts
Mascaline and its salts
Metaldehyde
Methamphetamine, its derivatives and salts
Methadqualone and its salts
Methysergide
Nialamide and its salts
Nortriptyline and its salts
Paraldehyde
Pemoline and its salts
Pentazocine
Phenelzine and its salts
Pheniprazine and its salts
Phentermine and its salts
Prodilidine and its salts
Propoxyphene (Dextropropoxyphene)
Pipamazine and its salts
Protriptyline and its salts
Sulphonal and alkyl sulphonals
Sulphonamides and their salts and derivatives
Trimipramine and its salts

                                             PART II
Adrenocoriteal hormones and their salts and derivatives
Allopurinol
Aminopterin and its salts
4—Aminopteroylaspartic acid and its salts
4—Aminopteroy—N—methylglutamic acid and its salts
Aminopyrine and its derivatives and their salts
Antihypertensive drugs
Anticoagulants
Anticonvulsants
Bretylium Tosylate
Busulfan
Captodiame
Chlorambucil and its salts and derivatives
Chlorcyclizine (except in preparations for external use only)
Rauwolfia, and the following Rauwolfia alkaloids and their salts and derivatives—
       Deserpidine
       Raubasine
       Rescinnamine
       Reserpine
Sex hormones, natural and synthetic, or their derivatives (except for cosmetic preparation for
   external use)
Sulfinpyrazone and its salts
Tetrabenazine
Thiotepa
Thiouracil and its derivatives
Thyroid
Thyroxin and its salts
Tranylcypromine
Tretamine
1 – Triiodothyronine
Trimethadione
Vinblastine and its salts




                                     CHAPTER 110
                                  FOOD AND DRUGS ACT


                                 SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION




                                   No Subsidiary Legislation
