2015                           Food Safety                         Act 19   455

                         ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
                                        Part I
                                   PRELIMINARY

1.    Short title and commencement
2.    Interpretation
3.    Extended meaning of sale
4.    Application
5.    Presumption that food is intended for human consumption
6.    Food safety risk

                                       Part II
                                ADMINISTRATION

7.    Establishment of Food Safety Authority
8.    Functions of the Authority
9.    Establishment of the National Food Safety Advisory Body

                                       Part III
                    LICENCE, PERMIT AND REGISTRATION

10.   Licence to operate food business
11.   Permit to engage in street food vending
12.   Food handler’s certificate
13.   Renewal of licence, permit or certificate
14.   Suspension or revocation of licence, permit or certificate
15.   Appeal
16.   Registration of premises
17.   Inspection of food premises
18.   Authority to keep register

                                       Part IV
       POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE AUTHORITY AND INSPECTORS

20. Appointment of inspectors
21. Power to inspect
22. Duties of inspectors
456 Act 19                              Food Safety                            2015

23    Power of entry
24.   Power to suspend licence
25.   Food Analysts
26.   Analysis of food
27.   Responsibilities of medical practitioners
28.   Accredited inspection and analysis bodies

                                       Part V
                                 ENFORCEMENT

29.   Other duties and powers of the Authority
30.   Other powers of inspectors
31.   Emergency measures
32.   Preventative measures
33.   Disclosure of information
34.   Notices

                                      Part VI
                   DUTIES OF FOOD BUSINESS OPERATORS

35.   General duties of food business operators and street food vendors
36.   Duties of food business operators and street food vendors during an inspection
37.   Food business operator or street food vendor suspects certain medical conditions
38.   Traceability of food
39.   Exemption
40.   Terms of exemption
41.   Revocation of exemption
42.   Duration of exemption
43.   Surrender of exemption
44.   Minister to maintain register of exemption
45.   Recalling of hazardous food

                                      Part VII
                        IMPORT AND EXPORT OF FOOD

46. Requirements for importation and exportation
47. Review of notice to import or export
2015                          Food Safety                Act 19   457

48.   Obtaining sample of food
49.   Compliance, non-compliance
50.   Offence of import or export
51.   Food to be inspected
52.   Time for inspection
53.   Imported food may be held pending inspection
54.   Re-labeling and re-conditioning

                                     Part VIII
                          OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

55.   Offences generally
56.   Selling food that is unfit for human consumption
57.   Improperly influencing an inspector
58.   Impersonating an inspector
59.   Failure to grant access, provide samples
60.   Offences by inspectors
61.   Continuing offences
62.   Offences by a body corporate
63.   Obstruction and interference
64.   General defences

                                     Part IX
                        MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

65. Food safety training and accreditation
66. Regulations
67. Transitional provisions


      SCHEDULE – National Food Safety Advisory Body
458 Act 19   Food Safety   2015
2015                     Food Safety                           Act 19 459




                       GRENADA

                  ACT NO. 19 OF 2015
     I assent,                      L.S.
     					
     			           CÉCILE E. F. LA GRENADE
  24th June, 2015.            Governor-General.

AN ACT to provide for the establishment of a Food Safety
   Authority to regulate food safety and quality of food
   produced, sold, stored, distributed, imported into
   and exported from Grenada and to provide for the
   registration and licensing of food business.

                                             [By Notice].


   BE IT ENACTED by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majes-
ty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and the
House of Representatives of Grenada, and by the Authority
of the same as follows–
                           Part I
                      PRELIMINARY

  1. This Act may be cited as the
                                                               Short title and
                FOOD SAFETY ACT, 2015                          commencement.
460 Act 19                               Food Safety                      2015

                  and shall come into operation on such date to be appointed
                  by the Minister by Notice in the Gazette.
Interpretation.     2.    In this Act–
                         “Advisory Body” means the National Food Safety
                              Advisory Body established under section 9;
                         “analysis report” means a report provided by a food
                               analyst upon conducting analysis of food;
                         “Authority” means the Food Safety Authority estab-
                              lished under section 7;
                         “certificate” means a food handler’s certificate issued
                                pursuant to section 12;
                         “equipment” includes plants, utensils, machinery,
                               whether movable or immovable, whether man-
                               ual or automated;
                         “exporter” means a person who, whether as owner,
                              consignor, agent or broker, is in possession of
                              or entitled to the custody or control of food ex-
                              ported from Grenada;
                         “food” means any substance whether processed, semi-
                               processed or raw, which is intended for human
                               consumption or otherwise taken into the body
                               to sustain life and to provide energy, in liquid
                               or solid form and includes any other substances
                               used as ingredients in the preparation of food
                               for any purpose but does not include cosmetics,
                               tobacco or substances used only as drugs;
2015                      Food Safety                            Act 19 461

       “food analyst” means a person certified as a food ana-
             lyst for the purposes of this Act by the Minister
             pursuant to section 25;
       “food-borne disease” means any illness resulting from
             the consumption of contaminated food;
       “food business” means any activity involving or relat-
             ing to the production of food intended for hu-
             man consumption whether or not the activity is
             carried on for profit, but excludes street food
             vending;
       “food business operator” means a person who owns or
             is in charge of a food business;
       “food handler” means a person who–
          (a) directly handles, or assists in the handling
              of, packaged or unpackaged food, food
              equipment or food utensils, in the preparation,
              wrapping, packing, storage, transportation,
              exposure for sale, sale or delivery of food; or
          (b) in the performance of his or her duties,
              comes into direct contact with food-contact
              surfaces;
       “food premises” means any premises at which a food
             business is conducted;
       “governmental entity” includes government minis-
            tries or departments;
       “HACCP” means Hazard Analysis and Critical Con-
           trol Point Principles used as a systematic pre-
           ventive approach to food safety;
462 Act 19                  Food Safety                        2015

             “importer” means a person who, whether as owner,
                  consignee, agent or broker, is in possession of
                  or entitled to the custody or control of food im-
                  ported into Grenada;
             “inspection certificate” means a certificate issued by
                   the Authority pursuant to section 24;
             “inspector” means a food safety inspector appointed
                   under section 20;
             “licence” means a licence to operate a food business
                   issued pursuant to section 10;
             “Minister” means the minister having responsibility
                  for Health;
             “permit” means a permit to engage in street food
                  vending issued pursuant to section 11;
             “premises” means any place, vehicle, stall, land, build-
                  ings, parts of buildings and structures, tents,
                  aircraft, watercraft, any structures, whether
                  temporary or permanent, whether movable or
                  immovable, and includes a private dwelling;
             “production” means manufacturing, preparation,
                  treatment, packing, packaging, transportation,
                  importation, exportation, handling, serving,
                  storage, sale or distribution, and “produce”
                  shall be construed accordingly;
             “registration certificate” means a registration certifi-
                   cate issued by the Authority upon registration
                   of food premises pursuant to section 16;
2015                      Food Safety                             Act 19 463

       “street food” means ready-to-eat food produced in the
              street or any other public place;
       “street food premises” means any premises at which
              street food is produced;
       “street food vending” means producing street food in
              a temporary structure, vehicle, watercraft, cart,
              tray or other similar device;
       “street food vendor” means a person who engages in
              street food vending; and
       “WTO” means World Trade Organization.
  3.—(1) Reference in this Act to the sale of food shall be Extended
                                                            meaning of sale.
construed to include any activity where food is—
        (a) offered as a prize or reward or given away in
            connection with any entertainment to which
            the public is admitted, whether on payment of
            money or not, as if the food were, or had been,
            exposed for sale by each person concerned in
            the organization of the entertainment;
        (b) offered for the purpose of advertisement or in
            furtherance of any trade or business is offered
            as a prize or reward or given away, as if the
            food were, or had been exposed for sale by
            the person offering or giving away the food;
            and
        (c) exposed or deposited in any premises for the
            purpose of being so offered or given away as
            mentioned in paragraph (a) and (b) as if the
464 Act 19                         Food Safety                        2015

                           food were or had been exposed for sale by the
                           occupier of the premises.
                       (2) For the purposes of this section “entertainment”
               includes any social gathering, amusement, exhibition, game,
               sport or trial of skill.
Application.     4.—(1) This Act shall apply to–
                      (a) the production, processing, manufacturing or
                          other preparation of food;
                      (b) the handling or sale of food;
                      (c) the import or export of food;
                      (d) any other activity related to the activities men-
                          tioned in paragraphs (a) to (c).
                        (2) Notwithstanding the generality of sub-section
               (1), this Act shall not apply to–
                      (a) food produced, imported or exported for private
                          consumption;
                      (b) food that is brought into Grenada in a water-
                          craft or aircraft stored and used for crew or pas-
                          sengers on board the watercraft or aircraft;
                      (c) food that is transported through Grenada but not
                          intended for sale or consumption in Grenada;
                      (d) the raising, slaughter, ante mortem inspection
                          or postmortem inspection of animals;
                      (e) the import or export of animals, meat and meat
                          products, live or frozen fish and dairy products;
2015                       Food Safety                           Act 19 465

        (f)   activities related to the raising, slaughter or
              other preparation of animals regulated under
              the Animals (Diseases and Importation) Act
              Cap. 15;
        (g) the growing of plants or the import or export of
            fresh produce; and
        (h) the importing or exporting of veterinary bio-
            logical products.
  5.­­­­—(1) For the purposes of this Act, it is presumed that Presumption
                                                               that food
food is intended for human consumption if–                     is intended
                                                                 for human
        (a) the food was sold, offered for sale or kept for consumption.
            sale on the food premises or street food prem-
            ises; or
        (b) any ingredient of or article or substance relating
            to the food is found on food premises, or street
            food premises, used for production of the food.
        (2) Unless the contrary is proved, any article or sub-
stance found on food premises or street food premises which
is capable of use in the production of any food produced on
the food premises or street food premises shall be presumed
to be intended for such use.
  6. For the purposes of this Act, a food safety risk exists Food safety risk.
where–
        (a) a practice, process or treatment used in the op-
            eration of a food business or street food vend-
            ing;
        (b) the condition of food premises or equipment
            used on food premises or street food premises;
466 Act 19                               Food Safety                      2015

                          (c) the outbreak of a food-borne disease,
                   is likely to adversely affect public health.

                                               Part II
                                         ADMINISTRATION
Establishment        7.­—(1) There is hereby established a body to be called the
of Food Safety
Authority.         Food Safety Authority which shall be responsible for imple-
                   menting and enforcing the provisions of this Act.
                          (2) The Authority shall consist of a Director and four
                   other members, all of which shall be appointed by the Min-
                   ister.
                           (3) The Authority shall appoint such other staff as
                   shall be necessary for the efficient operation of the Author-
                   ity.
Functions of the     8.—(1) The Authority shall–
Authority.
                          (a) in collaboration with other governmental
                              entities, regional and international bodies–
                                  (i)    establish a coordinated and integrated
                                         system to protect, enhance and safe-
                                         guard food safety;
                                  (ii)   cooperate in and facilitate the im-
                                         plementation of aspects of the WTO
                                         Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosani-
                                         tary Measures Agreement relating to
                                         food safety;
                          (b) establish a coordinated and integrated risk-
                              based food safety and quality system to protect,
                              enhance and ensure food safety;
2015                     Food Safety                            Act 19 467

       (c) formulate policies and strategies related to
           food safety and quality in consultation with
           the Advisory Body and to monitor their
           implementation;
       (d) strengthen policy, planning and service
           capacity of the public sector, private sector and
           community organizations in food safety;
       (e) register food premises and to ensure that every
           food business implements quality control
           systems;
       (f)   approve risk-based sanitary measures and to
             take action in case of an emergency related to a
             food safety risk;
       (g) issue licences, permits and certificates, pursuant
           to this Act;
       (h) strengthen the national capacity for surveillance
           and response programmes to prevent, manage,
           reduce and eliminate food-borne diseases;
       (i)   develop training and certification programmes
             for food handlers;
       (j)   increase awareness on food-borne diseases and
             effective intervention strategies;
       (k) provide advice, information and assistance to
           any public authority in relation to food control,
           food safety and food trade;
       (l)   develop training programmes for inspectors in
             modern food safety systems;
468 Act 19                             Food Safety                        2015

                         (m) establish databases for imported and domestic
                             foods including inspections; and
                         (n) do all reasonable acts to promote compliance
                             with this Act and to carry out any other function
                             under this section.
                          (2) The Authority, in discharging the technical as-
                  pects of its functions under this Act, may negotiate and enter
                  into arrangements with any other entity.
Establishment        9.—(1) There is hereby established a body to be called the
of the National
Food Safety
                  National Food Safety Advisory Body which shall function
Advisory Body.    as an advisory body to the Authority on matters relating to
                  food safety.
                        (2) The Schedule applies to the procedures of the
                  Advisory Body.
                                            Part III
                         LICENCE, PERMIT AND REGISTRATION
Licence to           10.—(1) No person shall operate a food business unless
operate food
business.         that person has a valid licence issued by the Authority which
                  shall be affixed in a conspicuous place in the food premises
                  or is readily available for inspection under this Act.
                          (2) A person who operates, or intends to operate, a
                  food business shall make an application for a licence to the
                  Authority in the prescribed form and accompanied by the
                  prescribed fees.
                          (3) Upon application and payment of the prescribed
                  fees, the Authority may, subject to any reasonable condition,
                  issue a licence to a food business operator in the prescribed
                  form.
2015                      Food Safety                            Act 19 469

        (4) A licence issued under this section shall be valid
for three years.
        (5) A person who contravenes subsection (1) com-
mits an offence and is liable to arrest and on summary con-
viction to a fine of five thousand dollars.
   11.—(1) No person shall engage in street food vending, Permit to
whether permanently or temporarily, unless the person has a engage in street
                                                            food vending.
valid permit issued by the Authority which shall be kept in
the possession of that person when engaging in street food
vending.
        (2) A person who engages, or intends to engage, in
street food vending shall make an application for a permit
to the Authority in the prescribed form and accompanied by
the prescribed fees.
         (3) Upon application and payment of the prescribed
fees, the Authority may, subject to any reasonable condi-
tion, issue a permit to a person to be engaged in street food
vending.
        (4) A permit issued under this section shall be valid
for one year.
        (5) The Minister shall make regulations prescribing
the locations in which street food vending may be conducted.
        (6) A person who contravenes subsection (1) com-
mits an offence and is liable to arrest and on summary con-
viction to a fine of five thousand dollars.
  12.—(1) No person shall act as a food handler, whether Food handler’s
                                                          certificate.
permanently or temporarily, unless the person has a valid
food handler’s certificate issued by the Authority.
470 Act 19                             Food Safety                       2015

                          (2) A person who is or intends to be a food handler,
                  whether permanently or temporarily, shall make an applica-
                  tion for a food handler’s certificate to the Authority in the
                  prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed fees.
                          (3) Upon application and payment of the prescribed
                  fees, the Authority may, subject to any reasonable condition,
                  issue a food handler’s certificate in the prescribed form.
                          (4) A certificate issued under this section shall be
                  valid for one year.
                          (5) A person who contravenes subsection (1)
                  commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                  a fine of five thousand dollars.
                          (6) A food business operator or a street food
                  vendor who employs a person as a food handler, whether
                  permanently or temporarily, who does not have a valid food
                  handler’s certificate issued by the Authority commits an
                  offence and is liable to arrest and on summary conviction to
                  a fine of five thousand dollars.
                         (7) Without prejudice to section 12, the Authority
                  may suspend or revoke a food handler’s certificate if the
                  food handler is found to have a communicable disease or for
                  any other just cause.
Renewal of          13.—(1) An application for renewal of a licence shall–
licence, permit
or certificate.
                         (a) be made in the prescribed form at least three
                             months before the expiration of the licence; and
                         (b) be accompanied by the prescribed fee.
                           (2) An application for renewal of a permit or
                  certificate shall–
2015                        Food Safety                           Act 19 471

             (a) be made in the prescribed form at least one
                 month before the expiration of the permit
                 or certificate; and
             (b) be accompanied by the prescribed fee.
   14.—(1) Where a food business operator, street food ven- Suspension or
dor or food handler, contravenes any provision under this revocation        of
                                                                licence, permit
Act, any regulation made under this Act or any condition or certificate.
attached to a licence, permit or certificate issued to the food
business operator, street food vendor or food handler, as the
case may be, the Authority may by notice suspend or revoke
the licence, permit or certificate.
        (2) The Authority may by notice suspend or revoke a
licence, permit or certificate, where–
             (a) the food business operator, street food
                 vendor or food handler has contravened
                 any provision under this Act or any
                 regulations made under this Act;
             (b) the food business operator, street food
                 vendor or food handler has contravened
                 any condition attached to the licence,
                 permit or certificate; or
             (c) the food business operator, street food
                 vendor or food handler provided false
                 information in the application under
                 section 10, 11 or 12.
        (3) Where the Authority seeks to suspend or revoke
a licence, permit or certificate, the Authority shall–
             (a) give, in the prescribed form, notice of at
                 least fourteen days before the suspension
472 Act 19                        Food Safety                        2015

                               or revocation of the licence, permit or
                               certificate; and
                          (b) inform the food business operator, street
                              food vendor or food handler of the right of
                              appeal under section 15.
                     (4) A food business operator, street food vendor
             or food handler may make a request in writing to cancel
             a licence, permit or certificate issued to the food business
             operator, street food vendor or food handler and the licence,
             permit or certificate shall be cancelled with effect from
             seven days after the request is made.
Appeal.        15.—(1) A food business operator, street food vendor or
             food handler, as the case may be, may appeal to the Minister
             against a decision of the Authority–
                    (a) to refuse to issue a licence under section 10;
                    (b) to suspend or revoke a licence under section 14;
                    (c) to refuse to issue a permit under section 11;
                    (d) to suspend or revoke a permit under section 14;
                    (e) to refuse to issue a certificate under section 12;
                        or
                    (f)   to suspend or revoke a certificate under section
                          14.
                     (2) An appeal shall be made in writing to the Minister
             within seven days of receiving a notice of refusal, suspension
             or revocation under section 14.
2015                      Food Safety                            Act 19 473

       (3) Upon receiving an appeal, the Minister may
determine the appeal or may establish a tribunal to determine
the appeal which shall consist of–
            (a) the Minister as the chairperson; and
            (b) two other members appointed by the
                Minister, at least one of whom shall have
                wide knowledge and experience in food
                safety.
        (4) The Minister, or a tribunal established pursuant
to subsection (3), may carry out any inspection, or undertake
any investigation or engage in any other course of action
that the Minister or the tribunal deems necessary to assist in
the determination of the appeal.
        (5) Upon hearing an appeal, the Minister or the
tribunal, as the case may be, may–
            (a) dismiss the appeal;
            (b) direct the Authority to issue a licence,
                permit or certificate;
            (c) quash the suspension or revocation of the
                licence, permit or certificate;
            (d) substitute suspension of the licence, permit
                or certificate for revocation of the licence,
                permit or certificate; or
            (e) substitute the period for suspension of the
                licence, permit or certificate for a different
                period.
474 Act 19                            Food Safety                      2015

                         (6) No later than seven days after the decision is
                  made by the Minister or a tribunal established pursuant
                  to subsection (3), the Minister shall notify the Authority
                  and the food business operator, street food vendor or food
                  handler, as the case may be, of the decision.
                         (7) A person who is aggrieved by a decision of the
                  Minister may at any time within twenty-eight days appeal to
                  the High Court.
Registration of     16.­—(1) No person shall use premises to operate a food
food premises.
                  business unless the food premises is registered with the
                  Authority in the prescribed manner.
                         (2) Every food business operator shall ensure that
                  the food premises is registered with the Authority.
                          (3) On receipt of an application, the Authority may
                  issue a registration certificate in the prescribed form.
                         (4) Any person who contravenes subsection (1)
                  commits an offence and is liable to arrest and summary
                  conviction to a fine of five thousand dollars.
Inspection of       17.­—(1) All food premises and street food premises shall
premises.
                  be subject to routine inspections by the Authority.
                    (2) An inspection may be with respect to–
                              (a) the observance of sanitary conditions and
                                  practices;
                              (b) the maintenance of all equipment;
                              (c) the supervision, control, preparation and
                                  packing of food;
2015                        Food Safety                           Act 19 475

             (d) the prevention of contamination of food
                 through contact with any substance that
                 may have a deleterious effect on the
                 quality thereof;
             (e) the adequacy, design, construction and
                 manufacture of equipment, and the
                 materials used in the construction or
                 manufacture of the equipment;
             (f)   the designation of the persons who are
                   responsible for maintaining the sanitary
                   requirement therein; or
             (g) any other matter related to the carrying out
                 of its functions under this Act.
   18.­—(1) The Authority shall maintain a current register Authority to
of every licence, permit, and certificate issued under this Act keep register.
and all food premises registered under this Act.
        (2) Where there is any change in any information
supplied in an application under this Act, the applicant shall
notify the Authority within seven days of the change.
        (3) Any person who contravenes subsection (2)
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
a fine of five thousand dollars.
   19.—(1) The Authority shall develop and maintain in Report on
                                                            activities.
electronic format and in hard copy generated from the elec-
tronic format, data on–
        (a) the types and quantities of food imported or
            exported;
        (b) the shipment of food;
476 Act 19                            Food Safety                        2015

                        (c) food found by the importing country not to be
                            in compliance with the statutory requirements
                            of the importing country;
                        (d) a summary of every incident regarding any food
                            determined to be unsafe for export or import
                            and every action taken in response; and
                        (e) any other relevant matter.
                         (2) The report prepared under sub-section (1) shall
                 be available for inspection by the public.
                         (3) The Authority may require any person who
                 imports or exports food to submit a report relating to its
                 activities containing information mentioned in sub-section
                 1(a)-(e).
                         (4) A person who fails to comply with the
                 requirements of subsection (3) commits an offence and is
                 liable on summary conviction to a fine of five thousand
                 dollars or to imprisonment for a term of six months.
                                           Part IV
                  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE AUTHORITY AND
                               INSPECTORS
Appointment of      20.—(1) The Minister may in his sole discretion, by regu-
inspectors.
                 lations, declare and appoint any public officer or category of
                 public officers to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act.
                        (2) The Authority shall issue an identification badge
                 or any other form of identification to all inspectors that are
                 so appointed.
2015                      Food Safety                           Act 19 477

   21.—(1) Where the Authority, based on relevant informa- Power to
                                                           inspect.
tion, reasonably believes that–
       (a) a food business operator or street food vendor
           may be contravening any provision of this Act,
           any regulation made under this Act or any
           condition attached to the licence or permit; or
       (b) a food safety risk exists on food premises or
           street food premises,
the Authority may direct an inspector to conduct an
inspection of the food premises or street food premises.
        (2) The Authority may cause routine inspections of
food premises and street food premises for the purpose of
monitoring compliance with any provision of this Act, any
regulation made under this Act or any condition attached to
a licence or permit.
   22.—(1) Upon the direction of the Authority, or reasona- Duties of
ble grounds therefor, an inspector may inspect food premises inspectors.
or street food premises to evaluate whether a food business
operator or street food vendor is contravening any provision
of this Act, any regulation made under this Act or any condi-
tion attached to the licence or permit.
        (2) Where an inspector has reasonable grounds to
believe that a food business operator or street food vendor
is contravening, or has contravened, any provision of this
Act, any regulation made under this Act or any condition
attached to the licence or permit, the inspector may serve on
the food business operator or street food vendor, a notice in
the prescribed form setting out–
478 Act 19                         Food Safety                         2015

                          (a) the conduct constituting contravention
                              of this Act, any regulation made under
                              this Act or any condition attached to the
                              licence or permit;
                          (b) the measures that the food business opera-
                              tor or street food vendor shall implement
                              to remedy the contravention;
                          (c) the time period within which the measures
                              must be implemented.
                     (3) Without limiting the generality of subsection (2),
             the notice may direct a person to–
                          (a) clean and disinfect premises or equip-
                              ment;
                          (b) modify equipment;
                          (c) alter production or processing practices
                              for any food;
                          (d) discontinue the use of pesticides or other
                              chemicals specified in the notice during
                              the time period specified in the notice;
                          (e) modify or stop the operations of the food
                              business until the person has taken the
                              remedial action specified in the notice.
                     (4) A person who is served with a notice under
             subsection (2) shall comply with the notice within the period
             of time specified in such notice.
                     (5) An inspector shall forthwith file with the Authority
             a true copy of the notice served on the food business operator
             or street food vendor pursuant to subsection (2).
2015                       Food Safety                          Act 19 479

  23.—(1) An inspector who is properly identified may, at Power of entry.
any reasonable time, enter and inspect any food premises.
        (2) An inspector may, whether or not in the presence
of a member of the police force, pass through or over
any land, where it is necessary or impractical to use any
other means to gain access to food premises subject to an
inspection pursuant to sections 21 and 22.
   24.—(1) Where the Authority determines that continued Power to
operation of a food business or engagement in street food suspend     licence
                                                              or permit.
vending creates a food safety risk, the Authority may, by no-
tice in the prescribed form, immediately suspend the licence
or permit of a food business operator or a street food vendor
as the case may be for a period not exceeding seven days.
        (2) Where the Authority issues a notice under this
section, the Authority shall serve on the food business
operator or street food vendor, as the case may be, a copy of
the notice within twenty-four hours.
        (3) Within seven days of service of a notice, the
Authority shall re-inspect the food premises or street food
premises to determine whether the food premises or street
food premises may be certified for continuation of operation
of a food business or engagement in street food vending.
        (4) Where a notice is served, no food business
operator or street food vendor shall operate a food business
or engage in street food vending, as the case may be, until
an inspector re-inspects the food premises or street food
premises and the Authority issues an inspection certificate
in the prescribed form.
        (5) Where, after re-inspection of food premises or
street food premises, the Authority determines that a food
480 Act 19                               Food Safety                         2015

                    safety risk continues to exist on the food premises or street
                    food premises, the Authority may, by notice in the prescribed
                    form, suspend the licence to operate a food business or
                    permit to engage in street food vending, as the case may be,
                    for a period not exceeding thirty days.
                           (6) After the expiration of the period specified in
                    subsection (5), if a food business operator or street food
                    vendor fails to satisfy the Authority that the food safety risk
                    has been eliminated, the Authority may revoke the licence
                    or permit.
                            (7) A food business operator or street food vendor
                    who conducts a food business or engages in street food
                    vending on premises on which there is a food safety risk
                    commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                    a fine of ten thousand dollars or to a term of imprisonment
                    for two years.
Food analysts.         25. The Minister may, in consultation with the Advisory
                    Body, certify a person as a food analyst for the purposes of
                    this Act on the basis of requisite qualifications as may be
                    prescribed by the Minister.
Analysis of food.      26.­—(1) The Authority may direct a food analyst to ana-
                    lyse any food in the course of an inspection or investigation
                    under this Act.
                           (2) A food analyst who analyses any food pursuant
                    to subsection (1) shall issue an analysis report duly signed
                    and setting out the results of the analysis in the prescribed
                    form.
                           (3) In any proceedings under this Act, an analysis
                    report generated by a food analyst shall be sufficient
2015                      Food Safety                             Act 19 481

evidence of the facts stated in the analysis report, unless the
contrary is proved.
        (4) No analysis report shall be admitted into evidence
unless the party relying on it gives notice of his or her
intention to the other party.
        (5) The Minister may, by regulations, provide the
procedure for retrieving and analysing samples in the course
of an inspection or investigation under this Act.
  27. Every medical practitioner and food analyst shall re- Responsibilities
port to the Authority every incidence of any disease that of   medical
                                                            practitioners.
may be shown to be related to food.
   28. The Authority may publish a list of bodies that are Accredited
accredited to conduct inspections and analyzes in relation inspection and
                                                           analysis bodies.
to food.
                           Part V
                     ENFORCEMENT
   29.—(1) The Authority may request that a food business Other duties and
                                                            powers of the
operator or street food vendor provide any information, Authority.
books, records or other documents for the purpose of moni-
toring compliance with any provision of this Act, any regu-
lation made under this Act or any condition attached to the
licence or permit.
       (2) Where the Authority reasonably believes that–
             (a) a food business operator or street food
                 vendor may be contravening any provision
                 of this Act, any regulation made under
                 this Act or any condition attached to the
                 licence or permit; or
482 Act 19                             Food Safety                        2015

                              (b) a food safety risk exists on food premises
                                  or street food premises,
                  the Authority may cause to be seized, sealed or detained,
                  at the expense of the food business operator or street food
                  vendor, any food, ingredient or equipment likely to be
                  involved in or contributing towards the food safety risk.
                         (3) Where the Authority receives a copy of a notice
                  issued pursuant to section 22, the Authority shall notify
                  every relevant–
                              (a) statutory body;
                              (b) department of the Ministry; and
                              (c) private entity,
                  necessary to ensure that reasonable measures to protect
                  consumers are carried out.
                          (4) Where the Authority determines that a food
                  safety risk exists, it shall–
                              (a) cause to be destroyed every food or
                                  ingredient;
                              (b) cause to be sterilized or destroyed all
                                  equipment on the food premises or street
                                  food premises; and
                              (c) cause to be fumigated the food premises or
                                  street food premises, or part thereof,
                  likely to be contaminated as a result of the food safety risk,
                  at the expense of the food business operator or street food
                  vendor, as the case may be.
Other powers of
inspectors.
                    30.—(1) In the course of an inspection an inspector may–
2015                     Food Safety                            Act 19 483

       (a) request the presentation of any food, ingredient
           or equipment that creates or may create a food
           safety risk, or may be relevant to the existence
           of a food safety risk;

       (b) in the prescribed manner, analyse or retrieve
           samples of or from any food, ingredient or
           equipment that creates or may create a food
           safety risk, or may be relevant to the existence
           of a food safety risk;

       (c) in order to complete an inspection, stop, search
           and delay any vehicle transporting of any food,
           ingredient or equipment that creates or may
           create a food safety risk, or may be relevant to
           the existence of a food safety risk;

       (d) seize, seal and detain on reasonable grounds
           any food, ingredient or equipment that creates
           or may create a food safety risk, or may be
           relevant to the existence of a food safety risk;

       (e) seal off access to the food premises or street
           food premises or part thereof;

       (f)   request, examine and generate copies of any
             information, records and other matters that are
             relevant to the source, use or condition of any
             food, ingredient or equipment that creates or
             may create a food safety risk or may be relevant
             to the existence of a food safety risk;

       (g) request the delivery for inspection of anything
           described in paragraph (f);
484 Act 19                        Food Safety                       2015

                    (h) take photographs of any food, ingredient,
                        equipment or food premises or street food
                        premises;
                    (i)   read any measuring instruments installed on the
                          premises or use any other means necessary to
                          record data generated on that food premises or
                          street food premises;
                     (j) observe any practice or process conducted in the
                         operation of the food business or engagement
                         of street food vending;
                    (k) use any data storage, processing or retrieval
                        device or system in order to generate a record in
                        readable form of the information, records and
                        other matters described in paragraph (f);
                    (l)   request any assistance from the food business
                          operator or street food vendor, or an agent
                          thereof, as is necessary to enable an inspector
                          to exercise any power conferred on him or her
                          under this Act; and
                    (m) exercise any other power necessary to assess
                        compliance of the food business operator or
                        street food vendor with the provisions of this
                        Act, the regulations made pursuant to this Act
                        or the conditions attached to the licence or
                        permit.
                     (2) An inspector shall carry out any reviewing
             or copying of things with reasonable dispatch, and shall
             forthwith after the reviewing or copying return the things to
             the person who produced them.
2015                       Food Safety                             Act 19 485

        (3) A copy certified by an inspector as a copy made
under subsection (2) is admissible in evidence to the same
extent, and has the same evidentiary value, as the thing
copied.
        (3) An inspector may request the assistance of a
police officer in the execution of his or her duties under this
Act.
       (4) An inspector exercising his or her duties under
this section shall not be liable in any civil or criminal
proceedings for anything done in good faith.
         (5) Except with the authority of an inspector or police
officer, no person shall remove, alter or interfere in any way
with anything seized under this Part.
   31.—(1) Where the Authority reasonably believes that a Emergency
                                                             measures.
food safety risk exists, it may, after consultation with the
Advisory Body, implement measures to manage, reduce and
eliminate the food safety risk to public health, including–
        (a) notifying the public of the existence of a food
            safety risk by advertising a notice in two
            newspapers of national circulation;
        (b) prohibiting the production of all food likely to
            be affected;
        (c) seizing all food likely to be affected;
        (d) recalling all food likely to be affected that has
            been distributed for sale or consumption;
        (e) ordering and monitoring the disposal of all
            food likely to be affected and the treatment
486 Act 19                          Food Safety                        2015

                            or disposal of equipment employed in the
                            production of any food likely to be affected;
                      (f)   establishing protocol for the proper disposal
                            of food likely to be affected and for the proper
                            treatment or disposal of equipment employed in
                            the production of any food likely to be affected.
                      (2) Every food business operator and street food
               vendor shall be liable for any cost associated with compliance
               with any measure implemented pursuant to subsection
               (1) with respect to the operation of the food business or
               engagement in the street food vending.
                       (3) The Minister, after consultation with the
               Authority, may declare, by notice, a food safety emergency
               where he or she determines that the effect of a food safety
               risk is more probable than not to adversely affect the health
               of a person who consumes any food affected by the food
               safety risk.
                       (4) Where the Minister has declared a food safety
               emergency, a person who produces food to which a notice
               under subsection (3) applies commits an offence and is liable
               on summary conviction to a fine of twenty thousand dollars
               or to imprisonment for two years or to both.
                      (5) A person who contravenes a measure employed
               by the Authority pursuant to subsection (1) commits an
               offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of five
               thousand dollars or to imprisonment for one year or to both.
Preventative     32. For the purpose of preventing outbreaks of food-
measures.
               borne diseases and other food safety risks, the Authority
               shall–
2015                      Food Safety                           Act 19 487

       (a) conduct surveys on food;
       (b) maintain statistics relating to food;
       (c) conduct routine inspection and analysis of food;
       (d) conduct any other activities recommended by
           the Advisory Body;
       (e) do any other act that is reasonably necessary in
           the circumstances.
   33.—(1)  Where an inspector, a police officer or a person Disclosure of
authorized in writing by the Authority receives information information.
in the course of his or her duties under this Act, he or she
shall not disclose the information to a third party except in
accordance with this section or unless otherwise directed by
the Court.
        (2) Where in any circumstances an inspector, a police
officer or a person authorized in writing by the Authority
acquires information that relates to a food safety risk, the
inspector shall immediately disclose the information to the
Authority.
        (3) Subject to subsection (4), where the Authority
acquires any information that relates to a food safety risk
and it is reasonably necessary for the protection of public
health, the Authority may disclose the information to–
             (a) the Minister;
             (b) the Chief Medical Officer or the Medical
                 Officer in the locality in which the food
                 safety risk occurs; or
488 Act 19                        Food Safety                        2015

                     (c) any person or institution that may contribute to
             the prevention, management, reduction or elimination of the
             food safety risk.
                     (4) Where a person asserts that any information
             obtained by an inspector in the course of his or her duties
             or by the Authority is a trade secret or confidential business
             information, the Authority and every person to which
             the information is disclosed shall treat the information as
             confidential.
Notices.       34.—(1) Every notice serviced under this Act shall be
             completed by an inspector in triplicate and the inspector
             shall–
                    (a) serve one copy of the notice on the food business
                        operator or street food vendor, as the case may
                        be;
                    (b) file one copy of the notice with the Authority
                        within twenty-four hours of service under
                        paragraph (a); and
                    (c) retain one copy of the notice.
                     (2) Service of a notice under this Act shall be good,
             if an inspector–
                         (a) serves a copy of the notice on the food
                             business operator or street food vendor, as
                             the case may be;
                         (b) is unable to locate the food business
                             operator or street food vendor, as the case
                             may be, affixes the notice in a conspicuous
2015                       Food Safety                          Act 19 489

                  place on the food premises or street food
                  premises.
       (3) The Minister may by Order prohibit street food
vending in a specified area.
       (4) An inspector may erect “No Vending” signs in
any area prescribed by the Minister.
        (5) A person who removes or tampers with a notice
served pursuant to subsection (2)(b) commits an offence and
is liable on summary conviction to a fine of five thousand
dollars or to a term of imprisonment for one year or to both.
                          Part VI
   DUTIES OF FOOD BUSINESS OPERATORS AND
            STREET FOOD VENDORS
   35.—(1) Every food business operator and street food General duties
                                                             of food business
vendor shall ensure that all production of food conducted on operators and
the food premises is conducted in accordance with this Act. street food
                                                                 vendors.

       (2) Every food business operator or street food
vendor as the case may be shall–
             (a) prominently display in a conspicuous
                 place the licence or permit, as the case
                 may be, and registration certificate for the
                 food premises or street food premises, as
                 the case may be;
             (b) ensure that the food premises is constructed
                 in accordance with the Physical Planning
                 and Development Control Act, Chapter
                 241A and any regulations made thereunder;
490 Act 19               Food Safety                      2015

             (c) keep detailed and accurate records of
                 the operations of the food business or
                 engagement of street food vending, as the
                 case may be;
             (d) ensure that appropriate food safety proce-
                 dures and practices are identified, imple-
                 mented, maintained and reviewed;
             (e) establish and maintain quality control sys-
                 tems and make the systems available for
                 audit by the Authority when required to do
                 so;
             (f)   ensure that appropriate food safety proce-
                   dures are identified, implemented, main-
                   tained and reviewed by–
                   (i)    analysing the potential food hazards
                          in the operations of the food business
                          and the street food vending;
                   (ii) identifying the points in those opera-
                        tions where a food safety risk may
                        occur;
                   (iii) determining the points which are crit-
                         ical to ensuring food safety; and
                   (iv) analysing the potential food safety
                        risks in the operations of the estab-
                        lishment.
             (g) ensure that every food handler employed
                 at the food business receives training in
                 food safety and hygienic practices within
                 six months of commencement of employ-
2015                       Food Safety                            Act 19 491

                   ment and are monitored to ensure imple-
                   mentation of the practices;
             (h) notify the Authority and consumers of
                 any food safety risk relating to the food
                 business or street food premises in the
                 prescribed manner; and
              (i) ensure that he or she has in his or her
                  possession a valid permit when engaged in
                  street food vending.
   36. During the course of an inspection conducted by an Duties of
inspector pursuant to this Act, a food business operator or food  business
                                                            operators and
street food vendor, or an agent thereof–                    street food
                                                                   vendors during
        (a) may accompany the inspector at all times;              an inspection.


        (b) shall assist, or execute instructions, as may be
            reasonably necessary to facilitate the exercise
            of the inspector’s functions or to comply with
            any provision of this Act; and
        (c) shall provide any information as may be
            reasonably necessary for compliance with any
            provision of this Act.
   37.—(1) Where a food business operator or street food Food business
vendor reasonably believes that an employee has a disease operator        or
                                                                street food
likely to create a food safety risk, the food business operator vendor suspects
                                                                certain medical
shall immediately notify the Authority.                         conditions.

       (2) On receipt of a notification under subsection (1),
the Authority shall direct the employee of the food business
operator or street food vendor to submit himself or herself
to a medical examination and to submit to the Authority a
492 Act 19                              Food Safety                         2015

                  medical certificate duly executed by a registered medical
                  practitioner.
                          (3) Where a medical practitioner certifies that an
                  employee of a food business operator or a street food vendor
                  has a disease likely to create a food safety risk, the Authority
                  may, suspend or revoke the food handler’s certificate held
                  by the employee.
                          (4) A person who after suspension or revocation of
                  his or her food handler’s certificate works as a food handler
                  commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                  a fine of two thousand dollars or to a term of imprisonment
                  for six months.
                          (5) A food business operator or a street food vendor
                  who employs as a food handler, a person in relation to whom
                  a revocation or suspension under subsection (4) is in force,
                  commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                  a fine of five thousand dollars or to a term of imprisonment
                  for one year.
Traceability of      38.—(1) Every food business operator or street food ven-
food.
                  dor shall maintain adequate records and other relevant doc-
                  umentation for the purpose of supplying reliable informa-
                  tion regarding the origin of food if requested to do so by the
                  Authority.
                         (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the require-
                  ment to maintain adequate records and other relevant docu-
                  mentation, may relate to the food business operator or street
                  food vendor having information on–
                               (a) the quantity of food produced on the prem-
                                   ises with respect to every business day;
2015                      Food Safety                            Act 19 493

            (b) the name and address of every supplier
                from which, or wholesaler or retailer by
                which, all food, and every ingredient,
                food-producing animal, or substance in-
                tended to be, or expected to be incorpo-
                rated into food, are purchased;
            (c) the name and address of every employee
                and such other particulars as may be re-
                quired by the Authority;
            (d) the type, make and licence number of eve-
                ry vehicle used to transport food to, from
                or on behalf of the food business;
            (e) every ingredient used in production of
                food; and
            (f)   the type and quantity of packaging mate-
                  rial used in the packaging of food.
         (3) Every food business operator and street food
vendor shall adequately label every batch of food to facili-
tate its traceability.
        (4) For the purposes of this section, the Minister may
make regulations prescribing forms, and specifying proce-
dures to be adopted under this section.
   39.—(1) The Minister, in consultation with the Author- Exemption.
ity, may by Order exempt any person or category of persons
from the requirements of section 38.
        (2) The Minister must, prior to making the Order, be
satisfied–
            (a) that the person or category of persons–
494 Act 19                             Food Safety                    2015

                                 (i)    have adopted and implemented an
                                        appropriate food safety programmme;
                                 (ii) have taken all reasonable steps to
                                      comply with all relevant provisions
                                      of this Act and Regulations made
                                      thereunder and with all applicable
                                      food safety; and 		
                            (b) that the granting of an exemption under
                                this section is appropriate having regard to
                                all the relevant circumstances.
Terms of          40.—(1) Every exemption granted under section 39 shall
exemption.
                specify the terms thereof.
                       (2) The Minister, in consultation with the Authority,
                may from time to time issue written variations to the terms
                of an exemption, by endorsement on the exemption or
                otherwise.
                       (3) An exemption may be unconditional or subject to
                such conditions as the Minister thinks fit.
Revocation of     41.—(1) The Minister in consultation with the Authority
exemption.
                may at anytime, by notice in writing revoke the exemption
                granted to a person or any category of persons under section
                39.
                         (2) Without limiting the generality of subsection
                (1), the Minister may revoke an exemption if the Minister is
                satisfied that the person or category of persons has–
                            (a) failed to comply with any condition of the
                                exemption; or
2015                      Food Safety                            Act 19 495

             (b) contravened, or failed to comply with, any
                 provision of–
                  (i)   this Act; or
                  (ii) any regulations made under this Act;
                       or
                  (iii) any applicable food standards set by
                        the Authority.
       (3) The Minister shall not revoke an exemption unless
the Minister has first given the holder of the exemption a
reasonable opportunity to be heard.
  42.—(1) The Minister may specify in any exemption Duration of
granted under section 39 that the exemption is to have effect exemption.
indefinitely or for a stated period.
       (2) Every exemption granted under section 39–
             (a) shall come into force on the date of its
                 issue; and
             (b) shall continue in force until–
                  (i)   it is revoked pursuant to section 41;
                        or
                  (ii) in the case of an exemption granted
                       for a stated period, the expiry of that
                       period; or
                  (iii) it is surrendered pursuant to section
                        43.
  43.—(1) Subject to this section, any person or category Surrender of
of persons exempted under section 39 may at any time exemption.
496 Act 19                               Food Safety                        2015

                    surrender that exemption by notice in writing to that effect
                    to the Minister.
                            (2) The surrender shall take effect on the date of
                    expiry indicated in the notice.
                           (3) On or before the surrender takes effect, the
                    holder of the exemption shall return the exemption to the
                    Minister.
Minister to            44.—(1) The Minister shall cause to be kept and maintained
maintain register
of exemptions.
                    a register in which is recorded, in respect of every exemption
                    granted under section 39 the following particulars–
                           (a) the name of the person or category of persons to
                               whom the exemption was granted;
                           (b) the date on which the exemption was granted;
                           (c) the terms of the exemption;
                           (d) the premises or vehicle to which the exemption
                               relates;
                           (e) any conditions imposed in respect of the ex-
                               emption;
                           (f)   the details of any variation of the terms or con-
                                 ditions of the exemption;
                           (g) the date on which the exemption was revoked,
                               where applicable; and
                           (h) such other particulars as may be required by
                               this Act or any regulations made under this Act
                               to be recorded in the register.
2015                      Food Safety                           Act 19 497

       (2) The Minister shall cause the Register–
             (a) to be open for public inspection, during
                 ordinary office hours; and
             (b) shall supply to any person copies of all or
                 part of the register on request and payment
                 of a reasonable charge for the production
                 of the copy.
   45.—(1) A food business operator shall take all reasonable Recalling of
measures to recall all food likely to be affected by a food hazardous food.
safety risk, including consulting with the competent authority
of the state from which any food was imported or to which
the food has been exported.
        (2) Where food that is imported or intended to be
exported creates a food safety risk, the Authority may seize
or recall the food for analysis or destruction.
        (3) Where food exported creates a food safety risk,
the Authority may consult with the competent authority in
the State that received the food from Grenada to ensure that
the food–
             (a) if not yet released for distribution, is
                 seized; or
             (b) if already released for distribution, is re-
                 called,
for analysis or destruction by the competent authority of the
State.
       (4) Any action taken by the Authority pursuant to
subsections (2) and (3) shall be taken at the expense of the
food business operator.
498 Act 19                              Food Safety                       2015

                           (5) Where a food business operator contravenes
                   subsection (1), the Authority may, at the expense of the food
                   business operator, take all reasonable measures to recall all
                   food likely to be affected by the food safety risk.
                                            Part VII
                              IMPORT AND EXPORT OF FOOD
Requirements          46.—(1) A person who proposes to import or export food
for importation
and exportation.
                   shall submit a notice of intention to import or export in the
                   prescribed form, as the case may be, with the Authority prior
                   to such importation or exportation.
                         (2) A notice mentioned in sub-section (1) shall be
                   accompanied by–
                               (a) written confirmation from the relevant
                                   authority of the importing country that it
                                   consents, in accordance with the laws of
                                   that country with respect to the giving of
                                   consent, to the proposed import into that
                                   country of such food;
                               (b) a certificate of compliance from the
                                   exporting country which indicates that the
                                   standards and requirements established
                                   by this Act and Regulations are met in
                                   respect of the food to be exported.
                           (3) The Authority may, dispense with, or modify any
                   of the requirements of the notice mentioned in sub-section
                   (1) where it considers it appropriate to do so on the grounds
                   that the information to which the requirement relates is
                   already available from another governmental entity and is
                   submitted by the importer or exporter to it.
2015                      Food Safety                             Act 19 499

       (4) The requirements of this section shall be in
addition to the requirements of the–
             (a) Customs Act No. 9 of 2015;
             (b) Plant Protection Act Cap. 242;
             (c) Animals (Diseases and Importation) Act
                 Cap. 15;
             (d) Standards Act Cap. 310;
             (e) Fisheries Act Cap. 108;
             (f)   any other relevant enactment,
and nothing in this section relieves a person from the
requirements of those enactments.
       (5) Any food which is imported into Grenada and
found to present a food safety risk shall be re-exported to the
exporter or to such place as the Authority may direct.
  47. The Authority shall review the contents of the notice Review of
                                                            notice to import
mentioned in section 46 to determine whether–               or export.

       (a) a physical examination or a sample examination
           shall be made in respect of the food to be
           imported or exported;
       (b) the food may be released without examination
           to the exporter or importer as the case may be;
       (c) an inspection of the facilities from which the
           food was produced shall be made; or
       (d) the conduct of an audit of the food control
           system of the competent authority in the
           exporting country is required.
500 Act 19                              Food Safety                        2015

Obtaining sample      48.—(1) Where the Authority determines that an exami-
of food.
                   nation of the food is not required it shall notify the Comp-
                   troller of Customs that such goods may be released to the
                   importer or exporter on record upon payment of a prescribed
                   fee.
                            (2) A decision to collect a sample or to inspect food
                   that is to be imported or exported shall be based upon the
                   following considerations–
                               (a) the need to conduct a risk analysis;
                               (b) nature of the food;
                               (c) priorities of the Authority; and
                               (d) the history of the food.
                           (3) Where the Authority determines that an
                   examination of the food is required, it shall notify the
                   Comptroller of Customs and the importer or exporter on
                   record as the case may be and the shipment of food shall be
                   held intact pending further notice.
                           (4) Any sample collected by the Authority shall be
                   sent to a food analyst for analysis or examination.
Compliance,           49.—(1) Where after taking a sample of food under sec-
non-compliance.
                   tion 48, the Authority finds that the sample–
                          (a) complies with the requirements of this Act,
                              the Authority shall authorize the release of the
                              shipment of food and submit a notice in the
                              prescribed form to the Comptroller of Customs
                              and the importer or exporter on record in respect
                              of which the sample was taken;
2015                     Food Safety                           Act 19 501

       (b) does not comply with the requirements of the
           Act, it shall submit a Notice of Detention in the
           prescribed form to the Comptroller of Customs
           and the importer or exporter on record.
       (2) The Notice of Detention shall–
            (a) specify the nature of the non-compliance;
            (b) advise the importer or exporter of his or
                her right to present detailed particulars to
                the Authority as to how the shipment of
                food may be–
                 (i)   made eligible for import or export;
                 (ii) made suitable as food for human con-
                      sumption; or
                 (iii) converted into a non-food use.
       (3) Where a shipment of food is detained pursuant
to subsection (2) an importer or exporter may submit to the
Authority–
            (a) evidence that the shipment of food is in
                compliance with the requirements of this
                Act; and
            (b) certified analytical results of samples of
                the food conducted by an analyst.
       (4) Where the shipment of food is non-perishable,
no later than five days after the submission of a Notice
of Detention or within two days in the case of perishable
food the Authority shall consider the information provided
502 Act 19                               Food Safety                        2015

                    pursuant to sub-section (3) and make a determination
                    accordingly.
                           (5) Where the Authority determines that the importer
                    or exporter has not established that the shipment of food can
                    be–		
                                (a) made eligible for importation or exporta-
                                    tion;
                                (b) made suitable as food for human consump-
                                    tion; or
                                (c) converted into a non-food use,
                    the shipment of food shall be seized and disposed of in the
                    prescribed manner by the Authority.
                            (6) Where the Authority determines that the importer
                    or exporter has established that the shipment of food can be
                    made eligible for importation or exportation, it shall notify
                    the importer or exporter as the case may be, of the steps that
                    are required to be taken and the time-frame within which
                    the shipment of food may be presented for re-inspection and
                    subsequent release for import or export accordingly.
                             (7) Where upon re-inspection the shipment of food
                    fails to meet the requirements of sub-section (5) the shipment
                    of food shall be seized and disposed of in the prescribed
                    manner by the Authority.
Offence of             50. A person who imports or exports food in contraven-
import or export.
                    tion of this Act commits an offence and is liable upon sum-
                    mary conviction to a fine of fifty thousand dollars or to a
                    term of imprisonment for two years.
2015                       Food Safety                            Act 19 503

  51.—(1) The Minister may publish a list of foods that re- Food to be
                                                               inspected.
quire inspection by an inspector at a port of entry before ex-
portation from Grenada or upon importation into Grenada.
        (2) An importer or exporter of any food listed in
accordance with sub-section (1) shall ensure that the required
inspection is conducted prior to the completion of import or
export procedures as the case may be.
       (3) Where there are reasonable grounds for believing
that food which is not included on the list mentioned in
sub-section (1) is not safe or does not comply with the
requirements of this Act such food may be inspected by an
inspector.
       (4) Where a governmental entity determines that
imported food or food produced locally for consumption or
exportation does not meet the standards established under
this Act or any other enactment, such entity shall notify the
Authority accordingly.
  52. Inspections shall be carried out during normal busi- Time for
ness hours of the Authority or at any other time deemed nec- inspection.
essary by the Authority.
   53. The Authority may, at any time, order that any food Imported
                                                            food may be
that is imported into Grenada be held at a particular place held pending
until an inspection or re-inspection is conducted.          inspection.


   54.—(1) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohib- Re-labeling and
iting an importer from importing food pursuant to a permit re-conditioning.
issued under subsection (2).
        (2) Where the Authority is satisfied that an importer
intends to re-label or re-condition food to bring the food into
504 Act 19                           Food Safety                        2015

                compliance with the provisions of this Act, the Authority may
                issue a permit for importation of the food, notwithstanding
                any apparent contravention of any other provision of this
                Act, on the condition that the re-labeling or re-conditioning,
                as the case may be, shall be conducted within a prescribed
                time.
                        (3) Where the importer fails to re-label or re-
                condition, as the case may be, the food within the prescribed
                time, the importer shall re-export or destroy the food at the
                expense of the importer.
                        (4) An importer who contravenes this section
                commits an offence and is liable to a fine of twenty thousand
                dollars and to pay compensation to the Authority for the cost
                of destroying the food.
                                         Part VIII
                              OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Offences          55.—(1) A person commits an offence where that person
generally.
                contravenes this Act or the Regulations or fails to comply
                with a notice issued under this Act.
                       (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                Act shall, where no other penalty is provided, be liable on
                summary conviction to a fine of ten thousand dollars or to a
                term of imprisonment for three years.
Selling food      56.—(1) A food business operator or street food vendor
that is unfit
for human       who sells food that–
consumption.
                       (a) consists of or contains a biological, chemical or
                           physical agent or attribute;
2015                      Food Safety                           Act 19 505

       (b) was produced on food premises or uses equip-
           ment that is in a condition,
which is likely to have an adverse effect on the health of
a person who consumes the food commits an offence and
is liable on summary conviction to a fine of one hundred
thousand dollars.
       (2) In determining whether food is likely to have an
adverse effect on the health of a person who consumes it, the
Court shall have regard to–
             (a) the probable effect of the food on the
                 health of a person consuming it; and
             (b) the probable cumulative effect of food of
                 substantially similar composition on the
                 health of a person consuming such food in
                 ordinary quantities.
       (3) A food business operator or street food vendor
who contravenes subsection (1) is liable to suspension
or revocation of the licence or permit issued to the food
business operator or street food vendor.
   57. A person who attempts to improperly influence an in- Improperly
spector in the exercise of his or her duties under this Act influencing
                                                             inspector.
                                                                        an

commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a
fine of twenty thousand dollars or to a term of imprisonment
for one year or to both.
   58. A person who impersonates an inspector commits an Impersonating
offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of ten an inspector.
thousand dollars or to a term of imprisonment for one year
or to both.
506 Act 19                               Food Safety                         2015

Failure to grant
access, provide
                      59. A person who fails to grant access, provide samples
samples.           or provide information to an inspector or authorized officer
                   upon request gives false information to an authorized offic-
                   er, commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction
                   to a fine of five thousand dollars or to a term of imprison-
                   ment for one year or to both.
Offences by
inspectors.          60.—(1) An inspector who–
                           (a) directly or indirectly demands or accepts from
                               a person any fee, bribe, or reward, whether
                               pecuniary or otherwise, on account of anything
                               done, to be done, omitted or to be omitted by the
                               inspector in any way relating to the discharge of
                               his or her duties; or
                           (b) discloses to a third party any information
                               acquired in the performance of his or her duties
                               and relating to any person, except when required
                               to disclose information as a witness in a court
                               of law or under the authority of this Act,
                   commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                   a fine of ten thousand dollars or to a term of imprisonment
                   for one year or to both.
                           (2) The conviction of an inspector under subsection
                   (1), may constitute sufficient grounds for the dismissal of
                   the inspector.
Continuing            61. Where a person is convicted of an offence under this
offences.
                   Act and the contravening conduct for the offence of which
                   the person was convicted is continued or is repeated after the
                   conviction, the person shall, on conviction, be liable to a fur-
                   ther fine of one-fourth of the maximum penalty prescribed
2015                      Food Safety                            Act 19 507

for the offence for each day of the period within which the
offence continues.
   62. Where a body corporate commits an offence under Offences by a
this Act, every director, manager and other similar officer body corporate.
of the body corporate, and every person purporting to act
in any such capacity, at the time of the commission of the
offence–
       (a) may be charged severally, or jointly in the same
           proceedings with the body corporate; and
       (b) where the body corporate is convicted of the
           offence, shall be liable for that offence unless,
           having regard to the nature of his or her functions
           in that capacity and to all circumstances, he or
           she proves that–
             (i)   the offence was committed without his or
                   her knowledge, consent or connivance;
                   and
             (ii) he or she took all reasonable precautions,
                  and exercised due diligence, to prevent the
                  commission of the offence.
  63.—(1) A person who–                                          Obstruction and
                                                                 interference.
       (a) obstructs, assaults, threatens or delays an
           inspector in the exercise of his or her duties
           under this Act;
       (b) upon reasonable request for the purposes of
           this Act and without reasonable cause, refuses
           to provide assistance or information to an
           inspector or police officer acting pursuant to
           this Act; or 			
508 Act 19                            Food Safety                         2015

                        (c) without reasonable cause, refuses to comply
                            with any request of an inspector,
                 commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                 a fine of two thousand dollars or to imprisonment for a term
                 of one year or to both.
                        (2) A person who–
                              (a) furnishes information which he or she
                                  knows to be false or misleading in a mate-
                                  rial particular; or
                              (b) recklessly furnishes information which is
                                  false and misleading in a material particu-
                                  lar,
                 commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
                 a fine of ten thousand dollars or to a term of imprisonment
                 for one year.
General             64. In any proceedings for an offence under this Act, it
defences.
                 shall be a defence to establish that the person could not, with
                 reasonable diligence, have ascertained that the production of
                 the food would contravene this Act.

                                           Part IX
                             MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Food safety
training and
                    65.­
                       —(1) The Authority may provide training pro-
accreditation.   grammes, materials and certification in food safety for any
                 person who engages or intends to engage in a food business
                 or street food vending, whether as an operator, employee or
                 otherwise.
2015                      Food Safety                             Act 19 509

        (2) Any training programme conducted, and materi-
als distributed, on the subject of or relating to food safety
shall be first approved by the Authority in consultation with
relevant governmental entities and relevant accredited enti-
ties.
        (3) A person or institution that intends to conduct
a training programme on the subject of or related to food
safety shall apply, in the prescribed manner, to the Authority
for approval of the training programme and the materials to
be used therein.
        (4) Upon application under subsection (3) the
Authority may issue an accreditation certificate in the
prescribed form if the Authority is satisfied that the training
programme and its materials are consistent with HACCP
and the provisions of this Act.
  66.—(1) The Minister may make regulations for the pur- Regulations.
pose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
        (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection
(1), the Minister may make regulations–
             (a) in respect of the issuance, renewal,
                 suspension, revocation or cancellation of
                 licences and permits under this Act;
             (b) in respect of protocols and procedures for
                 the importation and exportation of food;
             (c) in respect of analysis of any food;
             (d) in respect of production of food;
510 Act 19               Food Safety                      2015

             (e) prescribing fees for the purposes of this
                 Act;
             (f)   in respect of procedures for monitoring
                   and surveillance of food-borne diseases
                   and other food safety risks;
             (g) in respect of protocols and procedures for
                 inspection of food;
             (h) in respect of the qualifications, education,
                 training and certification that an inspector
                 is required to have in order to exercise
                 powers or carry out duties under this Act;
             (i)   in respect of the establishing of systems to
                   ascertain the origin or destination of food
                   or anything used in or related to a licensed
                   activity including requiring persons who
                   come into contact with the food to identify
                   and track them in the prescribed manner
                   and at the prescribed times and maintain
                   records and other documents with respect
                   to them in the prescribed manner and at
                   the prescribed times;
             (j)   in consultation with the Bureau of Stand-
                   ards make regulations establishing appli-
                   cable standards based on–
                   (a) codex Alimentarius;
                   (b)     good agricultural practices;
                   (c) good manufacturing practices;
2015                        Food Safety                             Act 19 511

                    (d) HACCP; and
                    (e) any other relevant international stand-
                        ard pertaining to food safety; and
              (k) for the purpose of the better administration
                  and implementation of this Act.
       (3) In making the regulations the Minister may
consult with and solicit the recommendations of the
Authority.
   67. A food business operator, street food vendor or food Transitional
handler conducting a food business, street food vending or provisions.
food handling for a continuous period of six months prior to
the commencement of this Act shall—
        (a) be deemed to have a valid licence, permit or
            certificate under this Act for a period of six
            months from the date of commencement of this
            Act;
        (b) within one month from the date of commence-
            ment of this Act, make an application for a
            licence, permit or certification in accordance
            with this Act.

                                   SCHEDULE

                                                                        (Section 9)

   1. National Food Safety Advisory Body. (1) The Minister shall appoint a National
Food Safety Advisory Body of no less than eleven members or no more than fifteen
members to hold office for a term not exceeding three years under such terms and
conditions of service as the Minister may fix in the instrument of appointment.
512 Act 19                             Food Safety                                2015

                   (2) The Advisory Body shall advise the Minister on any matter
             pertaining to food safety.

                   (3) The Minister may appoint any person or agency with relevant
             knowledge or experience to the Advisory Body including persons
             from health, testing laboratories, agriculture, fisheries, nutrition, trade,
             customs, bureau of standards, food processing, food distribution, public
             health sectors, consumer groups or local government.

                  (4) The Minister shall, on the recommendation of the Advisory
             Body, appoint one of the members of the Advisory Body to be the
             Chairman.

                  (5) The Advisory Body shall select from among its members a
             Deputy Chairman and a Secretary.

                    (6) The Advisory Body shall meet at least once in each month
             and at such other times as the Chairman determines is necessary for the
             efficient discharge of its functions.

                  (7) The Advisory Body shall determine its own procedure and
             may make rules governing such procedure as are considered necessary.

                  (8) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the Advisory
             Body, remove a member of the body if the member–

                        (a) becomes incapable, by reason of mental or physical
                            capacity, of carrying out his or her duties;

                        (b) is convicted of an offence under this Act or under the
                            Criminal Code;

                        (c) is guilty of misconduct;

                        (d) is absent, except on providing reasons to the Advisory
                            Body, from all meetings of the body held during two
                            consecutive months or during any three months in any
                            period of twelve months;

                        (e) fails to comply with sub-regulation (9).

                   (9) Any member of the Advisory Body who has any interest,
             directly or indirectly, in any matter before the body–
2015                          Food Safety                                  Act 19 513

           (a) shall disclose the nature of the interest to the Advisory
               Body; and

           (b) shall not take part in any deliberations or decisions of
               the Advisory Body with respect to that matter.

     (10) A disclosure under this section shall be recorded in the
minutes.

      (11) The Chairman may resign from office by an instrument in
writing addressed to the Minister, and any other member may resign
from office by an instrument in writing addressed to the Chairman.

   2. Appointment of sub-committees, working groups. (1) Notwith-
standing anything contained in regulation 1, the Advisory Body may
appoint sub-committees for the purpose of advising it on any specialized
area of food safety.

       (2) Persons may be appointed to such sub-committee mentioned in
sub-regulation (1) for a period of two years but any person so appointed
shall be eligible for reappointment.

  3. Functions of the Advisory Body. The functions of the Advisory
Body shall be to–

         (a)   facilitate the development of food safety policies;

         (b)   propose food safety laws;

         (c)   review work-plans and programmes;

         (d)   provide guidance on matters related to risk analysis and
               applicable international standards;

         (e)   develop a plan of action in relation to prevention,
               reduction, management and elimination of outbreaks of
               food-borne diseases and other food safety risks;

         (f)   perform such other functions as are relevant to the
               effective implementation of this Act.
514 Act 19                      Food Safety                      2015

  Passed by the House of Representatives this 17th day of April, 2015.

						WILLAN THOMPSON
     Clerk to the House of Representatives.
                             ____________
  Passed by the Senate this 29th day of April, 2015.

						WILLAN THOMPSON
           Clerk to the Senate.




                                  GRENADA
          PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTER, AT THE GOVERNMENT
                        PRINTING OFFICE, ST. GEORGE’S
                                   3/7/2015.
