             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975                           5

conjunctions and prepositions, is in identical type and identically dis-
played.
  6. All information required by these Regulations to be declared shall
be in durable characters, and in boldfaced capital letters written in
such colour or colows as to afford a distinct contrast with the back-
ground.

                              Division 11. Food
   7. In this Division-
      "artificial (non-nutritive) sweetening agent" means any chemical
            compound which is sweet to the taste but does not include
           sugar or other carbohydrate or polyhydric alcohols;
      "bulk container" means a container in which more than one duly
           labelled package of a food and its contents are placed for
           wholesale purposes, but in which the packages and their con-
           tents are not intended to be retailed;
      "close proximity" means with reference to a common name, written
            or graphic matter placed immediately adjacent to that com-
           mon name;
      "common name" means with reference to a food, the name by
           which the food is generally known;
      "food additive" means any substance, including any source of
           radiation, the use of which results, or may reasonably be
           expected to result, in it or its by-products becoming a part
           of or affecting the characteristics of a food excepting-
                 (a) any nutritive material that is used, recognized, or
                     commonly sold as an article or ingredient of food;
                 (b) vitamins, minerals, and amino acids unless added for
                      flavourings;
                 (c) spices, seasoning, flavouring preparations essential
                     oils, oleoresins and natural extractives;
                 (6) pesticides;
                 (e) food packaging materials and components thereof;
                     and
                     drugs recommended for administration to animals
                     that may be a source of food for human beings;
      "unstandardized food" means any food for which a standard has
           not been prescribed.
   8. A person shall not prepare, pack, store or transport any food
intended for sale in any manner which renders it injurious to health,
                  induoion of this Page is authorized by L.N 286119761
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS. 1975

or which injuriously affects its nutritive properties, or which renders
it unwholesome, nor shall a person sell any f w d which has become
injurious to health, which has had its nutritive properties injuriously
affected, or which has become unwholesome.

   9. A person shall not sell any canned food the container of which
is blown or punctured, or any frozen f w d which has been thawed
in the package and subsequently refrozen.

  10. A person shall not use water other than potable water as an
ingredient in the manufacture or preparation of any food.

                                     Labelling
   11.41) A person shall not sell a package of food which is not
labelled or which bears a label that does not comply with the pro-
visions of these Regulations.
        (2) The provisions of paragraph (I) shall not apply to food
packaged from bulk on the premises where that food is retailed, so.
however, that where any f w d so packaged bears any statement, mark
or device regarding the ingredients or the substances contained therein
other than the name of the food, the name and address of the retailer
and the net contents, it shall be labelled as required by the Act.

  1 2 4 1 ) Unless otherwise specifically provided in these Regulations.
every package of food offered for sale shall bear a label stating legibly
and conspicuously in conformity with regulations 5 and 6-
    (a) on the main panel-
            (i) the brand name or trade name, if any; and
           (ii) the common name of the food; and
          (iii) a statement of the weight, volume, number or measure
                of contents; and
    (b) on the remainder of the label-
            (i) a declaration of added colour, if present; and
           (ii) the name and address of the manufacturer, packer, im-
                porter, vendor or of any person who assumes the
                responsibilities of the manufacturer, packer, importer
                or vendor and indicates in conjunction with his name
                and address that he is not the manufacturer, packer.
                importer or vendor.
              [The Inclusion of thia page ir authorized by L.N 286/19761
            THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS. 1915

       (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (i) of subparagraph (b) of
paragraph (1). a list of ingredients is not required to indicate the
presence of caramel as a food wlour in-
    (a) nonexcisable fermented beverages;
    (b) spirituous liquors other than gin;
    (c) wine.

  13. Except where the quantity of the contents marked on a package
of food is stated in terms of minimum weight, volume, number or
measure, there shall be permitted from the stated quantity, variations-
     (a) due exclusively to weighing, measuring or counting that occur
         in packaging conducted in compliance with good commercial
         practice;
     (b) due exclusively to difference in the capacities of containers
         resulting solely from unavoidable factors in manufacturing;
     (c) due exclusively to the ordinary and customary exposut of
         the package to evaporation under usual atmospheric con-
         ditions.

  14. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by these Regulations, a
person shall not sell a synthetic food as substitute for any food unless-
    (a) it is clearly indicated on the label or in any advertisement
         in respect thereof that it is a substitute, imitation, artificial
         or synthetic food; and
    (b) the label of every package of such food other than imitation
         flavouring preparations, includes legibly and conspicuously,
         the common names of all the ingredients of that food in
         descending order of their proportionate content.

   15. A person shall not sell any food bearing a label which suggests
or implies the presence of one or more vitamins, that the food contains
vitamins, or that it is rich in vitamins, unless there is written on the
label in letters of not less than eight points, the actual vitamin content
per 100 grammes of food.

  16. Where any colouring or any flavouring has been added to any
food, every package to which that colouring or flavouring has been
added shall bear a label including the words "artificially coloured",
"artificially flavoured" or "artificially coloured and flavoured'', as the
case may require.
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, I975

  17. Any colouring substance or mixture of colouring substances
which is sold or packaged for use in food shall bear a label on
which shall be written legibly and prominently-
    (a) the name or names of the colouring substance or substances
        present; and
    (b) the words "food colour" in letters of not less than 4 inch in
        height.
           Adulteration of Foods and Special Foods.
  18. A person shall not add any colouring, flavouring, preservative.
or anti-oxidant to any food, extender, stabilizing or modifying agent
other than to food in its natural form, or of a standard specified in
these Regulations, or add any such substance to any food or sell any
food containing any such substance unless the addition or presence of
any such substance is specifically permitted by these Regulations.
  19.+1) A person shall not add any artificial sweetening agent,
mineral oil, parffi, mineral salt (except sodium chloride), resin, glycol
derivative, coumarin or any substance containing coumarin, to any
fwd, or sell any food containing any such substance unless the addition
or presence is permitted by these Regulations.
        (2) The provisions of this Regulation with respect to paraflin
shall not apply to chewing gum.
  20. A person shall not use or sell for use in or upon a food, any
ingredient, unless it is of a purity that renders it safe and appropriate
for w e in foods.
  21. A food shall be deemed to be adulterated if any of the following
substances or classes of substances are present therein or have been
added thereto-
    (a) mineral oil, p a r e wax, or any preparation thereof;
    (b) coumarin, extracts of tonka beans, the seed of Dipteryx odorata
         Willd, or Dipteryx oppositi-folia Willd;
    (c) synthetic sweetening agents other than saccharin;
    (4 cottonseed flour that contains more than four hundred and
        fifty parts per million of free gossypol;
    (e) fatty-acids and their salts containing toxic factors;
    (f) dihydrosafarole;
    (g) isosafrole;
    (h) oil of American sassafras from sassafras alkidum (nut) Nees;
    (i) oil of Brazilian sassafras from Ocotca cymbarum H.B.K.;
              me inclusion of tbh page u authorized by L.N 286/1976]
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975                           9

    (j) oil of camphor sassafras from Cinnamon camphorum sieb;
    (k) oil of micranthum Hyata; or
    (0 safrole;
  Provided that-
      (i) a food shall not be adulterated if it contains not more than
          0.3 per cent mineral oil, where the normal manufacturing
          practices require the use of mineral oil;
     (ii) chewing gum shall not be adulterated if it contains a paraffin
          wax base;
    (iii) fresh fruits and vegetables (with the exception of turnips)
          shall not be adulterated if they are coated with not more
          than 0.3 per cent p a r a h wax and petrolatum, where normal
          manufacturing practices require the use of such coating; and
    (iv) turnips and cheese shall not be adulterated if they are coated
          with para& wax in accordance with normal manufacturing
          practice.
  2 2 Except in the case of special formulae, bakery products, and
special dietary foods, a person shall not sell a food that is represented
as W i g for babies if that food contains a f w d additive.
  23. Where a statement or claim implying a special dietary use is
made on the label of, or in any advertisement for a food, the type
of diet for which that food is recommended shall be included in such
label or advertisement.
   24.41) Special dietary foods recommended for carbohydrate or
sugar reduced diets shall be foods that contain not more than 50%
of the glycogenic carbohydrates normally present in foods of the same
class, except that confectionery and pudding powders shall contain
not more than 70% of the glycogenic carbohydrates normally present
in such foods.
        (2) For the purpose of these Regulations a food may be de-
scribed as "sugarless", "sugar-free" or by any other synonymous term
if that food contains not more than 0.25 per cent glycogenic carbohy-
drates.
       (3) Where a statement of claim relating to the carbohydrate.
sugar or starch content of any food is made on the label of, or in
any advertisement for that food, such label or advertisement shall in-
clude a statement of the carbohydrate content in grammes per 100
grammes or on a percentage basis.
                  inclusion of this p a p Is authorized by L.N 286119761
              THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

  25.41) Special dietary foods recommended for calorie reduced diets
shall be foods that contain not more than 50 per cent of the total
calories normally present in foods of that same type.
        (2) Where a statement or claim relating to the calorie content
of any food is made on the label of, or in any advertisement for that
food, such label or advertisement shall include a statement of the
calorie content in calories per 100 grammes.
        (3) For the purpose of these Regulations, a food may be de-
scribed as "low-caloried" or by any other synonymous term if it
contains not more than 15k calories per average serving and 30k
calories in a reasonable daily intake.
  26.41) Where a statement or claim relating to the sodium content
of any food is made on the label of, or in any advertisement for that
food, such label or advertisement shall include a declaration of the
sodium content in milligrammes per 100 grammes.
       (2) The number of milligrammes of sodium contributed by a
reasonable daily intake of a special dietary food recommended for a
sodium reduced diet shall not exceed one-sixth the number of mil&
grammes contained in a reasonable daily intake of the same food.
        (3) For the purposes of these Regulations, a food may be
described as "low-sodium" or by any synonymous term if it contains
not more than 10 milligrammes sodium in an average serving and
20 milligrammes in a reasonable daily intake.
  27.41) A person shall not sell a food containing a non-nutritive
sweetening agent unless-
    (a) the label bears a declaration that contains a non-nutritive
         artificial sweetener and the name of that sweetener;
    (b) the label includes a statement specifying a special dietary
         use;
    (c) that food meets the requirements for special dietary foods
        prescribed in these Regulations; and
    (6) the label includes a warning that the food should only be
         used on the advice of a registered medical practitioner.
         (2) The substances listed in the First Schedule may be used as
artificial (non-nutritive) sweetening agents in foods.

  28.--(I)   Where a standard for a 'food is prescribed in these Regula-
tions-
                pike inclusion of thin page u authorized by L.N 2861 19761
            THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975                            11

    (a) that food shall conform to the requirements prescribed in
         that standard;
    (b) each ingredient shall be incorporated in the food in a quantity
         within the limits prescribed for that ingredient; and
    (c) if the standard includes an ingredient to be used as a food
         additive for a specified purpose, that ingredient shall be a
         food additive approved by the Minister for use as an additive
         to that food for that purpose.
       (2) Where a standard for a food is not prescribed in these
Regulations-
    (a) the food shall not contain any food additives other than
         food additives approved by the Minister for use as additives
         to that food for that purpose; and
    (b) each food additive so approved shall be incorporated in the
         food in a quantity within the limits approved for that food
         and that food additive.
       (3) The provisions of sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph (1) and
sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph (2) shall not apply-
    (a) the spices, seasonings, flavouring preparations essential oils,
         oleoresins and natural extractives; or
    (b) in any case where a standard has been prescribed under any
         other enactment.

                                 Preservatives
  29.--(1) A person shall not use as a preservative in or upon food, or
sell as a preservative for food, any substance other than those specified
in these Regulations as Class I. Class II. Class III or Class IV
preservatives, respectively.
        (2) Where any Class II. Class 111 or Class IV preservative, as
the case may be, is sold for use on food, the label thereof shall
include adequate directions for use in accordance with the limits
prescribed for that preservative in these Regulations.
   30.--(I) The following preservatives shall be Class I preservatives
 for the purposes of these Regulations-
      (a) alcohol;
.     (b) ascorbic acid and its salts;
      (c) dextrose;
      (d) erythorbic acid and its salts;
              LThe iadusion of thin page k authorized by L.N 286/1976]
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS. 1975

     (e) glucose;
     (f) potassium nitrate;
     (g) common salt;
     (h) sodium nitrate;
     (0 spices;
     Q sugar;
     (k) vinegar; and
     ( I ) wood smoke.
          (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1). sodium nitrate or potassium
nitrate shall be a Class I preservative in relation to preserved meats
if used in quantities not exceeding 200 parts per million of the finished
product.
  31.-41) The following preservatives shall be Class I1 preservatives
for the purposes of these Regulations-
     (a) benzoic acid, including the salts thereof;
     (b) sulphurous acid, including the salts thereof: and
     (c) sorbic acid, including the salts thereof.
       (2) A person shall not use more than one Class I1 preservative
in or upon any food, except in the case of methyl-p-hydroxybenzoate
and propyl-p-hydroxybenzoate. where a mixture of both may be used.
       (3) A person shall not use in or upon any food more than-
    (a) 1.000 parts per million of benzoic acid or its salts calculated
         as benzoic acid; or
    (b) 1,000 parts per million of sorbic acid or its salts calculated
         as sorbic acid.
        (4) A person shall not use sulphurous acid or its salts calculated
as sulphur dioxide, in amounts greater than-
     (a) 100 parts per million in beverages prepared for consumption
          in accordance with label directions;
     (b) 2,500 parts per million in or upon dried fruits and vegetables;
          or
    (c) 500 parts per million in or upon other food.
  3 2 . 4 1 ) The following preservatives shall be Class 111 preservatives
for the purposes of these Regulations-
     (a) propionic acid, including the salts thereof;
     (b) sodium diacetate; and
     (c) sorbic acid, including the salts thereof.
              [The inclusion of rhis page is authorized by L.N 2861197q
            THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975                           13

       (2) A person shall not use in or upon a food, more than 2.000
parts per million of propionic acid or its salts calculated as propionic
acid.
       (3) No quantitative declaration is required on the label of any
Class 111 preservative used on bread, bakery products. cheese, or
processed cheese.
  33.-(1) The following preservatives shall be Class IV preservatives
for the purposes of these Regulations-
       (i) gum quaiacm;
      (ii) vegetable oils containing tocopherols;
     (iii) lecithin;
     (iv) citric, tartaric, or ascorbic acid;
      (v) monoisopropyl citrate;
     (vi) ascorbyl palmitate;
    (vii) n-propyl gallate, or n-octyl gallate, or n-dodecyl gallate;
   (viii) butylated hydroxyanisole; and
     (ix) butylated hydroxytoluene.
       (2) A person shall not sell a food containing-
    (a) any combination of Class IV preservatives that includes both
        propyl gallate and nordihydroguaiaretic acid;
    (b) any combination of Class IV preservatives, including the sub-
        stance in which they are dissolved, in an amount greater than
        0.2 per cent of the finished product;
    (c) a combination of Class IV preservatives that includes more
        than three of the following preservatives-
           (i) butylated hydroxyanisole;
           (ii) butylated hydroxytoluene;
          (iii) propyl gallate; or
    (d) any combination of the Class IV preservatives listed in para-
        graph (c) in an amount greater than 0.02 per cent of the
        finished prodpct.
  34. A person shall not sell or use as a preservative on food-
    (a) benzoic acid, including the salts thereof;
    (b) sulphurous acid, including the salts thereof;
    (c) propyl gallate;
    (4 butylated hydroxyanisole;
    (e) butylated hydroxytoluene,
              p l ~
                 Inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N 286/1976]
14                      THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

            unless the label of each package includes a quantitative declaration
            of tach of the preservatives present.

                                           Food Additives
              35. A person shall not sell a food containing a food additive except
            as provided in these Regulations.
               36. A person shall not sell any substance or mixture of substances
            for use as a food additive unless the label includes a quantitative
            statement of the amount of each substance present, and a complete
            list of the food additives present in descending order of their pro-
            portions, as well as directions for their use, which if followed, shall
            produce a food containing such additives in accordance with the
            maximum levels of use permitted by these Regulations.

                                 Poisonous Substances in Food
              37. A person shall not sell any food in a container that may transmit
            to its contents any substance that may be injurious to the health of
            a consumer of the food.
               38. Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of Section 5 of the Act. the foods
Second      listed in the Second Schedule may contain in or upon them-
Schedule.
                 (a) any or all of the poisonous or harmful substances listed in
                      that Schedule opposite to that food in amounts not exceeding
                      the quantities stated therein in parts per million @.p.m.) for
                     that food, as determined by the official method; and
                 (b) other poisonous or harmful substances in amounts not con-
                      sidered by the Minister likely to be injurious to health.

                                       Division 111. Drugs
              39. In this Division-
                "adequate directions for use" includes a l l information as may be
                     necessary for proper use, including cautions as to the possible
                     adverse reactions and contra-indications;
                "antibiotic" means any drug or combination of drugs prepared
                     from certain micro-organisms, or which formerly was pre-
                     pared from micro-organisms but is now made synthetically
                     and which possesses inhibitory action on the growth of other
                     micro-organisms;
                "common name" means. with reference to a drug. the name in the
                     English language by which the drug is commonly known;
                              inslurion of this p.ge is authorized by L.N 286119761
           THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

   "expiration date" means any date prescribed in relation to a
        particular drug, as the date after which that drug is not
        recommended for use;
   "generic drug" means an unpatented drug product, including a
        drug whose patent has expired and one which has never been
         patented;
   "generic name" means the official name or international non-
         proprietary nomenclature;
   "internal use" means ingestion by mouth or application for systemic
        effect to any part of the body in which the drug comes into
        contact with mucous membrane;
   "parenteral use" means administration of a drug by means of a
         hypodermic syringe, needle or other instrument through or
        into the skin or mucous membrane;
    "pharmacist" or "druggist" means any person registered as such
         under any enactment for the time being in force relating to
         the registration of druggists or pharmacists;
    "medical practitioner" means any person registered as such under
         the Medical Act or any enactment for the time being in force
         relating to practise of medicine;
    "pr" means, when used in relation to a List 4 Drug, to be sold
         on prescription only;
    "practitioner" means any dentisf medical practitioner, veterinary
         surgeon or veterinary practitioner registered respectively as
         such under any relevant enactment for the time being in force;
    "prescription" means an order given by a practitioner directing
          that a stated amount of any drug or mixture of drug specified
         therein be dispensed for a person named in the order;
    "proper name" means, with reference to a drug, the name in the
         English language of that drug;
    "teaspoon" means for the purpose of calculation of dosage, a
         volume of five cubic oentimetres.

  40.41) A person shall not sell, manufactwe, import or distribute
a W g unless-
    (a) that drug has been registered with the Ministry of Health; and
    (b) a fee of $25.00 has been paid in respect of such registration.
      (2) The Minister may, in his discretion, exempt any person or
any drug from the requirements of paragraph (1).
             m e inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/19951
16                            T H E FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

                   41.-41) A person shall not manufacture a drug unless he has applied
                 for and been granted a permit to do so by the Minister.
'IhLd                   (2) A permit to manufacture a drug shall be in the form set
Schedule.
~    ~ A.r   m
                 out as Form A in the Third Schedule.
                         (3) A fee of one thousand dollars ($1.000) shall be paid in
                 respect of each product for which a permit to manufacture is sought.

                   42-41) A person licensed to manufacture a drug pursuant to
                 regulation 41 shall not sell a drug in dosage form unless the drug has
                 been prepared, manufactured, preserved. packaged, stored, labelled
                 and tested under suitable conditions.
                      (2) For the purposes of paragraph (1) "suitable conditions"
                 require
                      (a) that the construction, fittings and furnishings in a building
                          where a drug is processed and packaged shall be of such
                          material and finish as to permit the ready and efficient clean-
                          ing of all surfaces, to prevent the introduction of extraneous
                          materials into drugs during their processing and testing, and
                           to prevent the migration of dust. in accordance with good
                          pharmaoeutical practices;
                     (b) that the premises used for the processing, testing, finishing.
                          distribution and storage of the drug, and all auxiliary facilities,
                          shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and orderly con-
                          dition, free from vermin, infestation, accumulated waste or
                          debris;
                     (c) in cases where d.rugs for parenteral use are processed, that
                          all fillings and aseptic processes shall be carried out in a
                          separate and enclosed area designed for the processing and
                          filling of such drugs and operated in a manner that will
                          prevent contamination of the drug to be compounded and
                          filled;
                     (4 that the personnel used as supervisors in the formulation.
                          processing, testing, packaging and labelling of drugs, and
                          the personnel responsible for the maintenance of machinery.
                          equipment and sanitation shall have such technical training
                          as is deemed necessary by the Minister, having regard to
                          the duties and the responsibilities involved;
                     (e) that each lot or batch of raw bulk material used in the
                          processing of a drug in dosage form shall be tested to ensure
                          the identity and purity of such raw bulk materials;
                               m e inclusion of this paw u a u t h d z d by L.N. 1441199SJ
            THE FOOD AN^ DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

    0 that each lot or batch of a drug in dosage form shall be
         tested to ensure its identity, potency and purity for its re-
         commended use;
     (g) that adequate quality controls shall be used, having regard
         to the nature of each drug;
     (h) that a system of control shall be applied which will permit
          a complete and rapid recall of any lot or batch of the drug
          from the market, if necessary; and
     (0 thal records shall be maintained relating to each drug, in a
          form and manner satisfactory to the Minister showing-
             (i) the tests canied out on each lot or batch of raw
                  bulk materials used in the processing of the drugs;
             (ii) the tests carried out on each lot or batch of drugs
                  in the dosage form;
            (iii) the quality controls applied;
            (iv) all information received pertaining to the quality or
                  hazards of any drug;
             (v) the results of tests to determine the stability of each
                  drug; and
            (vi) the measures taken to ensure the recall of unsatisfactory
                  lots or batches of drugs from the market.
        (3) The records required to be maintained by sub-paragraph (i)
of paragraph (2) shall be kept until the expiration of three years from
the date of the testing of each lot or batch of each drug, or until the
expiration date of that drug, whichever first occurs, and an adequate
sample of each such batch or lot shall be submitted to the Minister, on
his request, for analysis and examination.
  43.-41) A person shall not import a drug unless he has applied
for and obtained permission to do so from the Minister and has paid
a fee of two hundred dollars ($200) in respect of each permit bearing
a maximum of ten products.
        (2) A person applying for permission to import a drug pursuant
to paragraph (1) may be required by the Minister-
     (a) to furnish information and evidence satisfactory to establish
          that the conditions of manufacture described in paragraph (2)
          of regulation 42 have been met in respect to such drug; and
    (b) before such drug is released for sale. to conduct tests in
        Jamaica by an acceptable method, on that drug in the form
        in which it is sought to be imported.
              p   c inclusion of (hi page is authorized by L.N. 144119951
            THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

       (3) Where, in the opinion of the Minister, a drug, or lot or
batch of drugs, does not conform with the requirements of these
Regulations, the drug, or the lot or batch thereof, as the case may
be. shall not be admitted into the Island for use as a drug.

  44.-41) Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations, the label
of a drug shall include--
    (a) on the main panel of both the inner and the outer labels-
            (i) the proper name; or
           (ii) where there is no proper name, the common name;
    (6) on both the inner and the outer labels-
          (i) the name of the manufacturer or distributor of the drug;
           (ii) the address of the manufacturer or distributor, except
                in cases where the immediate container contains 5
                millilitres or less, when this statement need not be
                made on the inner label;
          (iii) where a drug is intended for parenteral use. the lot
                number thereof;
           (iv) a quantitative list of the medicinal ingredients contained
                therein by their proper names, or if they have no
                proper names, by their common names, except in the
                case of drugs sold on prescription; and
          (v) adequate directions for use;
    (c) on the outer label-
            (i) a correct statement of net contents in terms of weight;
                and
           (ii) where the drug is intended for parenteral use, the
                name and proportion of any preservative present there-
                in.
        (2) All the information required by this regulation to be included
on a label shall be clearly and prominently displayed thereon, and
shall be readily discernible to the public under the customary con-
ditions of pwhase and use.
       (3) Where a package of a drug has only one label, that label
shall include the information required by these Regulations to be
shown on both the h e r and outer labels.
                  inclusion of this p ~ s eis authorized by L.N. 144119953
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

        (4) The provisions of paragraph (1) shall not apply to the label
of a drug package from bulk on the premises where the drug is
retailed. except that the name of the drug shall be included on the
label and where the package of a drug bears a statement, mark or
device regarding the ingredients declared therein, in addition to the
name of the drug, including the name and address of the retailer, the
net contents and adequate directions for use, the package shall be
labelled as required by these Regulations.
       (5) The provisions of this regulation shall not apply to drugs
supplied on prescription.
  45. Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations, a person
shall not sell to the general public for human use, a drug, other than
a preparation solely for external use. unless both the inner and outer
labels on such drug include a statement of the quantitative content
of each drug and the recommended single and daily adult dosage, and
where the drug is recommended for children, the statement "dose for
children, as directed by the physician".

  46.41) Both the inner and the outer labels of a drug for which
a single or daily dosage or a statement of concentration in excess of the
limits herein provided has been recommended shall include a caution
that the product is to be used only on the advice of a physician.
       (2) The provisions of paragraph (I) shall not apply to a drug
supplied on prescription, or to the inner label of a single dose container.
  47. The label of every prepacked drug shall include the cautionary
phrase"keep out of the reach of children".
  48-41) A person shall not sell a drug containing-
    (a) salicylic acid or its salts, acetylsalicylic acid or its salts or
        salicylamide, unless, where the drug is recommended for
        children, both its inner and outer labels include cautionary
        statements to the & a t that the drug may be administered
        to children under two years of age only on the advice of a
        physician;
    (b) hyoscine (scopolamine) or its salts, unless both its inner and
        outer labels include a cautionary statement to the effect that
        the drug is not to be used by persons d e r i n g from glaucoma
        or where the drug causes blurring of the vision or pressure



              -
        pain within the eye: and
    (c) phenacetin, either singly or in combination with other drugs,
        unless its label bears tbe following statement-
                  irlurion d thk wee in euchaiosd by L.N. 144/1995l
                         THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

                           "CAUTION: May be injurious if taken in large doses
                        or for a long time. Do not exceed the recommended dose
                        without consulting a physician."
                    (2) The provisions of paragraph (1) shall not apply to any pre-
            paration containing a drug that is required by anyone to be sold on
            prescription, or for parenteral or injectable use.
              49.-41) A person shall not sell a corticosteroid drug for ophthalmic
            use unless-
                (a) the outer label of the package insert includes as part of the
                     directions for use, the following statements-
                               "Contraindications-
                          Viral disease of the cornea and conjuctiva;
                          Tuberculosis of the eye;
                          Fungal disease of the eye;
                          Acute purulent mtreated infection of the eye, whch like
                             other diseases caused by micro-organisms may be
                             masked or enhanced by the presence of the steroid.
                                 Side eflecrs
                              Extended ophthalmic use of oorticosteroid drugs may
                            cause increased intraocular pressure in certain individuals
                            and in those diseases causing thinning of the cornea, per-
                            foration has been known to occur"; and
                 (b) the inner label includes the statement required by sub-
                       paragraph (a) of paragraph (1) or instructions to refer to
                       the outer label or package insert for idormation about con-
                       traindications and side effwts.
                     (2) The provisions of paragraph (1) shall not apply to a coni-
            costeroid drug that is dispensed by a registered pharmacist pursuant
            to a prescription.
                    (3) A person shall not disseminate to a practitioner promo-
            tional literature about corticosteroid drugs for ophthalmic use unless
            the statements required by sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph (1) are
            included in the literature.
                     (4) The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (3) shall not apply
            to a drug sold solely for veterinary use.
                                            List 4 Drugs
Faunb
Sfhcdulc.
               SO.+)      The drugs listed in the Fourth Schedule (hereinafter referred
            to as List 4 Drugs) arc heteby prohibited from being retailed except
            on or in accordance with a prescription from a practitioner.
                          me inclwion of tbis page L authorized by L.N. 144/199fl
               THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGD'L.ATIONS, 1975

          (2) A person shall not advertise any List 4 Drugs to the general
public.
   51.-41) Subject to regulations 52 and 58, a person shall not sell a
List 4 Drug unless he has received a prescription therefor, either in
writing or verbally.
        (2) A person selling a List 4 Drug pursuant to a written
prescription shall retain such prescription for at least two years from
the date of the filling thereof.
        (3) A person to whom a prescription for a List 4 Drug has
been communicated verbally by a practitioner shall forthwith reduce
the prescription to writing (which shall be validated by the practitioner
within thirty-six hours) and shall upon the filling therefor, retain that
written and validated prescription for a period of at least two years from
the date of filling thereof.
       (4) The person reducing a verbal prescription for a List 4
Drug to writing shall indicate on the written prescription-
    (a) the date and number of the prescription;
    (b) the name and address of the person for whom the drug was
         prescribed;
    (c) the name and quantity of the drug prescribed;
    (d) the name and address of the practitioner prescribing the drug;
    (e) the directions for me given with the prescription, and if that
         prescription is to be repeated, the number of times and
         intervals of time at which it may be repeated;
   (0 the name and address of the person receiving the prescription.
         if given verbally: and
    (g) the name and address of the person dispensing the drug
         pursuant to a verbal prescription which has been reduced
         to writing.
       (5) A person repeating a prescription for a List 4 Drug shall
record on the original prescription therefor, in respect of each repeat.
the date of the repeat, the quantity of the drug dispensed, and the
name and address of the person who dispensed the drug.
  51A.41) Where a prescription directs the dispensing of a named
List 4 Drug and there is available a bioequivalent generic drug which
is less costly than the named drug. the registered pharmacist shall.
before supplying the drug. inform the person for whom the drug is
supplied or the person presenting the prescription-
                                                                            '..._. .
                me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144119951
            T H E F O O D A N D D R U G S REGULATIONS. 1975

    (a) that there is available a bioequivalent generic drug whch is
        hterchangeable with the named drug;
    ( b ) that it is less costly than the named drug; and
    (c) that the generic drug will be dispensed for the one prescribed.
         except where the person objects or declines to accept the
         generic presentation.

        (2) This regulation shall not apply where there is a direction
from the person who issued the prescripton that there shall not be
any substitution.

         (3) Where a person is supplying a drug for which a prescrip-
tion is not required and there is available a generic drug which is less
costly than the one requested, the pharmacist shall, before supplying
the drug, inform the person requesting the drug-
    (a) that there is available a generic drug which is interchangeable
        with the drug requested;
    (b) that is less costly than the drug requested.

  52.-31) A person may sell a List 4 Drug on the strength of a
written order duly signed, to-
    (a) a drug manufacturer;
     (b) a practitioner;
    (c) a registered pharmacist;
     (4 a hospital or any nursing home duly registered under any
         law for the time being in force relating to the registration
         of nursing homes;
     (e) any person to whom a written order signed by the Minister
         has been issued.
        (2) A person selling a List 4 Drug in accordance with para-
graph ( 1 ) shall, prior to effecting the sale, verify the signature of the
person signing the order if there are grounds for reasonable doubt as
to the authenticity thereof.
        (3) A person selling a List 4 Drug in accordance with paragraph
(1) shall retain the order on the strength of which the List 4 Drug
was sold, for a period of at least two years from the date on which
the sale was effected.
              [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144119951
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

  53. A List 4 Drug shall not be imported other than by or for the
use of-
    (a) a practitioner;
    (b) a drug manufacturer;
    (c) a registered pharmacist; or
    (4 a public hospital as defined under the Hospitals (Public) Act
        or any enactment for the time being in force relating to
        public hospitals.
  54.41) Both the inner and outer labels of a package containing
a drug represented for use primarily as a disinfectant, germicide, or
antiseptic, shall include-
     (a) the chemical name and proportion or amount of each drug
          contained therein;
     (b) the batch number;
     (c) directions for use;
     (d) the words "For external use only" or "For internal use only";
     (e) for preparations of phenolic type of natural oils other than
          soaps and ointments, as a declaration of the phenol co-
          efficient of the preparation as determined by the official
          method;
     (0 for preparations containing available chlorine. a declaration
          of the percentage of the available chlorine content.
   55.41) A person shall not sell aminopyrine or dipyrone (a deriva-
tive of aminopyrine) for oral or parenteral use, unless-
     (a) the inner label includes the following statement-
                "WARNING: Fatal agranulocytosis may be associated
             with the use of arninopyrine and dipyrone. It is essential
             that adequate blood studies be made. (See enclosed wam-
             ings and precautions)"; and
     (b) the outer label or the package insert includes the following
          statements-
                "WARNING: Fatal and even serious agranulocytosis is
             known to occur after the administration of aminopyrine or
             dipyrone. Fatal agranulocytosis has occurred after short
             term, intermittent and prolonged therapy with the drug;
             therefore, the use of these drugs should be as brief as
             possible. Bearing in mind the possibility that such reactions
             may occur, aminopyrine or dipyrone should be used only
             when other less potentially dangerous agents are ineffective".
              me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144l19951
            THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS. 1975

              "PRECAUTIONS: It is essential that frequent white
           blood cell counts and differential counts be made during
           treatment with these drugs. However, it is emphasized that
           agrandocytosis may occur suddenly without prior waming.
           The drug should be discontinued at the first evidence of
           any alteration of the blood count or sign of agranulocytosis.
           and the patient should be instructed to discontinue use
           of the drug at the first indication of sore throat or sign of
           other infection in the mouth or throat (pain, swelling,
           tenderness, ulceration)."
         (2) A person shall not disseminate to a practitioner promotional
literature about aminopyrine or dipyrone unless the statements specified
in paragraph (1) are included in such literature.
       (3) The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply to
preparations containing aminopyrine or dipyrone that are dispensed
by a pharmacist pursuant to a prescription, or sold for veterinary
use only.

  5 6 4 1 ) A person shall not sell coated tablets containing potassium
salts, with or without thiazide diuretics, unless the inner label of
the package or the package insert includes the following statement-
             "WARNING: A probable association exists between the
           use of coated tablets containing potassium salts, with or
           without thiazide diuretics, and the incidence of serious
           small bowel ulceration. Such preparations should be used
           only when adequate dietary supplementation is not practical,
           and should be discontinued if abnormal pain. - distention.
           nausea, vomiting or gastrointestinal bleeding occur."
         (2) A person shall not disseminate to a practitioner promotional
literature about coated tablets containing potassium salts, with or
without thiazide diuretics, unless the statement specified in paragraph
(1) is included in such literature.
        (3) The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) shall apply to
coated tablets containing potassium salts with or .pithout thiazide
diuretics that are sold for veterinary use only, or are dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a prescription.                               t




  57. A person shall not sell a drug for veterinary                 ;He
                                                            unless both
the inner and the outer labels include, in addition to the requirements
of regulation 61, the quantitative content of the drug: G d except for
              [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/1995f;
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

drugs in a form not suitable for human use, the words "For Veterinary
Use Only".
   58. A person may sell a List 4 Drug on the strength of a prescription
from a veterinary surgeon provided that-
    (a) the drug is in a form not suitable for human use; or
    (b) the main panel of both the inner and outer labels carries the
        words "For Veterinary Use Only", immediately following
        or preceding the proprietary or brand name, proper name or
        common name, in type not less than one-half as large as
        the largest type on the label.
  59. Both the inner and the outer labels of a veterinary drug repre-
sented as containing one or mort vitamins shall include in addition
to the requirements of regulation 61-
     (a) a statement of the amount of each vitamin present in the
         drug, expressed in terms of the proper name of the vitamin
          in-
              (i) international units per gramme or per millilitre in the
                  case of vitamin A, provitamin A, vitamin D and
                  vitamin E;
             (ii) milligrammes per gramme in the case of solid or
                  viscous liquids, or per millilitre in the case of other
                  liquids, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, niacinamide, pyri-
                  doxine, d-pantothenic acid, d-panthenol. folic acid,
                  ascorbic acid and vitamin K;
            (iii) microgrammes per gramme in the case of solid or
                  viscous liquids, per millilitre in the case of other
                  liquids, biotin and Vitamin B12;
            (iv) oral units for vitamin B12 with intrinsic factor con-
                  centrate; and
             (v) the specified units per individual dose or dispensing
                  form in the case of vitamin products put up in in-
                  dividual doses or dispensing forms;
    (b) except for drugs in a form not suitable for human use, the
          words "For Veterinary Use Only".
  60. A person may sell an antibiotic preparation for the treatment
of cattle if-
    (a) the preparation is not to be used for lactating cattle and
          the inner and outer labels of the preparation include a
          statement to that effect; or
              me iuclwion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/19951
             T H E FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

    (b) where the preparation may be used for lactating cattle-
           (i) there has been submitted to the Minister on request.
               evidence acceptable to him, to show the period of
               time required to elapse after the last treatment with
               the preparation. in order that the milk from lactating
               animals so treated shall not contain residues of anti-
               biotics, and that period does not exceed ninety-six
               hours;
          (ii) the main panel of the outer label of the preparation
               and either the inner label or a packaging insert describ-
               ing the antibiotic preparation includes the words :
                  ''WARNING : MILKTAKEN FROM TREATED ANIMALS
                                 .
               WITHIN......72.. . .....HOURS AFTER THE LATEST TREAT-
               MENT WITH AN INTR.ZMAMMARY       MEDICATION  SHALL NOT
                BE USED IN FOOD";and
         (iii) the relevant space on the label is filled in with the
                appropriate figure.
  61. A person shall not sell any substance having oestrogenic activity
For administration to podtry which may be used as food for human
consumption.
   62.--(I) The Minister may from time to time require the manu-
facturer of a drug recommended for administration to animals which
may be used as food for human consumption-
      (a) to file with him in respect of that drug, a submission in
            writing, in form and content satisfactory to the Minister,
            describing in detail, tests camed out to determine that no
            residues of the drug, other than residues within the limits
            prescribed by these Regulations remain in meat. meat by-
            products, eggs or milk obtained from animals treated with
            that drug; and
      (b) to print on the main panel of the outer label of any drug
            recommended for administration to animals which may be
            used for human consumption and on either the inner label
            or on a package insert describing the drug, a warning that
            meat, meat-products, eggs or milk obtained from animals to
            which the drug has been administered cannot be sold as food
            for human consumption if they are obtained within such
            time after administration as may be specified by the Minister.
          (2) A manufacturer shall not sell a drug in respect of which
the Minister has required a warning to be printed pursuant to paragraph
(b) of subsection (1). unless that requirement has been complied with.
                 me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/19951
             THE FOOD A N D DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975


   63.-41) A person shall not sell a drug in tablet form, the label
of which indicates that it carries an enteric coating or a coating designed
to have a similar purpose, unless the tablet-
     (a) does not disintegrate when exposed to simulated gastric juice
          for sixty minutes; and
     (b) disintegrates in not more than an additional sixty minutes in
          simulated intestinal juice when tested by the official method.
        (2) Where a standard of disintegration has not been prescribed
for a drug in any of the publications listed in the Second Schedule
to the Act or in paragraph (1) of this regulation, a person shall not
sell a drug in the form of a tablet that is intended to be swallowed
whole, unless the tablet disintegrates in not more than sixty minutes
when tested by the official method.
        (3) The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply to
tablets containing a drug which has been demonstrated by the official
method to the satisfaction of the Minister to be assimilable by the
body.
        (4) Paragraph (2) shall not apply to tablets that are described
on their label as releasing the drug at timed intervals or in sustained
quantities over a period of time.

                                   New Drugs
  64. In this Division "new drug" means-
     (a) a drug that contains or consists of a substance, whether as
         an active or inactive ingredient, carrier, coating. excipient.
         menstrum or other component, that has not been imported
         into the Island for u'se as a drug for a sufficient time and
         in sufficient quantities prior to the 4th of August. 1975 to
         establish its efficacy and safety. or is a new drug in the
         country in which it was manufactured;
     fb) a combination of two or more drugs. with or without other
         ingredients which have not been imported into the island prior
         to the 4th of August, 1975, in that combination or in the
         proportion in which those drugs are combined;
     (c) a drug in relation to which the manufacturer prescribes,
          recommends, proposes or claims a use as a drug, or a
          condition of use as a drug, including dosage, demonstration
          or duration of action, and which has not been imported into
          the Island prior to the 4th of August. 1975, for that use
          or condition of use; or
               me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/1995]
       (d) any other drug which the Minister may prescribe.
  65.-(1)     A person shall not 'import; sell; advertise for sale, or manu-
                                                     ., ,
facture, a new drug unless-
     (a) he has been issued a licence by the Minister 'in respect of the
            importing, sale, or manufacture, as the case may require, of
            that new drug, and which licence has not been withdrawn in
            accordance with regulation 69; and
     ( b ) he has paid an initial fee of five thousand dollars in respect
            of that licence instead of the registration fee imposed pursuant
            to regulation 40.
          (2) Any person desirous of obtaining a licence in accordance
with paragraph (1) shall make an application to the Minister contain-
ing-
       (a) a description of the new drug, including the name and address
             of the manufacturer thereof, and a declaration of the proper
             name, if any, and the name mder which it is proposed to be
             sold;
       (b) a statement of all the ingredients, the route of administration,
            the proposed dosage, the therapeutic or diagnostic claims for
            the new drug, if known, a description of the pharmaceutical
            dosage form in which the new drug is to be sold, and any
            known contra-indications and side effects thereof;
       (c) details of the tests conducted to control the potency, purity
            and safety of the new drug;
       (4 a draft of every label proposed to be used in connection
            with the new drug;
       (e) samples of the new drug in the finished and pharmaceutical
            form in which it is to be sold;
       (f) such samples of the components of the new drug as the
            Minister may require;
       (g) a certificate from the competent authority in the country of
            manufacture or export certifying that the new drug is approved
            for use in that country and the conditions under which it may
            be used or sold in that country; and
       (h) a certificate in the English language in addition. to any other
            langdage, from the manufacturer, respecting 'the safety of the
            new drug conditions of use recommended, and giving the
            conditions under which it may be sold, issued by an official
          " body or    gotkmfient department having authority to issue
            such certificate, such official body or government department
                lThe mclusion of ths page' is authorized by L N. 144119951
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS,I975

          having the experience and facilities for testing the safety of a
          new drug that are considered by the Minister as adequate to
          ensure the safety of the new drug under the conditions of
          use recommended.
        (3) The Minister may in his discretion, refuse any application
for a licence made pursuanr to this regulation, or grant any such
application which does not comply with the requirements of sub-
paragraph (g) of paragraph (2) but is accompanied by-
     (a) detailed reports of the tests made to establish the safety
          of the new drug for the purpose and under the conditions
          of use for which it is recommended; and
     (b) such other information and material as the Minister may in
          any particular case require.
  66. A person shall not import, sell, advertise for sale or manufacture
a new drug in respect of which he has been granted a licence, if any
material change has been made in respect of that new drug, in-
     (a) the strength, purity or quality;
     (b) the pharmaceutical dosage form in which it is sold;
     (c) the conditions of use, including indications for use and the
          route of administration;
     (6) the dosage; or
     (e) the label,
unless he makes application for a new licence in respect thereof,
giving full details of the changes and the manner in which the new
drug in respect of which the original licence was granted, is affected
by the change.
  67. Where a person wishes to import, sell, advertise for sale or
manufacture, a new drug in respect of which a licence has been
previously granted to another applicant, that person shall make a
separate application in accordance with regulation 65.
  68. The Minister shall, within one hundred and twenty days after
the filing of an application for a licence to import, sell, advertise
for sale. or manufacture a new drug-
     (a) notify the applicant whether or not his application is satis-
          factory; and
     (b) if so, may grant a Licence to the applicant in accordance
          therewith.
  69.-41) The Minister may withdraw a licence in respect of any
new drug by sending a notice in writing to that effect to the person to
             me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/19951
              THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, I f l 5

 whom a licence has been granted in respect of that new drug, and
 such a withdrawal may be made where-
     (a) evidence obtained from clinical or other experience, or from
          tests by new methods or by methods not used before the
          approval was gven, reveal that the new drug is not shown to
          be safe for the use represented in the application made to
          the Minister in respect of that new drug and on which the
          approval by the Minister was based; or
     (b) the submission filed with the Minister in relation to that
          new drug and on which approval by the Minister was based,
          contained any untrue statement of material fact; or
     (c) the withdrawal is necessary in the public interest.
        (2) Notice of withdrawal of approval in respect of any new
drug shall be published for three consecutive weeks in the Gazette
and in at least one issue of a daily newspaper printed and circulating
in Jamaica, for three consecutive weeks.
   70. Where any person receives any report of any unexpected side
effects, injury, toxicity or sensitivity reaction associated with clinical
uses, studies, investigation and tests respecting any new drug, he
shall immediately inform the Minister thereof, furnishing him with
the full information available.
   71.-41) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these Regula-
tions, a new drug may be imported for the use of investigators having
such technical qualifications as is deemed necessary by the Minister
in the circumstances for the sole purpose of obtaining clinical and
scientific data with respect to its safety, stability, dosage or efficiency,
if--
     (a) the investigators have written authority from the Minister to
           carry out investigations on the new drug and the facilities
          for so doing:
     (b) before the importation, the Minister is informed of the identify-
           ing name or mark by which the new drug may be recognized;
     (c) both the inner and outer labels on any package of such new
          drug bear the statement "To be used for investigational pur-
          poses only";
     (6) before the sale, the importer ensures that any person to whom
          the new drug is to be sold has written authority from the
          Minister to conduct investigations relating to that new drug.
          and obtains in writing from that person an undertaking that
          the new drug will be used solely by him or under his
          direction for investigational purposes.
              (The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144119951
               THE FOOD A N D DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

        (2) A person who imports a new drug for the purpose of sale
to any other person authorized by the Minister to carry out investiga-
tions in relation to that new drug, shall keep accurate records of
such sales. and shall make these records available for inspection by
inspectors duly designated under the Act.
  72. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in these Regulations.
the Minister may grant permission in writing to any person to import
any specified quantity of a new drug, for submission as a sample
with an application for a licence in relation to that new drug.
   73. Notwithstanding any other provision in these Regulations, the
Minister may grant any emergency licence to a practitioner for the
importation of a new drug, the application for which does not comply
with the requirements of these Regulations, if that drug is required
for the treatment of an urgent case, and the Minister is satisfied that
it is in the best interest of the patient for whom the drug is intended,
that the importation be effected without delay.
                                  Controlled Drugs
  74. In this Division-
    "controlled drug" means any drug listed in the Fifth Schedule             &edule.
         and includes a mixture containing any such drug;
    "licensed dealer" means any person licensed to manufacture or
         sell a controlled drug, authorized by the Minister to have a
         controlled drug in his possession, or granted a permit to
         import or export a controlled drug pursuant to regulations
         75 and 76 respectively.
  75.-41) A person shall not manufacture or sell a controlled drug
unless he has been granted a licence to do so by the Minister nor
shall a person have a controlled drug in his possession unless he has
authorization from the Minister to do so.
       (2) A person shall not import or export a controlled drug
unless he has first obtained a permit to do so from the Minister.
 76.-(1)     The Minister may. on application therefor-
    (a) issue a licence in the form set out as Form B in the Third Ed",.
         Schedule to any person to manufacture or sell a controlled
           drtDg; or
    ( h ) issue a permit to any person to import or export a controlled
          drug subject to such terms and conditions as he may think
          fit.
                tThe inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/19951
             THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

        (2) A fee of $10.00 is payable by the applicant in respect of
each licence or permit, as the case may be, issued pursuant to para-
graph (1). in addition to any registration fee payable in respect of
that drug pursuant to regulation 40.
        (3) The Minister may revoke'or suspend a licence or a permit
issued pursuant to paragraph (1) if. in his opinion, the person to whom
it is issued, or any person in his employ. has violated or failed to
comply with any term or condition of such licence or permit or any
provision of these Regulations.
        (4) A licence issued pursuant to paragraph (1). unless it is sooner
revoked, shall expire on the 31st day of March next following the
date on which it is issued and may be renewed by the Minister on
the appropriate application being made to the Minister in respect
thereof. Where a licence has been suspended it has no validity during
the period of suspension.

  77. Subject to the terms and conditions of his licence, and to the
requirements of these Regulations a licensed dealer may supply a
controlled drug-
     (a) to another licensed dealer or to a practitioner, if he receives
         a written order therefor from such dealer or practitioner, and
         he verifies the signature afixed to the order prior to supplying
         same; and
    (b) to a hospital. if he receives a written order signed by a
         pharmacist, practitioner or other official duly authorized by
         the hospital to place such an order, and he verifies the signa-
         ture affixed to the order prior to supplying same.

  78.--(I) A licensed dealer who is a pharmacist carrying on the
business of a pharmacy, or a pharmacist employed by him for the
purposes of conducting that business, may supply a controlled drug
to any person if-
     (a) the drug forms part of the stock in trade of the pharmacy:
     (b) he has first received a prescription in writing authorizing the
          dispensing of that drug;
     (c) the prescription has been dated and signed by the practitioner
          who issued it;
     (4 the prescription includes the full name and address of the
          prescribing practitioner; and
     (e) the signature of the practitioner is verified prior to effecting
          the sale.
              [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/1995]
                T H E FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

         (2) A pharmacist shall not repeat a prescription for a con-
trolled drug unless the practitioner issuing the original prescription
specifies therein the number of times it may be repeated, and the
 intervals at which it may be repeated.

  79.--(I) Every licensed dealer and every pharmacist in control of
a place of business carrying on the business of a pharmacy shall keep
a separate register in relation to controlled drugs in which he shall
enter or cause to be entered within 48 hours of every receipt or
dispensation of any controlled drug, the following-
     (a) the name, quantity and form of any controlled dmg received
          by him, the name and address of the person from whom he
          received it, and the date on which it was received;
     (b) the name, quantity and form of any controlled drug supplied,
          the name and address of the person to whom it was supplied.
          the date on which it was supplied, and if supplied pursuant
          to a prescription, the name and address of the person for
          whom it was prescribed and the name and address of the
          practitioner who issued the prescription;
     (c) the name and quantity of any conuolled drug used in manu-
          facturing, the name and quantity of any controlled drug
          manufactured, and the date any manufactured controlled drug
          was placed in stock; and
     (6) the name, quantity and form of all controlled drugs in his
           stock at the end of each month.
        (2) A licensed dealer in both the business of a wholesaler
dealing in drugs and the business of a pharmacy, shall keep separate
registers as required by paragraph (I), in relation to each business.
         (3) Every licensed dealer and every pharmacist shall maintain
all vouchers relative to receipts and disposals of controlled drugs in
separate files, in sequence of number and date, for a period of at least
two years from the date on which each transaction took place and
such vouchers shall be kept in a manner that will enable an audit
thereof-to be made at any time.
  80. Eyery licensed dealer shall take all necessary steps to protect
controlled.,drugs in his possession or under his control against loss
or theft &d shall report to the Minister any such loss or theft of a
controlled dmg within ten days of the discovery of such loss or theft.
              ' i!
             ...        Division IV. Cosmetics
    81.-(1)A Qerson shall not sell a cosmetic which is not labelled
in accordance wi'th these Regulations.
-                [T-~lusion   of this page is authorized by L.N. 144119951
                  THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, I975
34                                                                                 I
            (2) Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations there shall
     be included-
         (a) on both the inner and outer labels of a cosmetic-
                  (i) the name, if any, of the cosmetic, and the identification
                      thereof; and
                 (ii) the name and address of the place of business of the
                       manufacturer or distributor and if he tias more than one
                      place of business, the address of his principal place
                      of business;
         (b) on the label of a cosmetic a declaration of the net contents
              expressed in terms of-
                  (i) weight for solids;
                 (ii) fluid measure for liquids; and
                (iii) weight for semi-solids.
              so, however, that in all cases fluid measurement may be used
              if it conveys accurate information in respect of the net content,
              and is in accordance with established commercial practice,
              and where a hazard exists, adequate directions for safe use
              shall be included as well as any warning, cauticn or special
              direction required by these Regulations.
       82. A person shall not sell a cosmetic on the label or in any
     advertisement for which is included any symbol or device suggesting
     that the cosmetic has been prepared or compounded in accordance
     with a prescription.
                          PARTUL Administration
       83. A certificate of designation to be furnished to an inspector
     pursuant to subsection (4) of section 19 of the Act, shall be in the
     form set out as Form C in the Third Schedule.
        84. When taking a sample in accordance with the provisions of
     section 19 of the Act, an inspector shall, after procuring a suitable
     quantity of the article in question, forthwith notify the owner thereof
     or the person from whom the sample was obtained, of his intention
     to have that sample examined or analysed and-
          (a) where in his opinion, division of the procured quantity would
              not interfere with analysis or examination, the inspector shall-
                  (i) divide the quantity into three parts;
                 (ii) identify the three parts as the owner's portion, the
                      sample, and the duplicate sample, and where only one
                      part bears the label, that part shall be identified as the
                      sample;
                   me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/19951
                  T H E FOOD A N D DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975                                                  37
                                    FIRST SCHEDULE                                       (Regdation 27 (2))

                         Artificial non-numtndvesweetening agents

 Item         Additive              Preparation usually added to                 Max. Level
  -            -                                                                  of Use

   1.    Ammonium              Special dietary foods recommended
          Saccharin          for carbohydrate or sugar reduced diets,
                             and special dietary food recommended
                             for reduced diets.                                 Good manu-
                                                                                 f acturing
                                                                                 practice.
  2.    Saccharin               Special dietary foods recommended
                              for carboh drate or sugar reduced diets,
                              and q  cd dietary food recanmended
                              for calone reduced he&.                               -do--
  3.    Sodium
         Saccharin


                                           SECOND SCHEDULE                                     (Regulation 38)




                                                                                           Zinc      Fluorine
                                                                                         parts ptr   Parts pcr
                                                                                         million     million

Citric Acid    ..              ..           .I         1
Tartaric Acid ..               ..                      1
Cram of Tartar ..              ..                      2
Sodium Bicarbonate             ..                      2
Baking Powder      ..          ..                      2
Phosphoric Acid                ..                      4
Calcium Phosphate              ..                      4
Sodium Potassium and Ammonium
  Phosphates       ..          ..                      4




                           [The inclusion of this page is suthoriocd by L.N. 144/19951
 38                     7HE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

                                        SECOND SCHEDULB. contd.
                              Poxso~ousS v s s ~ ~ ~ c a s
                                                     PPRMITIED, contd.

                                             I

                                                             Lead                     Zinc     Fluorine
                                                           %g                       P- pu
                                                                                     million
                                                                                               %E
Sodium and Potassium Nitrates              ..
Sodium Nitrite     ..         ..           ..
Aluminium Compounds           ..           ..
Marine and Fresh Water Animal Products
Liver              ..         ..           ..
FreshFNits         ..         ..           ..
Fresh VegetabIcs              ..           ..
Gelatin            ..         ..           ..
Gelling Agents exapt Gelatin               ..
Dried Herb and Spices         ..           ..
Apple J u i a , Cider, Wine and B a r      ..
Fruit Juice exapt Apple Juice              ..
Bev-as        Coasumed mdBo#led
  Wata             ..         ..           ..
Tea     ..         ..         ..           ..
Edible Bone Meal              ..           ..




                        W e inclusion of tbb page is authorized by L.N. 144119953
                    THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS. 1975

                                          THIRD SCHEDULE

                                               FORMA                                 (Regulation 41 (2) )
                                      The Food and Drugs Act
                                    Permit to Manufacture a Drug

............................................................................................................... Name and
                                                                                                                  address of
                                                                                                                  Licensee.
                     of. ......................................................................................
  Is HEREBY LICENSED, subject to the provisions of the Food and Drugs Act,
and the Regulations made thereunder, and to the subjoined conditions, to
manufacture at premises situated at-



...............................................................................................................
the following-



                                                  Conditions
   1. This Licence shall expirc on the...............day of .................................
19............

   2. This licence is not transferable.

  3. The Minister of Health may at any time revoke this licence upon the
failure of the licensee to comply with all or any of the conditions contained
therein, or in the Regulations.

  4. Nothing in this licence shall be deemed to authorize the licensee to keep
any drugs or poisons for the purpose of sale.

   Dated at     ........................this............y of .................................19..........
                                          .....................................................................
                                             Minister of Health and Environmental Control.


                                         FORMB                  (Regulation 76 (1) )
                                 The Food and Drugs Act
                     Licence to Manufacture or Sell a Controlled Drug
...............................................................................................................Name   and
                                                                                                               address of
                     of.   ...................................................................................... Licensee.
  Is HEREBY Lrc~~sm,    subject to the provisions of the Food and D ~ g s
                                                                        Act
and the Regulations made thereunder, and to the subjoined condlbons, to
manufacture/sell the controlled drugs set out hercund-
                      Wile inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 144/19951
                          THE FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS, 1975

                                        THIRD SCHEDULE,contd.
Exact
description
of drugs
'to be
manufac-       ...............................................................................................................
 tured/sold.




Quantity of
drugs to be
Qred,sold.
manufac-       ...............................................................................................................



                                                   Conditions
                 1. This Licence shall expire on the 31st day of March. 19........................
                 2. The Minister may revoke at any tirqe this Licence upon failure to comply
               with dl or any of the conditions mmtamai therein, or in the Regulaaions.
                 3. This Licence is not transferable.
                  Dated at.. ...................... this.. .......... day of.. .............................. .19..   ........
                                                        .....................................................................
                                                          Minister of Health and Environmental Control.

                                                            FORM C                                      (Regulation 84)
                                                     The Food and Drugs Act
                                            Certificate of Designation of Inspector
                  This is to certify that
               Mr./Mrs./Miss ..........................................................................................
               has becn designated an Inspector for the purposes of section 17 of the Food
               and Drugs Act
                                                        .....................................................................
                                                                     Signature o f Inspector
                                                       Minister of Health and Environmental Control.
                                                                     (OmaAL *AMP)

                                                            FORMD                                       (Regulation 86)
                                                   The F d and Dmga A d
                                            Certificate of Examination or Analysis



               person duly designated an inspector/a~lyst under the Food and Drugs Act
               do hueby certify-
                                    [The inclusion of this page ie euthorizcd by L.N: 144/19951
