                         FOOD AND DRUGS




                  THE FOOD AND DRUGS 'ACT                                                ,




                                    >    <
                           PARTI. preliminary
                                             .   .   '   .   .                  . . ..
                                        ..                                      .   .

1. Short title.
                                .        ,...... .           .. .
                                                                .
                                                                        .
                                                                            .
2. Interpretation.
              PART11. Foods, ~ r u k s .Cosmerics and Devices
,   ,
                                    GENERAL,.                .
                                                                 . .
                                                                    .
3. No food, drug, etc., to be advertised or sold for the:treatment, etc., of
   certain diseases.
                                                                                I

4. Restrictions on importation.
                                        FOOD

5. Prohibited sales of food.                                            .       .

6. Food to be correctly labelled, packaged, etc.
7. Insanitary conditions.
                                             DRUGS

8. Prohibited sales of drugs.
9. Drugs to be correctly labelled, packaged, etc.
10. lnsanitary conditions.
I I. Distribution of samples.
                                    COSMETICS

12. Prohibited sales of cosmetics.
13. Cosmetic to be correctly labelled, packaged, etc.
14. lnsanitary conditions.
                                        DEVICES

15. Prohibited saIes of devices.
16. Devices to be correctly labelled, packaged, etc.


        [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 92~/2012]
                 PART111. Administration and Enforcement
 17. Designation of officers.
 18. Administrative expenses.
 19. Powers and duties of inspectors and analysts.
 20. Disposal of article seized. .
 21. Power of Minister to make regulations.
 22. Procedure with respect to regulations.
 23. Power of Minister to require information.
 24. Establishment of Advisory Committees.
                                 OFFENCES

 25. Offences.
 26. Offence by body corporate.
 27. Fiat of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
 28. Penalties in regulations.
28A. Minister may amend monetary penalties.
                                     EVIDENCE

 29. Want of knowledge.
 30. Presumptions.
 3 1. Possession of adulterating substances.
 32. Name of manufacturer.
  33. Certificatesof analysis.
  34. Copies of records.
      SCHEDULES




           [The inclusion of this page is authorized by LN. 92c/2012]
                       FOOD AND DRUGS




              THE FOOD AND DRUGS ACT                                    Law
                                                                     46 of 1964.
                                                                        Acts
                                               [4th August, 1975.1         1974*
                                                                      70f 1996,

                                                                        Sch.

                      PARTI. Preliminary
1. This Act may be cited as the Food and.Drugs Act.                  short title

2. In this Act-                                                      Interpreta-
                                                                     tion.
  "advertisement" includes any representation by any means'
      whatever for the purpose of promoting directly or indi-
      rectly the sale or disposal of any food, drug, cosmetic
      or device;
  "analyst" means an analyst designated under section 17;
  "article to which this Act applies" includes-               .

       ( a ) any food, drug, cosmetic or device;
       (b) anything used for the manufacture, preparation,
           preservation, packaging or storing thereof;
                                                              - 4

       (c) any labeling or advertising material;

  "cosmetic" includes any substance or mixture of substances
      manufactured, sold or represented for use in cleansing,
      improving or altering the complexion, skin, lips, hair,
      fingernails or toenails, teeth, and includes deodorants
      and perfumes;
  "device" means any instrument, apparatus, or contrivance
       including components, parts and accessories thereof,
       manufactured or sold or represented for use in the
       diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of a
    ' disease, disorder, abnormal physical state or the symp-
       toms thereof in man or animal;


       [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 92c/2012]
4                        FOOD AND DRUGS


    "drug" means any substance or mixture of substances
         manufactured, sold or represented for use in-

          (a) the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention
              of a disease, disorder, abnormal physical state or
              the symptoms thereof in man or animal;

         (b) restoring, correcting or modifying organic func-
             tions in man.or animal;

         (c) -disinfection in premises in'which food is manu-
               factured, prepared, preserved, packaged or stored
               for sale or sold or for the control of vermin or
               insects in such premises;
                                              i



    "food" includes any article used for food or drink by man,
         chewing gum and any ingredient that may be mixed
         with food or drink for any purpose;

    "importer" in.relation to an imported article, includes any
        person who, whether as owner, consignee, agent or
        broker is in possession of the article or any way
        entitled to the custody or control of it;

    "insanitary conditions" means such conditions or circum-
         stances as might contaminate a food, drug or cosmetic
         as the case may be with dirt or filth or render the same
         injurious to health or unsafe for use;

    "inspector'? means an inspecto; designated under section
       ' 17;
                                                    I




    "label" includes any legend, word, record or mark attached
         to, included in, 'belonging 'to, or accompanying any
         food, drug, cosmetic, device or package;
                 .   .
    "'package" includes anything in which any food, drug,
          cosmetic or device is wholly or partly contained,
          placed or packed;


         ['Ibejincdusion of this page is ,authorized by L.N. 92~120121
                                FOOD AND DRUGS

              “sell” includes offer for sale, expose for sale, have in
                    possession for purposes of sale (whether by the
                    person in possession or by some other person)
                    and distribute.
                 (2) Where in this Act the expression “this Act” is
          used it shall be deemed to include references to regulations
          made under this Act.
    c
    ,
              PART11. Foods, Drugs, Cosmetics and Devices                                       -
                                  GENERAL
            3.-(1) A person shall not advertise any food, drug, Nofwd,
                                                                     d N & etc..
          cometic or device to the general public for the treatment, tabs
          prevention or cure of any of the diseases, disorders or $  ;?!$
          abnormal physical states mentioned in the First Schedule. thetmt-
                                                                                m a t , ctc.,
                                                                                of certain
                 (2) A person shall not sell any food, drug, cosmetic d1-s
                                                                        Flnt
          or devi-                                                      SehedlIlC.
               (U) that is represented by label; or
               (b) that he advertises to the general public,
          for the treatment, prevention or cure of any of the diseases,
          disorders or abnormal physical states mentioned in the First
          Schedule.

            4.-(1) Except as provided by the regulations, a person Rcstri*
                                                                       Dons on
          shall not import into the Island any food, drug, cosmetic hPm-
          or device unless it wholly conforms to the law of the tlon.
          country in which it was manufactured or produced and
          is accompanied by a certificate in prescribed form and
          manner that it does not contravene any known requirement
I
          of the law of that country and that its sale therein for
    ...   consumption or use by or for man or animal, as the case
          may be, would not constitute a violation of the law thereof.
              ’ (2) A person shall not sell any food, drug, cosmetic
          or device imported into the Island in contravefition of
          subsection (1).
                                                                           _-
                     indUai00 of this page is authorized by L.N 60/19161

                                                           I
6                                    FOOD AND DRUGS

                     (3) Except as provided by the regulations a person
              shall not import into the Island any food, drug, cosmetic
              or device, the sale of which would be an offence under
              this Act.
                                           FOOD
Prolubited      5. A person shall not sell any food that-
s a lo of
food.              (a) has in or upon it any poisonous or harmful sub
                        stance;
                   (b) is unfit for human consumption;
                   (c) consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid,
                        disgusting, rotten, decomposed or diseased animal
                        or vegetable substance;
                   (6) is adulterated; or
                   (e) was manufactured, prepared, preserved, packaged
                        or stored under insanitary conditions.

Foodtobe    6 . 4 1 ) A person shall not label, package, treat, process,
~b~~~~    sell or advertise any food in a manner that is false, mis-
~ k w d , leading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous
etc.
              impression regarding its character, value, quantity, com-
              position, merit or safety.
                     ( 2 ) Any food that is not labelled or packaged as
              required by the regulations, or is labelled or packaged
              contrary to the regulations, shall be deemed to be labelled
              or packaged contrary to subsection (1).
                     (3) Where a standard has been prescribed for a food,
              a person shall not label, package, sell or advertise any
              article in such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken
              for such food, unless the article complies with the pre-
              scribed standard.

manitary        7. A person shall not manufacture, prepare, preserve,
conditions.
              package or store for sale any food under h a n i w con-
              ditions.
                    m e incIusion of this page is authorized by LN. 60/19161
                          FOOD AND DRUGS                                           7

                               DRUGS
      8. A person shall not sell any drug that-                       Prohibited
                                                                      sales of
        ( U ) was manufactured, prepared, preserve-, package1         drugs.
              or stored under insanitary conditions;
         (b) is adulterated; or
         (c) is stale.

c      9 . 4 1 ) A person shall not label, package, treat, process, Dnrl(stok
    sell or advertise any drug in a manner that is false, mis- fiE$y
    leading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous e g d .
    impression regarding its character, value, quantity, com-
    p i t i o n , merit or safety.
               (2) A drug that is not labelled or packaged as required
    by the regulations, or is labelled or packaged contrary to
    the regulations, shall be deemed to be labelled or packaged
    contrary to subsection (1).
               (3) Where a standard has been prescribed for a drug,
    a person shall not label, package, sell or advertise aqy
    substance in such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken
    for such drug, unless the substance complies with the pre-
    scribed standard.
               (4) Where a standard has not been prescribed for a
    drug,but a standard for the drug is contained in any publica-
    tion mentioned in the Second Schedule, a person shall not wad
    label, package, sell or advertise any substance in such a sfhcdulc.
    manner that it is likely to be mistaken for such drug, unless
    the substance complies with such standard.
               (5) Where a standard for a drug has not been pres-
    cribed and no standard for the drug is contained in any
    publication mentioned in the Second Schedule, a person
    s h a l l not sell such drug, unless-
             (a) it is in accordance with the professed standard
                  under which it is sold; and
    -          inclusion of this page IS authonesd by L.N. 60119761
8                                   FOOD AND DRUGS

                  (b) it does not resemble, in a manner likely to deceive,
                      any drug for which a standard has been prescribed
                      or which is contained in any publication mentioned
                      in the Second Schedule.
Iu=nltary
oonditlons.
                10. A person shall not manufacture, prepare, preserve,
              package or store for sale any drug under insanitary con-
              ditions.
Distribuhon
of samples.
                11.41) A person shall not distribute or cause to be
              distributed any drug as a sample.
                      (2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to the distribution
              of samples of drugs to registered medical practitioners,
              registered dentists or veterinary surgeons, or by a mauu.
              facturer of drugs to any person acting as a distributor of
              drugs on behalf of such manufacturer.
                                         cosmcs
Prohibited      12. A person shall not sell any cosmetic that-
sales of
cosmetics.        (a) has in or upon it any substance that may cause
                      injury to the health of the user when the cosmetic
                      is used-
                          (i) according to the directions on the label or
                              accompanying such cosmetic; or
                         (ii) for such purposes and by such methods of
                              use as are customary or usual therefor,
                  (b) consists in whole or in part of any filthy or de-
                      composed substance or of any foreign matter, or
                  (c) was manufactured, prepared, preserved, packagd
                      or stored under insanitary conditions.
        13. Where a standard has been prescribed for a cosmetic,
Cosmetic to
rz,p aarticle
pckwL
etf
         person shall not label, package, sell or advertise my
              in such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken
              for such cosmetic, unless the article complies with the
              prescribed standard.
                         inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N.60/19761
                      FOOD AND DRUGS                                   9

  14. A person shall not manufacture, prepare, preserve, Insanitary
package or store for sale any cosmetic under instanitary condiuoru.
conditions.
                             DEVICES
  15. A person shall not sell any device that, when used Prohbitcd
                                                          sllea of
according to directions or under such conditions as are deviac
customary or usual, may cause injury to the health of the
purchaser or user thereof.
  16.41) A person shall not label, package, treat, process, ~ ~ i          ~   t   o
sell or advertise any device in a manner that is false, mis-
leading or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous etc  dagcd.
impression regarding its character, value composition, merit
or safety.
        (2) A device that is not labelled or packaged as
required by the regulations, or is labelled or packaged
contrary to the regulations, shall be deemed to be labelled
or packaged contrary to subsection (1).
        (3) Where a standard has been prescribed for a
device, a person shall not, label, package, sell or advertise
any article in such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken
for such device, unless the article complies with the pres-
cribed standard.
       PmT III. Administration and Enforcement
  17. The Minister may from time to time designate any D .
public officer whether by name or by the title of his office of=3iz?
to be an inspector or analyst for the purposes of this Act.
  18. There shall be defrayed out of sums provided for ~dmioisb-
the purpose by Parliament all expenses properly incurred 2
                                                         -
in the administration of this Act.
  19-41)An inspector may at any reasonable time-         POwtr5Sod
                                                         dutim of
    (a) enter any place where he reasonably believes any inspectors
        food, drug, cosmetic or device is manufactured,
       me inclusion of ihii pags is authorized by L.N. 60/19761
10                        FOOD AND DRUGS

                prepared, preserved, packaged or stored for sale
                or sold, examine such food, drug, cosmetic or
                device and take samples thereof free of charge
                and examine anything that he reasonably believes
                is used or is capable of being used for the manu-
                facture, preparation, preservation, packaging or
                storing thereof;
          (b) open and examine any receptacle or package
                found in any such place as is mentioned in para-
                graph (0) that he reasonably believes contains any
                article to which this Act applies;
          (c) examine any books, document or other records
                found in any such place as is mentioned in para-
                graph (a) which he reasonably believes contains
                any information that may assist in the enforcement
                of this Act and make copies thereof or extracts
                therefrom;
          (dj seize and detain for such time as may be prescribed
                and subject to such conditions as may be pres-
                cribed any article by means of or in relation to
                which he reasonably believes any provision of
                 this Act has been contravened.
             (2) An inspector may examine or analyse any article
     seized by him or any sample therefrom or any sample
     taken by him or submit such article or sample to an analyst
     for examination or analysis.
             (3) Where an inspector or analyst has made an
     examination or analysis he may issue a certificate or re
     port setting out the result of his examination or analysis.
             (4) An inspector shall be furnished with a certificate
     of designation and on entering any place pursuant to sub-
     section (1) he shall, if required to do so, produce the certifi-
     cate to the person in charge of the place.
             ( 5 ) The owner or person in charge of a place entered
     by an inspector pursuant to subsection (1) and every person
            me inclusion of mi rage ia allthorized by LH. 6011g761
                              FOOD AND DRUGS                                  11

    found therein shall give the inspector all reasonable assist-
    ance m their power and shall furnish him with such in-
    formation as he may reasonably require.
           (6) Any article seized under this Act may at the
    option of an inspector be stored or kept in the building
    or place where it was seized or may on his direction be
    removed to any other place which he considers satisfactory
c   for the- purpose.
      24l.-(l) An inspector shall release any article seized by D ~ S W S ~
                                                                 of article
    him under this Act when he is satisfied that all the pro- ~eipd.
    visions of this Act with respect thereto have been complied
    with.
             (2) Where a person has been convicted of an offence
    under this Act, the court may order that any article by
    means of or in relation to which the offencewas committed,
    belonging to the accused, be forfeited and upon such order
    being made, such article shall be forfeited and may be
    destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the Minister may
    direct.

      21. The Minister may make regulations for carrying the ~Miolslter
                                                               owcrof
                                                                        to
    purposes and provisions of this Act into effect and in parti- m a ~ e r ~ g ~ -
    cular but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing lationa.
    may make regulations-
        (U) declaring that any food, drug or class of food or
             drugs is adulterated if any prexribed substance
              or class of substances is present therein or has been
              added thereto or extracted or omitted theiefrom;
         (b) respting-
‘
i                (i) the labelling and packaging and the offer-
                     ing, exposing and advertising for sale of
                     food, drugs, cosmetics ana devices;
                (3the size,dimensions, fill and other specifica-
                     tions of packages of food, drugs, cosmetics
                     and devices;
              me inclusion of this page is authorized by LN. 60/19761
12                         FOOD AND DRUGS

                  (iii) the sale, the prohibition of sale or the con-
                        ditions of sale of any food, drug, cosmetic
                        or device; and
                  (iv) the use, the prohibition of use or the con-
                        ditions of use of any substance as an in-
                        gredient in any food, drug, cosmetic or
                        device,
                to prevent the consumer or purchaser thereof from
                being deceived or misled as to its quantity, charac-
                ter, value, composition, merit or safety or to pre-
                vent injury to the health of the consumer or
               purchaser;
          (c) prescribing standards of composition, strength
               potency, purity, quality or other property of any
                article of food, drug, cosmetic or device;
          (4 respecting the importation of foods, drugs, cos-
                metics and devices, in order to ensure compliance
               with this Act;
          (e) respecting the method of preparation, manufacture,
                preserving, packaging, storing and testing of any
                food, drug, cosmetic or device in the interests of, or
                for the prevention of injury to, the health of the
                consumer or purchaser;
5411974
s. 2
           V, providing for the registration of drugs or devices,
               the granting of licences for the manufacture or
               importation of any drug or device and the im-
                position of fees in respect of any such registration
               or licencq
          (g) exempting any food, drug, cosmetic or device from
                all or any of the provisions of this Act and p r e       -.
                                                                         _I/
               scribing the conditions of such exemption;
          (h) prescribing forms for the purposes of this Act;
           (tl respecting the powers and duties of inspectors and
               analysts and the taking of samples and the seinue,
               detention, forfeiture and disposal of articles;
           me inclusion of this p5e is authorized by L.N. 60/1976]
                             FOOD AND DRUGS                                13

          63 providing for the analysis of food, drugs, or cos-
             metics other than for the purposes of this Act
             and prescribing a tariff of fees to be paid for such
             analysis;
         (k) adding anything to or deleting anything from
             either of the Schedules, in the interests of, or for
             the protection of the public health;
r         0 requiring persons who sell food, drugs, cosmetics
             or devices to maintain such books and records as
             the Minister considers necessary for the proper
             enforcement and administration of this Act and
             to produce such books and records to any person
             authorized in that behalf by the Minister;
         (m)prescribing anything required to be prescribed
             under this Act                  -

       22.41) A draft of all regulations proposed to be made P$=dmus
     under section 21 shall be published in the Gazette so as m d a -
     to permit representations to be made to the Minister by tlOnS.
     any person concerning any provision of the regulations to
     which that person objects.
             (2) The Minister shall, when making the regulations,
     consider every such objection if made in writing within
     thirty days of the date of publication of the draft regula-
     tions.
             (3) Where the Minister conciders it necessary in the
     public interest or in the interest of, or for the protection
     of the public health, he may make regulations under section
     21 without regard to the provisions of subsection (0, so,
     however, that any regulations so made shall be subject to
.-   negative resolution.
       23.41) For the purpose of enabling him to exercise his powaof
     functions under this Act, the Minister may by order require mipar
                                                                 reqrure
                                                                         to

     every person who at the date of the order or at any sub- S o m t i o n .
     sequent time carries on a business which includes the
           me inclusion of   this page is authorized by L.N. 60119761
14                                FOOD AND DRUGS

           production, importation or use of substances of any class
           specified in the order to furnish to the Minister, within
           such time as may be so specified, such particulars as may
           be so specified, of the composition and use of any sub-
           stances which in the course of that business are used,
           or sold for use, in the preparation of food, drugs or cos-
           metics.
                   (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection
           (11, an order made thereunder may require the following
           particulars to be furnished m respect of any substance, that
           is to say-
                (U) particulars of the composition and chemical form-
                     ula of the substance;
                (b) particulars of the manner in which the substance
                     is used or proposed to be used in the preparation
                     of food, drug or cosmetic;
                (c) particulars of any investigations carried out by or
                     to the knowledge of the person carrying on the
                     business in question, for the purpose of determin-
                     ing whether and to what extent the substance, or
                     any product formed when the substance is used
                     as aforesaid, is injurious to, OT in any other way
                     a f k t s health;
                (4particulars of any investigations or inquiries
                     carried out by or to the knowledge of the person
                     carrying on the business in quedion for the pur-
                     pose of determining the cumulative effect on the
                     health of a person oonsuming the substance in
                     ordinary quantities.
&hbfi&.      24.-(1) The Minister may establiih-
mcnt of
Advisory        (a) a Food Advisory Committee to assist and advise
commim              him with respect to food standards, labelling and
                    other matters connected with the manufacture and
                    distribution of foods in the interest of, and for
                    the piokction of, the public health,
                  [The indusion of thii page is authorized by L N 60/157q
                                    FOOD AND DRUGS

               (b) a Drug Advisory Committee to assist and advise him
                   with respect to drug standards, conditions of sale of
                   drugs and any other matters connected therewith in
    .             .the interest of, and .for the protection -of, the public
                   health.

               (2) A committee established under subsection (1) shall
        be representative of lay and professional interests and shall com-
        prise such person as by reason of their knowledge, interest and
        experience are considered suitable for appointment thereto.


          25. Every person who-                                                   Offences.

               (a) >movesor causes or allows to be moved any article in
                   contravention of this Act;

               (b) assaults or obstructs any officer designated under this
                   Act acting in the execution of his duty under this Act;

               (c) bribes or attempts to bride any inspector or analyst in
                   connection with any matter arising in the exercise or
                   performance of his powers or duties under this Act;

               (4 being an inspector or analyst accepts any bribe in con-
                   nection with any matter arising in the exercise or per-
                   formance of his powers or duties under this Act;

               (e) knowingly gives false or misleading information to an
                   inspector;

          . u> contravenes sections 3 to 16 inclusive or subsection (5)
           '
                   of section 19,

        shall be guilty of an offence and shall on summary conviction
        before a Resident Magistrate be liable to a fine not exceeding
,       one million dollars or to imprisonment with or without hard 71'996
                                                                       S. 2.
        labour for a term not exceeding twelve months.                 7no1I
                                                                                  Sch.


                    [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 92c/2012]
16                                      FOOD AND DRUGS


Offence by          26. Where a person committing an offence against this Act
body cor-
porate.         is a body corporate, the chairman, president, the officers and
                every director thereof concerned in the management of the
                body corporate, shall be guilty of the sanle offence unless he
                proves that the act or omission constituting the offence took
                place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due dili-
                gence to prevent the commission thereof.
Fiat of the          27. A prosecution for an offence under paragraph (c) or (6)
Director of
Public          of section 25 shall not be instituted without the sanction of the
Prosecutions.   Director of Public Prosecutions.
Penalties in         28. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 29 of the
regulations.
                Interpretation Act regulations made under section 21 or an order
                made under section 23 may prescribe greater penalties than
                those specified in the said section 29, so, however, that the
                maximum penalty that may be imposed by any such regulations
7R011            shall be a fine of one million dollars or imprisonment with or
Sch.             without hard labour for a term of twelve months.
Minister           28A. The Minister may, by order subject totaffirmative reso-
may amend
monetary         lution, amend the monetary penalties specified in this Act.
penalties.
7ROl l
Sch.



Want of             29.-(1) In a prosecution for the sale of any article in con-
knowledge.
                travention of this Act, if the person charged proves to the satis-
                faction of the Resident Magistrate that-
                     (a) he purchased the article from another person in pack-
                         aged form and sold it in the same package and in the
                         same condition the article was in at the .time he pur-
                         chased it; and
                     (b) that he could not with reasonable diligence have ascer-
                         tained that the sale of the article' would be in contra-
                         vention of this Act,
                the person charged shall be acquitted.
                         (2) Subsection (1) shall not apply in any prosecution
                unless the accused, at least ten, days before -the day fixed


                         [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N: 92c/2012]
                          FOOD AND DRUGS                                      17

    for the trial, has given to the prosecutor notice in writing
    that he intends to avail himself of the provisions of sub-
    section (1) and has disclosed to the prosecutor the name
    and address of the person from whom he purchased the
    article and the date of purchase.
      3 0 4 1 ) For the purpose of this Act-                       W
                                                                   lions.
                                                                          P
         (U) any article commonly used for human consump
              tion shall, if sold, be presumed, until the contrary
              is proved, to have been sold for human consump-
             tiOW
        (b) any article commonly used for human consumption
            which is found on premises used for the manu-
            facture, preparation, preservation, packaging or
            storage for sale or sale of that article and any
            article commonly used in the manufacture or pre-
            servation of products for human consumption
            which is found on premises used for the manu-
            facture, preparation, preservation, packaging or
            storage for sale or sale of these products, shall be
            presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be in-
            tended for sale, or for manufacturing products for
            sale, for human consumption;
        (c) any substance capable of being used in the com-
            position or preparation of any article commonly
            used for human consumption which is found on
            premises on which that article is prepared shall,
            until the contrary is proved, be presumed to be
            intended for such use.
            (2) In a prosecution for an offence under this Act
.   it shall be suilicient proof of the offence to establish that
    it was committed by & employee or agent of the accused
    whether or not such employee or agent has been prosecutad
    for the offence; and for the purposes of this subsection,
    any person selling or ostensibly employed to sell shall be
    presumed to be employed to sell.
               inclusion of this page is author&   by LN. aO/197s]
18                                   FOOD AND DRUGS

Possession       31. Where a person is prosecuted under this Act for
of adulter-
ating sub-     having manufactured an adulterated food or drug for sale,
stances.       and it is established that-
                    (a) the food OT drug has by regulation been declared
                         to be adulterated if any prescribed substance has
                         been added thereto; and
                    (b) such person had in his possession or on his pre-
                         mises any such prescribed substance,
               the onus of proving that the food or drug was not adulter-
               ated by the addition of such substance shall be on the
               person charged.

Name of           32. Proof that a package containing any article to which
manufac-
turer.         this Act applies bore a name or address purporting to be
               the name or address of the person by whom it was manu-
               factured or packaged shall be prima facie proof, in a prose-
               cution for a contravention of this Act, that the article was
               manufactured or packaged, as the case may be, by the per-
               son whose name or address appeared on the package.

certificate3     33.-(1) Subject to subsection (21, the certificate of an
ofanalysis.
               inspector or analyst stating that he has examined or
               analysed an article or sample for the purposes of this Act
               and stating the result of his examination or analysis shall
               be admissible in evidence in a prosecuition €or a contra-
               vention of this Act and shall be primo fmie proof of the
               statements contained in the certificate but the party against
               whom it is produced may require the attendance of the
               inspector or analyst for the purpose of cross-examining
               him.
                        (2) A certificate under subsection (1) shall be not
               admissible in evidence unless the party intending to pro-
               duce it has before the trial given to the party against whom
               il is intended to produce it reasonable notice of such inten-
               tion and a copy of the certificate
                     me inclusion of this P.BE LE authorized by L.N. 60119761
                          FOOD AND DRUGS                                      19

       34. In a prosecution for a contravention of this Act a CopiEsof
    copy of a record or an extract therefrom certified to be. a records.
    true copy by the inspector who made it pursuant to para-
    graph (c) of subsection (1) of section 19 shall be admissible
    in evidence and shall be prima jack proof of the contents
    thereof.

f                            FtRST %XBDlJLG                (Sections 3. 21)
               Alcoholism
               Appendicitis
               Arteriosclerosis
               Blood Poisoning
               Bright’s Disease
               Cancers and Sarcomas
               Cataract
               Diabetes
               Disorders of menstrual flow
               Disorders of the prostatic gland
               Dropsy
               Epilepsy
               Gallstones, Kidney Stones, Bladder Stones
               Glaucoma
               Goitre
               Heart Diseases
               High Blood Pressure
               Infantile Paralysis
               Intluenza
               Lockjaw
               Locomotor Ataxia
               Osteo-arthritis
               Paralysis
               Pleurisy
               Pneumonia
               Rheumatoid Arthritis
               Ruptures
               Sexual Imptence
               Tuberculosis
               T m o u rs
               Typhoid Fever
               Ulcers of the gastro-intestinal tract
               Venereal Diseases
          pbbe inclusion of this page is authorkd by   L.N. 60119761
                       FOOD AND DRUGS

                         Smm SCHEDULE                 (Sectims 9, 21)
Pharmacopoeia Internationalis
The British Pharmacopoeia
The pharmacopoeia of the United States of America
The Canadian Formulary
The British Pharmaceutical codw;
The National Formulary
Tbc Extra P b a m p i a - M a r t i n d a l e




        me inclusioo vf this m e is authorized by L.N. 60/1976]
