                       PLANTS (Q'UARANTINE)




              THE PLANTS (QUARANTINE) ACT

                                 ORDER
                             (under section 3)



                                                                             L.N. 72/94
     (Made by the Minister on the 15th day of September, 1994)
  1. This Order may be cited as the Pawpaw Ringspot Vhus Order.
1994.
  2. The Pawpaw Ringspot Virus is hereby declared to be a notifiable
plant pest within the meaning of the Act.
  3. The areas specified in the Schedule are hereby declared to be M W I - ~ ~ .
infected with the Pawpaw Ringspot Virus plant pest and to be infected
areas within the meaning of the Act.
  4. Except with the approval in writing of the Chief PIant Quarantine
Officer, no person shall move, despatch or remove any earth, soil.
manure, pawpaw, pawpaw seedlings, pawpaw products or other things
into or out of any infected area.

  5. The planting, replanting or cultivation of pawpaw plants within
any infected area is prohibited until notification of the determination of
the Chief Plant Quarantine Weer to the contrary is published in the
Gazette.

  6. Every owner or occupier and every person having charge or man-
agement of land on which pawpaws are grown shall forthwith give
notice in writing to the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer specifying-
     (a) his name and address;
     ( b ) the name and location of the property on which the pawpaws
           are grown;
     (c) the type of pawpaws grown;
     (d) the quantity of pawpaws grown; and
     (e) the manner in which and the person to whom the pawpaws are
          sold.
               [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 4119971
            THE PAWPAW RIN'GSPOT VIRUS O'RDER, 1994                             -

  7. Every exporter of pawpaws shall forthwith give notice to the Chief
Plant Quarantine Officer in writing specifying-
    (a) the farm of origin of the pawpaws;
    (b) the place from which any pawpaw seeds or pawpaw seedlings
        are obtained.
  8. Where the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer is not satisfied with the
information given under paragraph 6 or 7, he shall by notice in writing
require the owner, occupier, person having charge or management of
the land or exporter, as the case may be, to furnish him with such further
information, as he may require, concerning the matters specified under
paragraph 6 or 7.

                                       SCHEDULB                             (Paragraph 3)
                                        Infected Areas
    (a) Saint Mary--Green Castle Estate and Agwlta Vale and any area
          within a five mile radius of each f m ;
    ( 6 ) ?int Tlhoms--Belvedere ~Eetate; Tais Farm, YallaJls and any area
          within a five mile radius of ea& farm;
    (c) Saint Oatherine-Diou~bIewlell F a m , Ohistian Pen and any area within
          a five mile radius of the farm;
    (d) Clarendon-Clarendon Park Orchard, barn owned by National Com-
          mercial Blank Investments Limited, Clarendlon Park;
    (e) C l a r e n d o n 4 b a Farm, Sevens;
    (j)Manchester-Rochester Farm, New Forest.




                [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 4119971
                                   PLANTS (QUARANTINE)




                          THE PLANTS (QUARANTINE) ACT

                                          ORDER
                                      (under section 3)

                    THEPINKHIBISCUS MEALYBUG
                                           ORDER,2007
                                                                                      ~L.N.
                                                                                         m~ls:
                                                                                            14snw7
               (Made by the Minister on the 14th day ofAugust, 2007)
                                                                                      L.N.n. bAR008
                                                                                           92Bi2009

       1. This Order may be cited as the Pink Hibiscus Mealybug Order, 2007.
       2. The Pink Hibiscus Mealybug (Maconellicoccus hirsutus) is hereby
    declared to be a notifiable plant pest.
        3. The areas specified in the Schedule are hereby declared to be infected Schcdulc.
    or suspected of being infected with the Pink Hibiscus Mealybug and to be
    infected areas within the meaning of the Act.
        4. Except with the approval in writing of the Chief Plant Quarantine
    Officer, no person shall move, dispatch or remove any plant, seedling, cut-
    ting, plant product or any plant related material or article into or out of an
.   infected area.
        5. Every owner, occupier or any other person having the charge or man-
    agement of land who knows of, or suspects the existence of, the Pink Hibis-
    cus Mealybug on such land-
          (a) shall, in addition to giving notice in writing to the Chief Plant
              Quarantine Officer of that fact and of all other available infor-
              mation as to the extent and nature of the pest, report the infor-
              mation to-
                      (i) the Parish Agricultural Manager, Rural Agricultural
                          Development Authority (RADA) for the parish in which
                          the land is situated; or
                    (ii) the Principal Research Director of the Bodles Agricul-
                         tural Research Station in Old Harbour in the parish of St.
                         Catherine; and
          (b) unless authorized in writing to do so by the Chief Plant Quarantine
              Officer, shall not remove from the land (hereinafter referred to as
              "the reported land") any plant, seedling, cutting, plant product or
              any plant related material or article.


                                            -                -      -


                   [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. ZIROIZ]
                                  THE PINK HIBISCUS MEALYBUG ORDER, 2007


            6. Where the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer is not satisfied with the
        information given by notice in writing under section 7 of the Act, he may by
        notice in writing require the owner, occupier or person having charge or
        management of the reported land, as the case may be, to furnish him, within
        the period specified in the notice, with such further information as he may
        require.
              7.-(1)      The powers specified in sub-paragraph (2) may be exercised
        by-
                 (a) the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer, a Quarantine Officer or any
                     other officer appointed under section 5(1) of the Act,.in addition to
                     the powers conferred upon him by section 5(2) of the Act; or
                 (b) any authorized person, in addition to the authority given to him to
                     perform the duties of inspection.
                   (2) Sub-paragraph (1) refers to the power to-
                 (a) direct the owner, occupier or any other person having charge or
                     management of any land to implement measures specified by the
                     Chief Plant Quarantine Officer for the destruction and control of
                     the Pink Hibiscus Mealybug and the production and protection of
                     organisms that are natural enemies to that pest;
                 (b) for the purpose of controlling the spread of the Pink Hibiscus
                     Mealybug, enter upon any land and with such assistance as may be
                     necessary, destroy, remove, uproot, dispose of, prune or treat any
                     plant, plant product or any plant related material or article on such
                     land and, whether such plant, plant product or any plant related
                     material or article is infected or not.




                                                   SCHEDULE                                  (Paragraph 3)
                                                     Infecred Areas
                  The parishes of-
I                 (a) Kingston;
    I             ( b ) Portland;
                  (c) Saint Andrew;
                  (4Saint Catherine;
                  (e)   Saint Thomas; and
                  V) any area within a five mile radius of an infected area




                                     [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 21120123
                                PLANTS (QUARANTNE)




                     THE PLANTS (QUARANTDE) ACT

                                       ORDER
                                   (under section 3)




                                                                                 L.N. 9612004
                                                                                      44~2004
            (Made by the Minister on the 29th day of March, 2004)
                                                                                     ~B/~OOS.

   1. This Order may be cited as the Plants (Quarantine) (Control of
Ralstonia Solanacearum Bacterium Plant Pest) Order, 2004.
     2. The dstonia solanacearum bacterium is hereby declared to be a
notifiable plant pest
     3. The areas specified in the Schedule are hereby declared to be infected Schedule
with the dstonia solanacearum bacterium plant pest.
    .4. Except with the approval in writing of the Chief Plant Quarantine
O&cer, no person shall remove any soil, banana, plantain, heliconia, ginger
lily or ornamental plants of the heliconiaceae family, weeds, plant parts or
plant products into or out of any infected area.
     5 . 4 1 ) Subject to paragraph (2), the planting, replanting, or cultivation
of banana or plantain within any infected area is prohibited.
        (2) The Chief Plant Quarantine Oacer shall, by notice in the
Gazette, spec@ the'date on which the planting, replanting, or cultivation of
banana or plantain within an infected area is no longer prohibited.
   6 . 4 1 ) Every owner, occupier or person having charge or management of
any land on which banana or plantain is grown who has knowledge of or
suspects the existence of the dstonia solanacearum bacterium plant pest on
such land shall forthwith give written notice of the existence or suspected
existence of the dstonia solanacearum bacterium plant pest to-
      (a)  the Chief Plant Quarantine Oacer;
      (6)  the Parish Agricultural Manager of the office of the Rural
          Agricultural Development Authority of the parish in which the
          land is situated;
      (c) the Principal Research Director, Montpelier Agricultural Re-
          search Station in the parish of Saint James;




             lThe Inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18~/20081
      THE PLANTS (QUARANTINE)(CONTROL OF W S T O N I A SOLANACE/IRUM
                    BACTERIUM PLANT PEST) ORDER. 2004



      (4 the Research DirectorIBanana Board Research Department,
            Kmgston Gardens in the parish of Kingston; and
       (e) the Agronomist, European Union Banana Support Programme,
            Boundbrook Wharf in the parish of Portland.
         (2) The notice referred to in sub-paragraph (1) shall speclfy-
            the name and address of the owner, occupier or person having
            charge or management of the land;
            the name and location of the land on which the banana or plantain
             is grown;
            the type of banana or plantain grown;
            the source of the planting material for the banana or plantain
             grown on that land;
            the quantity of banana or plantam grown; and
             the manner in which and the person to whom the banana or
             plantain is sold.
    7. Every owner, occupier or person having charge or management of land
on wluch banana or plantain is grown and on which the ralstonia
solanacearum bacterium plant pest is identified, shall implement all the
recommendations specified by the Chef Plant Quarantine Officer or any
person authorized by the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer in that behalf, in
respect to that plant pest.
    8. No person shall, unless authorized by the Chief Plant Quarantine
Officer in writing-
       (a) transport from any infected area any fruit, sucker, corm, leaves or
            any other material from the banana or plantain;
       (b) drive or transport any vehicle used in an infected area on to
            land in any other area on which banana or plantain is grown.
    9. Where the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer is not satisfied with the
information given under paragraph 6 (2), he shall by notice in writing require
the owner, occupier or person having charge or management of the land, as
the case may be, to furnish him, within the period specified in the notice,
with such further information as he may require.
   10. Any person appointed under section 5 of the Plants (Quarantine) Act
may, the carrying out of his duties under that section-
     (a) direct the owner, occupier or other person having charge 'of the
          management of land in an infected area to implement such
          measures as are specified by the Chief Plant Quarantine @cer
          for the destruction and the control of the ralstonia s o l a n a m
          bacterium plant pest;



               [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18d2008]
      THE PLANTS (QUARANTINE)(CONTROL OFRALSrONLA SOL4NACLWZUM
               ,    BACTERIUM PLANT PEST) ORDER, 2004



      (b)   for the purpose of mpectmg any land in an infected area in order
            to control the spread of ralstonia s o l a n a m bacterium plant
            pest, enter upon such land and with such assistance as may
            be necessary, destroy any plant found thereon and in accordance
            with the approved eradication protocol of the Ministry of
            Agriculture.
    11. Any penon who contravenes the provisions of this Order is guilty of
an offence and shall, on summary conviction before a Resident Magistrate,
be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand dollars and in default of
payment, to imprisonment with hard labour for a period not exceeding one
year and on a further conviction within a period of twelve months for a
second or subsequent offence, he shall be liable at the discretion of the court
to be imprisoned for a further term not exceeding six months with hard
labour in lieu of a fine to which he is liable.




                                        Infected Areas
      The infected areas are-
      (a) the parish of St. Thomas;
      ( b ) the parish of St. James;
      ( c ) Portland;
      (d) St. Mary.




                 [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18~/20081
                              PLANTS (QUARANTINE)

                     THE PLANTS (QUARANTINE) ACT

                                 REGULATIONS
                                (under section 3)

THEPLANTS (QUARANTINE)
                   (CITRUS
                         GREENINGDISEASE
                                       (HUANGLONGBING)
                      ORDER,
                           20 10
          (Made by the Minister on the 19th day of January, 2010)              L.N. 4no10


    1. This Order may be cited as the Plants (Quarantine) (Citrus Greening
Disease) (Huanglongbing) Order, 20 10.
   2. The Citrus Greening Disease (huanglongbing), hereinafter referred to
as "huanglongbing", is hereby declared to be a notifiable plant pest with
which the following parishes of Jamaica are infected-
       (a) St. Catherine;
       (b) St. Ann;
       (c) St. Mary; and
       (4 Clarendon.
    3. No person shall, unless the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer has given
him written permission to do so, remove or dispatch from, or move into, any
area of Jamaica any citrus-
       (a) plant;
       (b) seedling;
       (c) cutting;
       (d) plant product;
       (e) plant related material; or
        V) plant related article.
    4. No person who operates a citrus nursery shall move or sell any citrus
cutting or citrus plant outside of the parish wherein that citrus nursery is
located, unless the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer has given that person
written permission to do so.
    5.--(I) A person who has charge or management of land on which that
person knows or suspects huanglongbing is present shall, in addition to
complying with the provisions of section 7 of the Act, report the same
information required by section 7 of the Act to-
      (a) the Parish Agricultural Manager of the Rural Agricultural
          Development Authority (RADA) for the parish in which the land is
          situated; or
      (b) the Principal Research Director of the Bodles Agricultural
          Research Station, sihiated in Old Harbour in the parish of St.
          Catherine.



               Fe inclusion of this page is authorized by LN. 9SR0131
6.06                THE CITRUS PLANT (CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS, 1999




           (2) A person to whom the requirement of sub-paragraph (1) applies, shall
       not, unless he has obtained the written permission of the Chief Plant
       Quarantine Officer to do so, remove fiom the affected land any citius-
             (a)' plant;

             (b) seedling;

             (c) cutting;

             (4 plant product;
             (e) plant related material; or

             u> plant related article.
          6 4 1 ) The Chief Plant Quarantine Officer may demand fiom a person
       who purports to comply with section 7 of the Act, such additional infor-
       mation as he deems necessary to supplement the information furnished to
       him in compliance with the section.
              (2) The Chief Plant Quarantine Officer shall make any demand
       under subparagraph (1) by notice in writing to the person required to furnish
       the additional information, and the notice shall specify the period within
       which the additional information is to be furnished.
           7.-(1) The Chief Plant Quarantine Officer, or any person he so autho-
       rizes in writing, may, for the purpose specified in sub-paragraph (2), and with
       such persons as may be required to assist, enter any land on which huang-
       longbing is known or suspected to be present, whether or not section 7 of the
       Act has been complied with in relation to that land.                               I



               (2) Upon entering land in accordance with sub-paragraph (I), the
       Chief Plant Quarantine Officer, or the person he has so authorized, and any
       accompanying assistants, may in their absolute discretion and in the interest
       of controlling the spread of huanglongbing, destroy, remove, uproot, dispose
       of, prune or treat any item specified in paragraph 5(2).
               (3) If any such item was not infected, that fact alone shall not render
       unlawful the taking of any action in relation thereto, including any action
       authorized by subparagraph (2).
               (4) Before acting in accordance with sub-paragraph (1) in relation to
       any land, the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer or any person he so authorizes,
       shall ensure that reasonable notice is given to the person who has charge or
       management of that land.



                           [The inclusion o f this p a p is authorized by L.N. 95/2013]
                               PLANTS (QUARAhThVE)




                      THE PLANTS (QUARANTINE) ACT


                                   REGULATIONS
                                 (under section 38)


           (Made by the Minister on the 22nd day ofApn'l, 1997)                  L.N.      4Y97
                                                                                        13012005.

   1. These Regulations may be cited as the Plants (Importation) Control
Regulations, 1997.
   2. For the purposes of these Regulations-
     "importer" means a person who is importing or has imported a plant
          into the Island;
     "inspector" means a person who has been given authorit) by the Chief
          Plant Quarantine CMicer to perform specific duties of inspection;
     "inspection" means an official visual examination of plants, plant
          products or other regulated articles to determine if pests are
          present and determine compliance with phytosanitary regulations;
     "Quarantine CHicer" has the same meaning as in the Plants
          (Quarantine) Act
     "regulated articles" means any plant, plant product, storage place,
          packaging, conveyance, container, soil and any other organism,
          object or material capable of harbouring or spreading pests,
          deemed to require phytosanitary measures particularly where
          international transportation is involved;


                         Plants, Plantsfor Planting, etc.
   3. In this Part-
      "pest risk analysis" means the process of evaluating biological or other
           scientific and economic evidence to determine whether a pest
            should be regulated and the strength of the phytosanitary
           measures to be taken against it carried out in accordance with the
           International Plant Protection Convention, 1951 (IPPC) as
            amended h m time to time and in force in Jamaica;
      "plants for planting" means plants intended to remain planted, to be
           planted or replanted;



              lThe inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18d20081
                        THEPLANTS (MPORTATION)CONTROLREGUL4TIONS. 1997


                   "plants products" means unmanufactured material of plant origin and
                         those manufactured products that, by their nature or that of their
                         processing, may create a risk for the introduction and spread of
                         pests.
                4 . 4 1 ) No plant, plant products or plants for planting shall be imported
            into the Island except in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
                     (2) The importation of plants, plant products or plants for planting or
~rrst       soil specified in Part 111 of.the First Schedule is hereby prohibited.
Schedule.
Part 111

               5 . 4 1 ) Subjcct to regulation (2), no plant, plant products or plants for
            planting (other than those specified in Part I1 of the First Schedule) shall be
            imported into the Island except in accordance with the terms of an import
            permit granted by the Chief Plant Quarantine mcer.
                      (2) The import permit for the importation of items listed in Part I
            of the First Schedule'shall be either a single use permit or a multiple use
            permit.
                6 . 4 1 ) Every plant, plant product or plant for planting entering the
            Island shall be subject to inspection by a Plant Quarantine Inspector who
            may-
                    (a) refuse entry of any such plant, plant product, or plant for planting
                         if-
                                 (i) it contains pests;
                                (ii) any condition of the import permit has not been
                                     complied with; or
                    (6) allow entry for any such plant, plant products or plants for plant-
                         ing unconditionally or subject to such conditions as may be
                         deemed necessary.
                      (2) Every plant, plant product or plants for planting imported into the
            Island shall be accompanied by a valid phytosanitary certificate issued by the
            competent aulhority of the exporling country which, together with the import
            permit, shall be presented to the Plant Quarantine Inspector at the time of
            inspection.
                7 . 4 1 ) Subject to lhe provisions of regulation 5, if so required by the
            Chief Plant Quarantine Officer, every plant, plant products or plants for
            planting, upon entry into the Island, shall be-
                    (a) removed by such means, in such nlanner and subject to such
                         conditions as the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer may direct to a
                         post-entry quarantine facility approved by the Chief Plant
                         Quarantine Officer for the purpose of quarantine; and
                    (6) keptinquarantine for such period as the Chief Plan
                         Quarantine Officer may direct.




                           lThe inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18rJ2008)
         (2) The release fiom quarantine of any plant, plant product or plant
for planting shall be subject to and dependent upon the result of reinspection
and of diagnostic examination and any tests which the Chief Plant
Quarantine Officer may deem necessary to carry out for the detection and
identification of pests.
         (3) Not withstanding the expiry of the period of quarantine directed
by the chief Plant Quarantine Officer under paragraph (I), no plant, plant
product or plant for planting shall be removed from any quarantine depot
without the prior written permission of the Chief Plant Quarantine OiXcer
and such permission may be either unconditional or subject to such
conditions as may be specified.
    8.-(1) The expenses incidental to the keeping in quarantine of a plant,
plant product or plant for planting shall be borne by the importer.
        (2) Every plant, plant product or plant for planting shall be kept in
quarantine at the risk of the importer.
        (3) Any plant, plant product or plant for planting, which, while in
quarantine, develops or, in the opinion of the Cluef Plant Quarantine Officer,
shows symptoms of any pest, may be destroyed without payment of
compensation.
   9!-(1) Every person who desires to import plants, plant products or
plants for planting shall apply in writing to the Chief Plant Quarantine
OiRcer for an import permit.
        (2) An application under paragraph (1) shall specify--
      (a) the name, address and telephone number of the importer,
      (b) the name (scientific and common) and quantity of each item to be
            imported;
      (c) the country from which the item is to be imported;
      (d) the type of permit required; and
      (e) the port of entry of the items to be imported.
        (3) Each application for an import penhit shall be accompanied by
the appropriate fee specified in the Second Schedule.                            Second
                                                                                 Schedule
         (4) The Chief Plant Quarantine OiXcer shall in determining whether
to grant an import permif conduct a pest risk analysis to determine the
specific conditions under which the item may be imported and shall not grant
a permit for items that are deemed high risk based on the outcome of the pest
risk analysis.
         (5) An import permit issued under these Regulations shall be in the
form prescribed in the Third Schedule and shall, subject to paragraph (6),be     Schedule.
valid for a period of four months from the date of issue thereof.


             lThe inclusion of this page Is authorized by L.N. 18~/2008]
            THE P M T S (IMYORTATION)CONTROL REGULITIONS, I997


         (6) The Chief Plant Quarantine Officer may revoke any permit at any
time if there is a change in the pest status in the exporting country.
        (7) No person shall be issued an import pennit iI the plants, plant
products or plants for planting to be imported originate in a country where
there are pests which, if introduced into the Island, could adversely affect
agriculture.


                            GeneticallyModfied Plants
    10. In this Part-
      "genetically modified plant" means a plant that has beell genetically
            modified and imported into Jamaica for the purpose of
            experimentation under controlled conditions.
    11. No plant, seed, cutting or slip shall be imported into the Island except
in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations.
    12. No plant, seed, cutting or slip shall be impofled into the Island except
in accordance with the terms of a permit granted by the Chief Plant
Quarantine Officer.
   1 3 . 4 1 ) N o p h t , seed, cutting or slip slmll be landed without the prior
written permission of the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer.
           (2) Every plant, seed, cutting or slip being landed shall be subject to
inspection by the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer who may-
        (a) refuse permission for any such plant, seed, cutting or slip to be
              landed if satisfied-
                     (i) that any such plant, seed, cutting or slip is plagued
                            with any disease; or
                     (ii) that any condition of a permit allowing the import-
                            ation of any such plant, seed, cutting or slip has not
                            been complied with; or
        (b) grant permission for any such plant, seed, cutting or slip to be
              landed either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as he
              may impose and forward the plant to the importer.
    1 4 . 4 1 ) Subject to the provisions of regulation 13 if so required by the
Chicf Plant Quarantine Officcr cvcry plant, sccd, culling or slip upon k i n g
landed in the Island shall be removed by such means, in such manner and
 subject to such conditions as the Chef Plant Quarantine Officer may direct to
 a quamnti~~c    dcpot approvcd by 1l1c Cllicf Plant Quariti~lcOfficer for Lllc
purpose of quarantine and shall be kept in quarantine there for such period as
the Chief Plant Quarantine Officer may direct.
            (2) The release from quarantine of any plant, seed, cutting or slip
 shall be subject to and dependent upon the result of re-inspection and of any



              [The inclusion of thls page is authorized by L.N. 18d20081
                THE PLQNTS (MPORTATIOW CONTROL REGUIATIONS. 1997


    diagnostic examination and any tests which the inspector may deem
    necessaq to carry out for the detection of disease.
            (3) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period of quarantine directed
    by the inspector under paragraph (1) no plant, seed, cutting or slip shall be
    removed from any qmmniim depot without the prior written pamission of
    the inspector and such permission may be either unconditional or subject to
    such conditions as may be specified.
        IS.+)    The expenses of and incidental to the keeping in quarantine of a
    plant, seed,cutting or slip shall be borne by the consignee of such plant, seed,
    cutting or shp.
            I
             (2) Every plant, seed, cutting or slip shall be kept in quarantine at
    the risk of the consignee.
                  When any plant, seed, cutting or slip, while in quarantine in
    accordance with the provisions of these Regulations, develops or, in the
    opinion of the Qmmtme OfEcer. shows symptoms of any disease. the
    spread of which would endanger the health of any person, animal or ather
    living organism, such plant, seed, cutting or slip may, with the approval of
    the FrIinister. be destroyed without payment of comgensation
                                             Seeds

      l6.NoseedsshailbeWedintheIsiandunlessthereisproducedtothe
    Quarantme Officer in respect thereof a statement by the importer that-
          (a) any such seeds have been packaged in-
                       (i) a sealed plastic bag or
                       (ii) aplas4corpapetewekqe,
                of at lease 5 millimetres in thickness;
          (b) after having been packaged in acc~dancewith para@         (a) the
              seeds have been placed in a metal container which is placed in
              another metal container that is capable of preventing spillage of
t             the seeds and which is conspicuousiy 4abeled with the nlmber of
              seeds and name of seeds printed thereon;




                -
          (c)   the~andouterconsainersinwhichtheseedsarepadcedare
                separated by shock-absorbing material;
          (d) where there is more than olne c m a k r h n g beansporbeq the
              containers are placed in a sturdy container made of cormgated
                fibreboarb, cardboard, wood or other material of equivalent


                 (The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18~fZ0081
           THE PLANTS (IMPORTATION)CONTROL REGULATIONS, 1997



     (e)   each outer container is labelled indicating the contents, place of
           origin, name and address of consignee and consignor along with
           respective telephone numbers, a statement indicating that the
           propagative material contained therein is derived from genetic
           engineering procedures and possess novel traits along with the
           notation 'For experimentation purposes only, not for sale or
           reuse'.
                                         Plants
   17.-41) No plant shall be imported if-
     (a) it is in flower, seed or fruit;
      (b) it is more than 15 centimetres (6 inches) tall.
       (2) No plant shall be landed in the Island unless there is produced to
the Quarantine Officer in respect thereof a statement by the importer stating
that-
      (a) such plants have been packaged in a sealed plastic bag of at least
          5 millimetres in thickness;
      (b) after having been packaged in accordance with paragraph (a) the
          plants have been placed in a sturdy, sealed, shatterproof, leak-
          proof metal container,
      (c) any plant transported in a pot is set in a soil free mix and covered
          before being boxed;
      (d) each container is labelled indicating the contents and number of
          specimens, place of origin, name and address of consignee and
          consignor along with respective telephone numbers, a statement
          indicating that the propagative material contained therein is
          derived from genetic engineering procedures and possess novel
          traits along with the notation 'For experimentation purposes only,
          not for sale or reuse'.
                                  Slips and Cuttings

    18. No slips or cuttings shall be landed in the Island unless there is
produced to the Quarantine Officer in respect thereof a certificate stating
that-
      (a) such slips or cuttings have been packaged in a sealed plastic bag
           of at least 5 millimetres in thickness;
      (b) after having been packaged in accordance with paragraph (a)
           the slips or cuttings have been placed in a sturdy, sealed,
           shatterproof, leak-proof metal container;
      (c) any slips or cuttings transported in a pot are set in a soil k e mix
           and covered before being boxed;


              lThe inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18*/2008]
            THE PLANTS (IMPORTATIOA? CONTROL REGULATIONS, 1997



      (6) each outer container is labelled indicating the contents and num-
           ber of specimens, place of origin, name and address of consignee
           and consignor along with respective telephone numbers, a
           statement indicating that the propagative material contained
           therein is derived from genetic engineering procedures and possess
           novel traits along with the notation 'For experimentation purposes
           only, not for sale or reuse'.

                         Application for permit to Import
    19.-31) A person who wishes to import a plant, seed, cutting or slip into
the Island shall apply to the National Biosafety Committee for permission to
do so and thereafter upon its approval such application shall be submitted by
the Committee to the Plant Quarantine Division of the Ministry responsible
for agriculture for the grant of a permit.
         (2) The National Biosafety Committee shall, in determining whether
to grant approval of the application, consider the applicants ability to enforce
adequate procedures and safeguards to ensure that no contamination by or
release of the plant, seed, cutting or slip which is detrimental to the health or
safety of any human, animal or other living organism will occur at the-port of
entry or otherwise in the Island.
       (3) Each application for a permit to import a plant shall include
information on the schedule of arrival of the items to be imported.
                                     Transportation

    20. Where permission has been granted for the entry of a plant, seed,
cutting or slip pursuant to regulation 13, the importer shall transport the
plant, seed, cutting or slip to its final destination.
   21. Every importer shall keep such records, make such returns and
furnish such information as the Plant Quarantine Division may at any time
require in relation to the following matters-
      (a) the number or quantity of plants, seeds, slips or cuttings im-
           ported,
      (6) the number or quantity of plants, seeds, slips or cuttings received;
      (c) the name of the property or properties on which the plants, seeds,
           slips or cutting originated;
      (6) the date of receipt;
      (e) the condition in which the plants, seeds, slips or cuttings
          were received;
      u> any other particulars required by the Division.

            lThe inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18J2008I
                  THE PLANTS (IMPORTATION)CONTROL REGULdT!ONS, 1997                         .


       22.-41) A person who imports any plant, plant product or plant for
    planting into the Island without a valid phytosanitary certificate shall be
    guilty of. an offence and shall on conviction be liable before a Resident
    Magistrate to a fine of ten thousand dollars.
            (2) A person who imports any item prohibited under regulation 4 (2)
    commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction before a Resident
    Magistrate to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand d o h .
            (3) A person who imports items without an import permit required
    under regulation 5 commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction
    before a Resident Magistrate to a fine not exceedingten thousand dollars.
                                                 FIRSTSCHEDULE                        (Regulation 5)



                                     Items that require Import Permit
    1. A     Fresh fruits and vegetables, citrus h i t s , plants and budwood.
        B.   Banana-hits,     suckers, plants or plant parts.
        C.   Coconut/palm family-seeds.
       .D. Coffee-berries and plants.
        E.   Anthurium plants-tissue cultured
    2. Other plants and plants for planting and plant parts.
           All plants and plants for planting must be bare-rooted, in-rooted cuttings, tissue cultured
        or seedlings in liners or small trays (maximum two inches wide and two inches deep).
           Bare-rooted plants and plants budded as grafted must be no more than twenty inches in
        height &om root up to top of plant.
           Plants and plants budded or grafted must not be more than twenty-four inches in height.
           Flowers, foliage, ornamental branches and bulbs.


                                     Items that do notrequire import permit
    Frozen h i t s and vegetables.
    Shredded vegetables.
    Canned h i t s and vegetables.
    Dried h i t s and vegehles.
    Processed or otherwise manufactured plant products that by their nature or that of their
    processing do not create a risk for the introduction and spread of pests.
                                                   PART111
                                          Items whose importation is prohibited


    B.-Plants   in growing medium (soil or non-soil).
    C.-Plants and plant products or plants for planting &om countries or areas within countries
         where the following pests (or any other pests that may be deemed to be of high risk based
         on a pest risk analysis) are known to exist.



                       (The inclusion of this page Is authorized by L.N. 18r\/20081
4
         THE PLANTS (MPORTATION)CONTROL REGULATIONS, 1997


                                   FIRSTSCHEDULE, contd.

                                           Insects
Mediterranean Fruit Fly                           Ceratitis capirafa
Guava Fruit Fly                                    Anastrepha striata
Sapodilla Fruit Fly                                Anastrepha serpentina
Mexican Fruit Fly                                  Anastrepha ludens
South American Fruit Fly                           Anastrepha fraterculus
Oriental Fruit Fly                                 Bactrocera dorsalis


r     bola Fruit Fly
  ango Fruit Fly
Papaya Fruit Fly
P i Hibiscus Mealybug
                                                   Bactrocera carambolae
                                                   Ceratitis cosyra
                                                   Toxotrypana curvicauda
                                                   Maconellicoccus hirsutus
Papaya Mealybug                                    Paracoccus marginatus
Mango Seed Weevil                                  Sternochetus mangiferae
Avocado Seed Weevil                                Heilipus laurir
Avocado Seed Moth                                  Sfenoma catenifer
Codling Moth                                       Cydia pomonella
Thrips Palmii                                      Thrips palmii
Asian Long Horn Beetle                             Anoplophora glabriepennis
Pickle Worm                                        Diaphania nifadalis '
Pineapple Mealybug                                 Dysmicoccus brevipes
Leaf Cutting Ant                                   Atta cephalotes
Stem Borer (hot pepper)                            Fautinus cubae
Sweet Potato Moth Borer                            Megastus grandalis
Banana Fruit Scarring Beetle                        Colaspsis hypochlora
Banana Scab Moth                                   Nacoleia ocfasema
Banana Silvering Thrips                            Hercinofhris bicinctus
Banana Stalk Borer                                  Castiomera humbolti
Banana Flower Thrips                                Thrips@rum
Asian Citrus Psyllid                                Diaphorina c i t i
South A6ican Citrus Psyllid                         Trioza erytreae
Palm Weevil                                         Rhynchophorus palmamm
                                                        (Linnaeus)
 Black Palm Weevil                                  Rhychophorus bilinentus
                                                        (uontrouzier)



 Citrus Canker                                - Xanfhomonas aronopodispv. citn'
 Bacterial Blight                             - Xanfhomonas campestris
                                                         pv manihotis



          (The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18d20081
        THE PLANTS (IMPORTATI0N)COhTROLREGULATIONS, 1997


                                   F m ? SCHEDULE.contd.


                                             - Liberobacter asiaticum
                                                         (Asian strain)
                                             - Liberobacferclfrfcamcm
                                                   (Afican strain)
Citrus Variegated Chlorosis                  - Xylella fastidiosa
Moko or Basterial Wilt,
   Blood Disease                              - Ralstonia solanaceclrum
Bugtok Disease                                - Ralstonia solanaceorum
Bacteriai Head Rot                            - Envinia chrysanthemi
Pseudostem Wet Rot                            - Pectobacterium Chrysanthemi

                                       Fungal Diseases

Citrus Black Spot                                    Guignardia citricarpa
Banana Freckle Disease                               Guignardia musae
Panama Disease or Fusarium
    Wilt                                             Fusarium arysporumj:
                                                         sp. cubense (E. F.) (Smith)
Black Sigatoka or
    Black Leaf Streak                                Mycosphaerellafjiensis morlet
Septoria LeafSpot                                    Mycosphaerella sp.
Lixa Grande                                          Sphaerodothis acrocomiola
Lixa Pequena                                         Phyllachoro torrendieh
Ganoderma Bun Rot                                    Ganoderma sp.
American Leaf Spot                                   Mycena citricolor/~m/haliafilvida
Thread Blight                                        Corticium koleroga (Cwke)
 Witches Broom                                       Crinipellis perniciosus

                                  Virus and V h i d Diseases

 Citrus Tristeza virus (CTV, stem pitting strains)
 Exocortis Viroid
 Cachexia (citrus viroid)
 Ringspot-Psorosis    complex
 Banana Bunchy Top Virus
 Banana Bract Mosiac Virus
 Banana Mosiac Virus
 Banana Steak Virus
 Banana Die-back Virus
 Abaca Mosaic Virus
 Enset Streak Virus
 Cassava Afiican Mosaic Virus



              [The inclusion or this page Is authorized by L.N. 18rJZ0081
                 THE P M S (IMPORTATION) CONTROL REG LILA TIONS. 1997


                                     .    FIRST SCHEDULE,contd.

        Cassava Brown Streak Virus
        Coconut Cadang-Cadang (viroid)
        Coconut Foliar Decay
        Coconut Tinangaja (viroid)
        Coconut Natuna Wilt
                                                 Nematodes

        Golden Nematode                             - Heterodera rostckhiensis
        Red Ring Nematode                           - Bursaphelenchus cocophilus
                                           Phytomond Diseases
        Coconut Palm Heart Rot                   - Phytomonas stahellii
        Cedros Wih                                   - Phytomonas stahellii

                                                   Weeds
        Witchweed                                    - Siriga spp.
        Orobanche                                    - Orobanche sp.
        Benghal Daytlower                            - Commelrna Benghalensis
        Tropical Soda Apple                          - Solanum viarum
                                                  Molluscs
        Giant African Snail                          - Achatinaficliw


                                                                                  (Regulation 9)

                               Fees for import penniw and inspection
                                         of imported items
       Twes of Permit                                                   -
                                                                        Fees
    I. Single use pennit                         $750.00 where the weight of the import does not
                                                 exceed 22,270 kilogrammes and $1,000.00
                                                 where the weight of the import exceeds 22,270
                                                 kilogrammes
    2. Multiple use import permit                $1.000.00 where the weight of each import does
                                                 not exceed 22,270 kilogrammes $1,500.00 where
                                                 the weight of each import exceeds 22,270
                                                 kilogrammes
)   3. Inspection ofcommercid                    $1.000 for each shipment
            imports

                                        JAMAICA'
                                 MIMSTRY OF AGRlCULTURE
    PERMIT No.
       (Granted by the Minisby of Agricuthue under the Customs (Importation) (Rohibition)
       (Fruit, Plant and Vegetable) Roclamation, 1949)




                  lThe inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 18~/20081
              THE PLANTS (IMPORTATION) CONTROL REGULATIONS, 1997


                                      SECOND      contd.
                                           SCHEDULE,




   OF
   TO IMPORT




   SUBJECT TO THE CONDITIONS SPECIFIED ON THE REVERSE OF W S LABEL

   N.B.-No     liability shall attach to the Ministry of Agriculture or to any officer or
   representative offile Ministry with respect to this permit.
   Packages of plant material arriving wrthout a permit label attached will be considered
   dangerous and will be liable to destmctia.
                                         CONDITION
                                                 OF P         E      ~

1. Package to arrive in Jamaica with this label attached to relevant papers.
2. Entry to be in the Pwt


3. Package and contents to be inspected on arrival in Jamaica, and treated ifnecessary.
4. All plant material to be accompanied by a certificate of inspection and 'of freedom fiom
   injurious insects and diseases, such cettificate to be given by an authorized official of the
   ministry or department of agriculture of the country of origin. The certificate should also
   state that the plants were grown in an area ffee ffom the Golden Nematode.
5. Package and contents to be fiee from soil, and packaging material to consist of


                                 ADDITIONAL DECLARATION




PERMIT NOT VALID AFTER




                    [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 1Bd20081
             THE CITRUS PLANT (CERT1I;ICATlON) REGULATIONS, I999



       (2) The Agency shall, upon receipt of an application under paragraph
1, cause the required test, as prescribed under regulations 17, 18, 19 and 2 1, to
be carried out.
       (3) If on testing the prospective tree is found-
    (a)    to be satisfactory, the Agency shall issue a certificate in the form set
           out in Form 6 in the First Schedule.                                     F~nt
                                                                                    Schedule
                                                                                        Form 6
    (b)    to not be satisfactory, the Agency shall so notify the applicant in
           writing stating the reasons therefor.
        (4) A certificate issued under paragraph (3) shall be valid for a period
of four years.
    17. The Agency shall test all parent trees and certified scion trees for the
citrus tristeza virus, the psorosis complex of viruses, citrus viroids, citrus
variegated chlorosis, greening, stubborn, and any other graft-transmissible
diseases at such intervals as the Agency may determine.
   18.--(I) The Agency shall, where there is a new accession of a prospective
parent tree-
     (a)   carry out short-term indexes for the presence of the citrus tristeza
           virus, citrus viroids, and the psorosis complex of viruses;
     (b)   carry out long-term indexes with the budwood of the prospective
           parent trees by establishing from the budwood of the prospective
           parent trees-
                  (i) two trees on Orlando tangelo or Clemelin rootstock as an
                      index for the citrus cachexia viroid; and
                  (ii) two trees on poncirus trifoliata, as an indexing indicator for
                       the citrus tatter leaf virus.
       (2) The Agency may conditionally release to any nursery carrying out
propagation of quick multiplication block trees and certified citrus trees budwood
which, pursuant to paragraph ( I ) (a), has tested negative.
         (3) A budwood propagated before the completion of the indexes listed
in paragraph (1) (b) shall be subject to recall, if within twenty-four months after
its release, the citrus cachexia viroid or citrus tatter leaf virus is present in the
budwood.
    19.-41) The Agency may determine that a local clone be treated as a parent
tree-
     (a)   where the selection is of proven or anticipated-commercialvalue to
           the Jamaica Citrus Industry; and
     (b)   based on documented yield and fruit quality data.
                    [The inclusion of this page i s aulhorized by L.N. 102/2001]
                        THE CITRUS PLANT (CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS, 1999



                   (2) Where a local clone is to be treated as a parent tree, the Agency or
           the owner shall collect the appropriate propagating material and have it shoot-
           tip grafted and indexed so that it may be-
               ( a ) verified as being free from graft-transmissible diseases; and
               (b) retrieved as a pathogen free accession.
              20. The cost of indexing under regulation 18 (1) shall-
               [a)    where the new accession is to be distributed throughout the Island
                      for the benefit of the citrus industry, be borne by the Agency; or
               ( b ) where use of the new accession is to be restricted, be borne by the
                     person submitting the local clone.
              2 1 . 4 1 ) A grower of a certified scion tree shall make that tree available to
           the Agency to be-
               (a)    indexed for the citrus tristeza virus, citrus viroids, the psorosis
                      complex of viruses, and other graft-transmissible diseases at such
                      intervals as the Agency deems necessary; or
               (b)    inspected for any bud mutation and evaluated for its horticultural
                      traits.
                 ( 2 ) The cost of indexing, inspection or evaluation shall be borne by the
           owner of the certified scion tree.
               22. A person shall not use budwood from a certified scion tree for the
           establishment of quick multiplication blocks or the propagation of certified
           citrus trees, unless bud cutting is witnessed by a representative of the Agency
           authorized in that behalf and recorded in the appropriate part of the form set out
First
Schedule
           as Form 7 in the First Schedule.
Form 7
                                         Quick Multiplication Blocks
              2 3 . 4 1 ) A grower who intends to propagate a tree for quick multiplication
           blocks shall ensure that-
                ( a ) the citrus tree, whether field-grown or containerized or grown while
                      protected from insect vectors, is propagated on vigorous rootstocks,
                      separated from other propagation, and identified with plainly visible,
                      durable markers;
                ( b ) each clone for quick multiplication blocks in field-grown nursery
                      rows is separated within the row by a gap with each gap properly
                      labelled with the name of the clone and the date budded;
                (c)   trees grown on greenhouse benches are separated by gaps with the
                      first and last containers of each clone clearly labelled with the clone
                      and the date budded.
                              [The tnclusrun of th~s page 1s author~zedby L N 10?/?001]
             THE CITRUS PLANT (CERTIFICATION)REGULATIONS, 1999                                23

      (2) The size of the gap referred to in paragraph 1 (b) shall be
determined by the Agency.
   24. A grower of quick multiplication block trees may use those trees-
      (a) as a certified source of budwood for production of certified citrus
          trees for a period of up to forty-eight months after budding, where
          the bud cutting is witnessed by a representative of the Agency
          authorized in that behalf and recorded in the appropriate part of
          the form set out as Form 7 in the First Schedule;                         FUS Schedule.
                                                                                    Form 7.

      ( b ) in varietal blocks, or the containerized trees as certified citrus
            trees, if they are planted in the field after reaching the end of the
            period during which they may be used as sources of budwood, as
            specified in paragraph (a) or in regulation 27, as the case may be.
    25.-(1) A grower of quick multiplication block trees shall ensure that all
trees are tested for the citrus tristeza virus, using no more than six trees as a
composite sample for testing.
          (2) Where upon testing pursuant to paragraph (1) no citrus tristeza
virus is found or citrus tristeza virus is present at a low incidence and the
citrus tristeza virus infected trees are removed, the period specified in
regulation 24 (a) may, at the discretion of the Agency, be extended to fifty-
four months on approval of the Agency and payment of the prescribed fee.
        (3) The testing referred to in paragraph (1) shall be at such periods
as may be determined by the Agency and the 'cost thereof shall be borne by
the grower.
    26. A person shall not use budwood for quick multiplication blocks unless
it comes from a parent tree certified scion tree and unless bud cutting is
witnessed by a representative of the Agency so authorized and recorded in
the appropriate part of the form set out as Form 7 in the First Schedule.
   27. Any person who acquires any budwood bundles for the purpose of-
      ( a ) establishing quick multiplication blocks; or
       ( 6 ) producing certified citrus trees,
shall complete the appropriate part of the form set out as Form 7 in the First
Schedule and forward the completed form to the Agency.
                                        CertiJiedCitrus Tree
   28.-(1) A certified citrus tree may only be produced by a nursery
registered pursuant to regulation 5 ( 3 ) (a).
         (2) No grower shall produce a certified citrus tree unless-
      ( a ) only rootstock seedlings that have not previously had a bud
            inserted in them are used; and



                 r r l ~ einclusion of Illis page is authorized by L.N. 17;2009]
                                  THE CITRUS PLANT (CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS, 1999

                         (6) if rebudding is necessary, buds from the same bud source as the
                             original bud are used;
                         (c) budwood is procured from a parent tree, certified scion tree or
                             quick multiplication blocks, within the periods stated in
                             regulation 24 (a) or 25 (2), as the case may be;
                         (4 all budwood cut are collected into budwood bundles;
                         (e) each budwood bundle is accompanied by a copy of the form set
First Schedule.              out as Form 7 in the First Schedule with the appropriate part of
Form 7.                      the form completed.
                      29. The Agency shall, upon receipt of a form under regulation 27, and
Sand              upon payment of the appropriate fee set out in the Second Schedule, issue to
Schedule.
                  the owner of a nursery, a tag bearing the nursery's registration number, the
                  scion variety, the rootstock variety and date of budding, for each certified
                  citrus tree.
                    30. -(I) An owner of a nursery shall accurately maintain records of the
                  movement of every certified citrus tree while that tree is in his possession.
                            (2) Where the owner of a nursery disposes of a certified citrus tree
                  he shall submit to the Agency a form in the form set out as Form 8 in the
First Sjledu~e    First Schedule.
Form 8
                            (3) Every person who receives a certified citrus tree shall, within
                  thirty days of receipt thereof, inform the Agency of the final location of the
                  tree.
                     31. Budwood from a certified citrus tree shall not be used as a further
                  source of certified budwood.
                                                           Varietal Block Tree
                       32. -(I)    A grower shall not identify a tree as a varietal block tree unless
                  it is-
                          (a) the progeny of a parent tree or certified scion tree; and
                          (b) propagated on rootstocks that are-
                                       (i) recommended or proven for the citrus industry;
                                      (ii) separated from other propagations;
                                     (iii) grown with planting spaces recommended by the
                                           Agency for the particular variety; and
                                     (iv) identified with plainly visible and durable markers as
                                          trees intended for varietal blocks.
                            (2) A varietal block tree shall be made available to the Agency
                  each year in order that the Agency may carry out an annual evaluation of its
                  horticultural characteristic.



                                      [The inclusio~iof this page is authorized by L.N. 17/2009]
                 THE CITRUS PLANT (CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS. 1999




The tree is located at block                         row                      tree

Draw a map in the space provided below t o show the exact location of the tree.




Signature of Applicant
(Company Sump where applicable)



Date



                                                     FORM 4
                         THECITRUSPLANT(CERTIFICATION)
                                                  REGULATIONS,
                                                            1999
                                        Seed Source Tree Cer/ijcate


Tree Identification Number

Located at
                                               Name of Nursery




is hereby certified to be a seed source tree.

The variety of which is

Location of which is                         block                             row

This certificate is valid for the period                                 to




             D i m r of Agency                                                         Dale




                         [The inclusion or thia page is authorized by L.N. 102/2001]
                 THE CITRUS PLANT (CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS. 1999


                                                      contd.
                                        FIRST SCHEDULE,
                                                  FORM5
                       THECITRUSPLANT(CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS,1999
                           Cert$ed Scion Tree or Parent Tree Applicatron

I
                                          Name and Title of Applicant




                                                Nursery Name




                                                   Address


Nursqry Registration No.

hereby apply to have the following tree(s) o f the Variety



certified as a Certified Scion Tree or Parent Tree.

The tree is located at block                        row                     tree

Draw a map in the space provided below to show the exact location o f the tree.




Signature o f Applicant
(Company Stamp where applicable)




Date




                         [The inclusion of this page is authorized by L N. 102/2001]
                  THE CITRUS PLANT (CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS, 1999


                                             FIRSTSCHEDULE,contd
                                                       FORM6
                          THECITRUS                 REGULATIONS, 1999
                                  PLANT (CERTIFICATION)

                                  Certij?ed Scion Tree or Parent Tree Cerlij7cate


Tree Identification Number -

Located at
                                                 Name of Nursery


                                                Address of Nunery


is hereby certified to be a Certified Scion Tree or Parent Tree Certiticate.

The variety of which is

Location of which is                           block                           row

This certificate is valid for the period                                 to




             Director of Agency                                                        Date




                          [The ~nclusiono f this pnge 1% nuthor~red by L N 102/2001]
                THE CITRUS PLANT (CERTIFICATION) REGULATIONS, 1999


                                          FIRSTSCHEDULE,
                                                      contd.
                                                   FORM 7
                        THECITRUS
                                PLANT
                                    (CERTIFICATION)
                                                 REGULATIONS,
                                                          1999
                                          BUD CU7TING FORM

Check as appropriate-Buds    are being cut to establish certified scion trees
                     B u d s are being cut to establish varietal block trees
                     B u d s are being cut to establish quick multiplication block trees
                     B u d s are being cut to establish certified citrus trees

To be filled out by the Agency.                        To be filled out by the nursery receiving the buds.
Representativeperforming bud cutting                   Submit the completed form within 30 days of receipt
                                                       of buds




Buds supplied by
                         (Name of Nursery)

Address of Nursery




Nursery Registration No.


  (Name and Sibmature of Agency Representative)


Rebud= Check this column if the buds are being used
       to rebud previously budded rootstocks. The
       same clone/variety source must be used as was   1hereby certify that this information is true and
       used initially.                                 correct to the best of my knowledge.
                                                       Buds received by
Retain a copy and submit the original to:                                         (Name of Nursery)
Jamaica Citrus Protection Agency, .
Bog Walk, St. Catherine.                               Nursery Registration No.




                                                       Name and Signature of
                                                       Owner of Nursery
                                                       QMB-Quick moltiplication block number assigned if
                                                       a quick multiplication block is being established.

                        [The inclusion of this paso is authorized by L N. 102/2001]
