LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
        AND NEVIS                         Sale of Food and Drugs Act                    CAP. 9.26               1
 Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002




                              ST. CHRISTOPHER AND NEVIS

                                            CHAPTER 9.26
                                          SALE OF FOOD
                                         AND DRUGS ACT
                                        and Subsidiary Legislation


                                           Revised Edition
                                showing the law as at 31 December 2002

             This is a revised edition of the law, prepared by the Law Revision Commissioner under the
             authority of the Law Revision Act, No. 9 of 1986.


This edition contains a consolidation of the following laws—
                                                                                                         Page
SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT                                                                                 3
        Act 18 of 1887 … in force 31st October 1987
        Amended by: Act 6 of 1976
                       Act 7 of 1976

        FOOD AND DRUGS ORDER – Section 30                                                                 12
        S.R.O. 9/1933




                                            Prepared under Authority by
                                       The Regional Law Revision Centre Inc.
                                                   ANGUILLA
LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
        AND NEVIS                   Sale of Food and Drugs Act       CAP. 9.26             3
 Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002



                                        CHAPTER 9.26
                              SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT
                                  ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
      1.      Short title
      2.      Interpretation
      3.      Prohibition of the mixing of injurious ingredients and of selling same
      4.      Prohibition of mixing drugs with injurious ingredients and of selling same
      5.      Exemption in cases if proof of absence of knowledge
      6.      Prohibition of sale of articles of food and of drugs not of the proper nature,
              substance and quality
      7.      Reduction allowed to the extent of 25 degrees under proof for brandy, whisky or
              rum and 35 degrees for gin
      8.      Provision for the sale of compounded articles of food and compounded drugs
      9.      Protection from offences by giving of label
     10.      Prohibition of the abstraction of any part of an article of food before sale and
              selling without notice
     11.      Appointment of analysts
     12.      Power to purchaser of an article of food to have it analysed
     13.      Officer named to obtain a sample of food or drug to submit to analyst
     14.      Officer, Inspector or constable may obtain a sample of milk to submit to analyst
              at place of delivery
     15.      Penalty on refusal to give milk for analysis
     16.      In sale of adulterated articles no defence to allege purchase for analysis
     17.      Provision for dealing with the sample when purchased
     18.      Provision when sample is not divided
     19.      Provision for sending article to the analyst through the post office
     20.      Person refusing to sell any article to any officer liable to penalty
     21.      Form of certificate
     22.      Quarterly report of the analyst
     23.      Proceedings against offenders
     24.      Certificate of analyst prima facie evidence. Analyst to be called if required.
              Defendant and his wife may be examined
     25.      Power for Magistrate to have articles of food and drugs analysed
     26.      Defendant to prove exception
     27.      Defendant to be discharged if he prove that he bought the article in the same
              state as it was sold and with a warranty
     28.      Punishment for forging certificate or warranty
     29.      Proceedings by indictment and on contracts
     30.      Powers to fix standards of purity
     31.      Penalty
     32.      Powers of Sanitary Officers
              FIRST SCHEDULE
              SECOND SCHEDULE: Food and Drugs Order
LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
        AND NEVIS                    Sale of Food and Drugs Act            CAP. 9.26   5
 Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002



                                         CHAPTER 9.26
                              SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT
AN ACT TO MAKE PROVISION FOR THE SALE OF ARTICLES OF FOOD AND DRUGS IN THEIR
PROPER NATURE, SUBSTANCE AND QUALITY; AND TO MAKE PROVISION FOR RELATED OR
INCIDENTAL MATTERS.

Short title.
1.         This Act may be cited as the Sale of Food and Drugs Act.

Interpretation.
2.         In this Act—
“food” includes every article used for food or drink by man, other than drugs or
      water;
“drug” includes medicine for internal or external use;
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for Health;
                                      (Inserted by Act 7 of 1976)
“sanitary officer” means any duly appointed officer of a Board of Health in the State
       or a sanitary officer of some town, village, or place in the State.


                                      Description of Offences

Prohibition of the mixing of injurious ingredients and of selling same.
3.     (1) No person shall mix, colour, stain or powder or order or permit any other
person to mix, colour, stain or powder any article of food with any ingredient or
material so as to render the article injurious to health with intent that the same may be
sold in that state, and no person shall sell any such article so mixed, coloured, stained
or powdered.
      (2) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable to pay a fine not exceeding three thousand dollars or to
imprisonment for six months.
                               (Amended by Acts 7 of 1976 and 9 of 1986)

Prohibition of mixing drugs with injurious ingredients and of selling same.
4.     (1) No person shall, except for the purpose of compounding as hereinafter
described, mix, colour, stain or powder or order or permit any other person to mix,
colour, stain or powder any drug with any ingredient or material so as to affect
injuriously the quality or potency of such drug with intent that the same may be sold
in that state and no person shall sell any such drug so mixed, coloured, stained or
powdered.
       (2) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable for a first and subsequent offence to the same penalty in each
case as provided in section 3.
                                                                    LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
6        CAP. 9.26                Sale of Food and Drugs Act                AND NEVIS
                                                                       Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002


Exemption in cases if proof of absence of knowledge.
5.     No person shall be liable to be convicted under either of the two last foregoing
sections in respect of the sale of any article of food or of any drug if he or she shows,
to the satisfaction of the Magistrate or Court before whom he or she is charged, that
he or she did not know of the article of food or drug sold by him or her being so
mixed, coloured, stained or powdered as in either of these sections mentioned and
that he or she could not with reasonable vigilance have obtained that knowledge.

Prohibition of sale of articles of food and of drugs not of the proper nature,
substance and quality.
6.    Any person who sells, to the prejudice of the purchaser, any article of food or
any drug which is not of the nature, substance and quality of the article demanded by
the purchaser commits an offence and is liable to pay a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars:
       Provided that an offence shall not be deemed to be committed under this
section in the following cases, that is to say—
           (a) where any matter or ingredient not injurious to health has been added
               to the food or drug because the same is required for the production or
               preparation thereof as an article of commerce in a state fit for carriage
               or consumption and not fraudulently to increase the bulk, weight or
               measure of the food or drug or conceal the inferior quality thereof;
           (b) where the drug or food is a proprietary medicine or is the subject of a
               patent in force and is supplied in the state required by the specification
               of the patent;
           (c) where the food or drug is compounded as in this Act mentioned;
           (d) where the food or drugs is unavoidably mixed with some extraneous
               matter in the process of collection or preparation.
                        (Amended by Acts 7 of 1976 and 9 of 1986)

Reduction allowed to the extent of 25 degrees under proof for brandy, whisky or
rum and 35 degrees for gin.
7.     In determining whether an offence has been committed under the preceding
section by selling to the prejudice of the purchaser spirits not adulterated otherwise
than by the admixture of water it shall be a good defence to prove that such admixture
has not reduced the spirit more than twenty-five degrees under proof for brandy,
whisky, or rum or thirty-five degrees under proof for gin.

Provision for the sale of compounded articles of food and compounded drugs.
8.    Any person who sells any compound article of food or compounded drug
which is not composed of ingredients in accordance with the demand of the purchaser
commits an offence and is liable to pay a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars.
                        (Amended by Acts 7 of 1976 and 9 of 1986)

Protection from offences by giving of label.
9.     No person shall be guilty of any such offence as aforesaid in respect of the sale
of an article of food or a drug mixed with any matter or ingredient not injurious to
health and not intended fraudulently to increase its bulk, weight or measure or
conceal its inferior quality if at the time of delivering such article or drug he or she
LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
        AND NEVIS                   Sale of Food and Drugs Act            CAP. 9.26   7
 Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002


shall supply to the person receiving the same a notice by a label distinctly and legibly
written or printed on or with the article or drug to the effect that the same is mixed.

Prohibition of the abstraction of any part of an article of food before sale and selling
without notice.
10. Any person who, with the intent that the same may be sold in its altered state,
without notice, abstracts from an article of food any part of it so as to affect
injuriously its quality, substance or nature, and any person who sells any article so
altered without making disclosure of the alteration commits an offence and is liable,
in each case, to pay a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars.
                              (Amended by Acts 7 of 1976 and 9 of 1986)



                               Appointment and duties of analysts

Appointment of analysts.
11. The Minister may appoint one or more persons possessing competent
knowledge, skill and experience as analysts of all articles of food and drugs sold
within the State.
                              (Amended by Acts 6 of 1976 and 7 of 1976)

Power to purchaser of an article of food to have it analysed.
12. Any purchaser of an article of food or of a drug in the State after there is an
analyst appointed under this Act shall be entitled on payment to such analyst of a sum
to be prescribed by the Minister or if there be no analyst then appointed to any analyst
whom the Minister may appoint of such sum as may be agreed upon between such
person and the analyst, to have such article analysed by such analyst and to receive
from him or her a certificate of the results of his or her analysis.
                              (Amended by Acts 6 of 1976 and 7 of 1976)

Officer named to obtain a sample of food or drug to submit to analyst.
13. Any medical officer, inspector of nuisances, or inspector of weights and
measures, or any inspector of a market, or any police constable, under the direction of
the Chief of Police may procure any sample of food or drugs, and if he or she suspect
the same to have been sold to him or her contrary to any provision of this Act, shall
submit the same to be analysed to an analyst appointed under this Act and such
analyst shall upon receiving payment as is provided in the last section with all
convenient speed analyse the same and give a certificate to such officer wherein he or
she shall specify the results of his or her analysis, and the expenses attending any
purchase or analysis under this section shall be paid out of the Public Treasury.

Officer, Inspector or constable may obtain a sample of milk to submit to analyst at
place of delivery.
14. Any medical officer, inspector of nuisances, or inspector of weights and
measures, or any inspector of a market, or any police constable, under the direction of
the Chief of Police, may procure at the place of delivery any sample of any milk in
course of delivery to the purchaser or consignee in pursuance of any contract for the
sale to any purchaser or consignee of such milk and such officer, inspector or
constable if he or she suspect the same to have been sold contrary to any of the
provisions of this Act shall submit the same to be analysed and the same shall be
                                                                       LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
8         CAP. 9.26                Sale of Food and Drugs Act                  AND NEVIS
                                                                          Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002


analysed and proceedings shall be taken and penalties on conviction be enforced in
like manner in all respects as if such officer, inspector or constable had purchased the
same from the seller or consignor under the preceding section.

Penalty on refusal to give milk for analysis.
15. The seller or consignor or any person or persons entrusted by him or her for
the time being with the charge of such milk if he or she shall refuse to allow such
officer, inspector or constable to take the quantity which such officer, inspector or
constable shall require for the purpose of analysis commits an offence and shall be
liable to a fine not exceeding seven-hundred and fifty dollars.
                          (Amended by Acts 7 of 1976 and 9 of 1986)

In sale of adulterated articles no defence to allege purchase for analysis.
16. (1) In any prosecution under the provisions of this Act for selling to the
prejudice of the purchaser any article of food or any drug which is not of the nature,
substance and quality of the article demanded by such purchaser it shall be no
defence to any such prosecution to allege that the purchaser having bought only for
analysis was not prejudiced by such sale.
        (2) Neither shall it be a good defence to prove that the article of food or drug
in question though defective in nature or in substance or in quality was not defective
in all three respects.

Provision for dealing with the sample when purchased.
17. (1) The person purchasing any article with the intention of submitting the
same to any analyst shall, after the purchase shall have been completed, forthwith
notify to the seller or his or her agent selling the article his or her intention to have the
same analysed by the Public Analyst and shall offer to divide the article into three
parts to be then and there separated and each part to be marked and sealed or fastened
up in such manner as its nature will permit and shall if required to do so proceed
accordingly and shall deliver one of the parts to the seller or his or her agent.
       (2) He shall afterwards retain one of the said parts for future comparison and
submit the third part, if he or she deems it right to have the article analysed, to the
analyst.

Provision when sample is not divided.
18. If the seller or his or her agent do not accept the offer of the purchaser to
divide the article purchased in his or her presence the analyst receiving the article for
analysis shall divide the same into two parts and shall seal or fasten up one of those
parts and shall cause it to be delivered either upon receipt of the sample or when he or
she supplies his or her certificate to the purchaser who shall retain the same for
production in case proceedings shall afterwards be taken in the matter.

Provision for sending article to the analyst through the post office.
19. If the analyst does not reside within two miles of the residence of the person
requiring the article to be analysed such article may be forwarded to the analyst
through the post office as a registered letter, subject to any regulations the Minister
may make in reference to the carrying and delivery of such article, and the charge for
the postage of such article shall be deemed one of the charges of this Act or of the
prosecution as the case may be.
                                 (Amended by Act 6 of 1976)
LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
        AND NEVIS                   Sale of Food and Drugs Act            CAP. 9.26     9
 Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002


Person refusing to sell any article to any officer liable to penalty.
20. If any such officer, inspector or constable as above described shall apply to
purchase any article of food or any drug exposed to sale or on sale by retail on any
premises or in any shop or stores or in any street or open place of public resort and
shall tender the price for the quantity he or she shall require for the purpose of
analysis, not being more than shall be reasonably requisite, and the person exposing
the same for sale shall refuse to sell the same to such officer, inspector or constable,
such person commits an offence and shall be liable to pay a fine not exceeding seven
hundred and fifty dollars.
                              (Amended by Acts 7 of 1976 and 9 of 1986)

Form of certificate.
21. The certificate of the analyst shall be in the form set forth in the First Schedule
or to the like effect.

Quarterly report of the analyst.
22. Every analyst appointed under this Act shall report quarterly to the Minister
the number of articles analysed by him or her under this Act during the foregoing
quarter and shall specify the result of each analysis and the sum paid to him or her in
respect thereof, and such report shall be presented at the next meeting of the National
Assembly.
                                     (Amended by Act 6 of 1976)



                                 Proceedings against Offenders

Proceedings against offenders.
23. (1) When the analyst having analysed any article shall have given his or her
certificate of the result from which it may appear that an offence against some one of
the provisions of this Act has been committed, the person causing the analysis to be
made may take proceedings for the recovery of the penalty herein imposed for such
offence, before any Magistrate having jurisdiction in the place where the article or
drug sold was actually delivered to the purchaser in a summary manner.
      (2) Every penalty imposed by this Act shall be recovered in the manner
provided by the Magistrates’ Code of Procedure Act, Cap. 3.17.

Certificate of analyst prima facie evidence. Analyst to be called if required.
Defendant and his wife may be examined.
24. At the hearing of the information in such proceeding the production of the
certificate of the analyst shall be sufficient evidence of the facts therein stated, unless
the defendant shall require that the analyst shall be called as a witness, and the parts
of the articles retained by the person who purchased the article shall be produced, and
the defendant may, if he or she think fit, tender himself or herself and his wife or her
husband to be examined on his or her behalf, and he or she shall, if he or she so
desire, be examined accordingly.

Power for Magistrate to have articles of food and drugs analysed.
25. The Magistrate before whom any complaint may be made or the Court before
whom any appeal may be heard under this Act may, upon the request of either party,
                                                                          LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
10           CAP. 9.26                  Sale of Food and Drugs Act                AND NEVIS
                                                                             Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002


in his or her or its discretion, cause any article, of food or drug to be sent to an analyst
other than the analyst by whom the analysis has been made and residing either in or
out of the State who shall thereupon make an analysis and give a certificate to such
Magistrate of the result of his or her analysis; and the expense of such analysis shall
be paid by the complainant or the defendant as the Magistrate may by order direct.

Defendant to prove exception.
26. In any prosecution under this Act where the fact of an article having been sold
in a mixed state has been proved, if the defendant shall desire to rely upon any
exception or provision contained in this Act it shall be incumbent upon him or her to
prove the same.
*
 Defendant to be discharged if he prove that he bought the article in the same state
as it was sold and with a warranty.
27. If the defendant in any prosecution under this Act prove to the satisfaction of
the Magistrate or Court that he or she had purchased the article in question as the
same in nature, substance and quality as that demanded of him or her by the
prosecutor, and with a written warranty to that effect, that he or she had no reason to
believe at the time when he or she sold it that the article was otherwise, and that he or
she sold it in the same state as when he or she purchased it, he or she shall be
discharged from the prosecution but shall be liable to pay the costs incurred by the
prosecutor unless he or she shall have given due notice to him or her that he or she
will rely on the above defence.

Punishment for forging certificate or warranty.
28. (1) Any person who shall forge or shall utter, knowing it to be forged, for the
purposes of this Act any certificate or any writing purporting to contain a warranty
commits a misdemeanour and shall be punishable on conviction by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding two years with hard labour.
        (2) Every person who shall wilfully apply to an article of food or a drug in any
proceedings under this Act a certificate or warranty given in relation to any other
article or drug commits an offence under this Act and shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding one thousand dollars.
       (3) Every person who shall give a false warranty in writing to any purchaser in
respect of an article of food or a drug sold by him or her as principal or agent
commits an offence under this Act and be liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars.
       (4) Every person who shall wilfully give a label with any article sold by him
or her which shall falsely describe the article sold commits an offence under this Act
and shall be liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars.
                              (Amended by Acts 7 of 1976 and 9 of 1986)

†
    Proceedings by indictment and on contracts.
29. Nothing in this Act contained shall affect the power of proceeding by
indictment or take away any other remedy against any offender under this Act or in
any way interfere with contracts and bargains between individuals and the rights and
remedies belonging thereto:

*
    Note: section 28 was deleted by Act 7 of 1976.
†
    Note: sections 31 to 32 were deleted by Act 7 of 1976.
LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
        AND NEVIS              Sale of Food and Drugs Act      CAP. 9.26           11
 Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002


        Provided that in any action brought by any person for a breach of contract on
the sale of any article of food or of any drug such person may recover alone or in
addition to any other damages recoverable by him or her the amount of any penalty in
which he or she may have been convicted under this Act together with the costs paid
by him or her upon such conviction and those incurred by him or her in and about his
or her defence thereto if he or she proves that the article or drug the subject of such
conviction was sold to him or her as and for an article or drug of the same nature,
substance and quality as that which was demanded of him or her and that he or she
purchased it not knowing it to be otherwise and afterwards sold it in the same state in
which he or she purchased it, the defendant in such action being nevertheless at
liberty to prove that the conviction was wrongful or that the amount of costs awarded
or claimed was unreasonable.

Powers to fix standards of purity.
30. The Minister may make Orders fixing the standard of purity for any articles of
food or of any drug, and after due publication in the Gazette of such Orders or Orders
respectively the same shall be deemed to be part of this Act.

Penalty.
31. No person shall sell to the prejudice of any purchaser any article of food or
drug which does not comply with the standard of purity fixed therefor under such
order or orders as aforesaid and any person infringing any such order shall be liable
to the penalty provided in sections 3 and 4.

Powers of Sanitary Officers.
32. Every sanitary officer as defined by this Act is hereby empowered to do and
perform all or any of the duties imposed by sections 13 and 14 on any medical
officer, inspector of nuisances, inspector of weights and measures, inspector of a
market or any police constable under the direction of the Chief of Police in the same
manner and with the same obligations, rights and privileges as are mentioned in the
said Act concerning the said officers respectively.
                                       __________
                                                                                                     LAWS OF SAINT CHRISTOPHER
12            CAP. 9.26                           Sale of Food and Drugs Act                                 AND NEVIS
                                                                                                          Revision Date: 31 Dec 2002




                                                 FIRST SCHEDULE
                                                         (Section 21)
          To
         I the undersigned public analyst for the ...............................................................
do hereby certify that I have received on the ........................... day of ..........................
20 ................ from a sample of ....................................................... for analysis (which
when weighed ...........................................................) and have analysed the same and
declare the result of my analysis to be as follows:—
          I am of opinion that the same is a sample of genuine ..........................................
                                                                or
      I am of opinion that the said sample contained the parts as under or the
percentages of foreign ingredients as under:

                                                   OBSERVATIONS
       As witness my hand this ................................. day of .........................................
A.B. ............................................................. at ...............................................................
                                                          __________



                                               SECOND SCHEDULE
                                                         (Section 30)
                                         FOOD AND DRUGS ORDER

Short title.
1.        This Order may be cited as the Food and Drugs Order.

Purity of Aerated Waters.
2.    Aerated waters shall not contain more than one twentieth of a grain per gallon
of metallic impurities estimated as lead and shall not contain any saccharine.
                                                          __________
