                                             MONTSERRAT




                                      CHAPTER 9.02

                         PLANT PROTECTION ACT
                                  and Subsidiary Legislation


                                      Revised Edition
                             showing the law as at 1 January 2013

            This is a revised edition of the law, prepared by the Law Revision Commissioner under
            the authority of the Revised Edition of the Laws Act.


This edition contains a consolidation of the following laws—
                                                                                                    Page
PLANT PROTECTION ACT                                                                                 3
  Act 11 of 1941 .. in force 29 December 1941
    Amended by Act 9 of 2011 .. in force 27 September 2011 (S.R.O. 40/2011)

  PLANT PROTECTION REGULATIONS – Section 15                                                         13
    S.R.O.s 2/1951, 12/1952 and 22/1956
      Amended by S.R.O. 14/1966 .. in force 17 June 1966
                                             MONTSERRAT




                                      CHAPTER 9.02

                         PLANT PROTECTION ACT
                                  and Subsidiary Legislation


                                      Revised Edition
                             showing the law as at 1 January 2013

            This is a revised edition of the law, prepared by the Law Revision Commissioner under
            the authority of the Revised Edition of the Laws Act.


This edition contains a consolidation of the following laws—
                                                                                                    Page
PLANT PROTECTION ACT                                                                                 3
  Act 11 of 1941 .. in force 29 December 1941
    Amended by Act 9 of 2011 .. in force 27 September 2011 (S.R.O. 40/2011)

  PLANT PROTECTION REGULATIONS – Section 15                                                         13
    S.R.O.s 2/1951, 12/1952 and 22/1956
      Amended by S.R.O. 14/1966 .. in force 17 June 1966
      LAWS OF
     MONTSERRAT                      Plant Protection                 CAP. 09.02   3
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013




                                          CHAPTER 9.02

                                  PLANT PROTECTION ACT

                                ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

     SECTION
           1.      Short title
           2.      Interpretation
           3.      Appointment of Officers
           4.      Power to make proclamations
           5.      Occupier to give notice of notifiable disease or pest
           6.      Power of entry
           7.      Procedure for eradication of diseases and pests
           8.      Non-compliance with order
           9.      Quarantine of nurseries
          10.      Service of notice in absence of occupier
          11.      Compensation
          12.      Informality not to invalidate proceedings
          13.      Offences
          14.      Legal proceedings
          15.      Regulations
          16.      Document to be evidence
                   SCHEDULE: Form
      LAWS OF
     MONTSERRAT                 Plant Protection               CAP. 09.02     5
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013




                                    CHAPTER 9.02

                             PLANT PROTECTION ACT
                             (Acts 11 of 1941 and 9 of 2011)

     Commencement
     [29 December 1941]

     Short title
          1. This Act may be cited as the Plant Protection Act.

     Interpretation
       2. In this Act—
     “animal organism” means any animal organism in whatever stage of
           existence such animal organism may be;
     “disease” means any abnormal conditions of plants, communicable or
           believed to be communicable by the transfer of a causative agent or
           by the propagation of the affected plants, which the Governor may
           by proclamation from time to time declare to be a disease within the
           meaning of this Act;
     “diseased” means affected with disease;
     “disinfection” means the utilization of any substance or process designed
           to prevent, eliminate or reduce any disease or pest with which plants
           or parts of plants may be affected;
     “import”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
           to bring or cause to be brought within Montserrat or the waters
           thereof;
     “land” includes plantation and nursery;
     “notifiable disease” means any disease which the Governor may by
           proclamation, from time to time, declare to be a notifiable disease
           within the meaning of this Act;
     “notifiable pest” means any pest which the Governor may, by
           proclamation, from time to time, declare to be a notifiable pest
           within the meaning of this Act;
     “nursery” means any land or place whereon is grown or kept any plant
           intended for sale or distribution;
     “occupier”, in relation to any land or building, means the person in actual
           occupation thereof or, if there is no such person, the owner of such
           land or building;
                                                                      LAWS OF
6         CAP. 09.02             Plant Protection                    MONTSERRAT
                                                                Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013


“owner” means the person who is for the time being entitled to receive the
      rent of any land, or who, if the same were let to a tenant at a rack
      rent, would be entitled to receive such rent;
“package” includes any container, box, covering, wrapper, or anything
      whatsoever in which plants are, or have been, imported, kept or
      conveyed;
“pest” means any parasitical, epiphytal or other animal or vegetable
      organism inimical to the growth or existence of living plants or
      injurious to plant products, and any agent capable of producing a
      communicable disease of plants, which the Governor may, by
      proclamation, from time to time declare to be a pest within the
      meaning of this Act;
“plant” includes any tree, shrub, herb or vegetable; any cutting, bulb, seed,
      bud or graft; and the fruit or any other part of any plant; and the
      whole or any part of any growing, dying, or dead plant, including
      any pod, husk or skin;
“Plant Protection Officer” means the Chief Plant Protection Officer and
      any person or persons appointed as a Plant Protection Officer under
      this Act;
“Plant Quarantine Committee” means the Committee of Management of
      the Plant Quarantine Station, Trinidad, established under section 16
      of the Plant Protection Act of Trinidad and Tobago;
“vegetable organism” means any vegetable organism in whatever stage of
      existence such organism may be.

Appointment of Officers
  3. The Governor or Deputy Governor may appoint an appropriately
qualified person as Chief Plant Protection Officer, and such Plant
Protection Officers as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act.

Power to make proclamations
    4. The Governor may by proclamation—
          (a) prohibit, control or restrict the transport of any diseased
              plant, or of any plant appearing to be affected with any pest
              or disease, or of anything whatever, whether of a nature
              similar to a plant or not, likely to infect any plant with any
              pest or disease;
          (b) prohibit, control or restrict the cultivation and harvesting
              either throughout Montserrat, or in any specified area
              thereof, of any plant when, in the opinion of the Governor,
              such measures are necessary for the control or eradication of
              any pest or disease;
          (c) direct, authorise or control the quarantine of infected areas;
      LAWS OF
     MONTSERRAT                      Plant Protection              CAP. 09.02           7
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013


                      (d) direct and specify the precautions to be taken to prevent the
                          spread of plant diseases or pests;
                      (e) authorise or require the inspection before import or export of
                          any plant or article likely to infect any plant with any pest or
                          disease, and provide for the grant of a certificate as to the
                          results of any such inspection;
                      (f) direct or authorise the disinfection or treatment of any plant
                          and of any article likely to infect any plant with a pest or
                          disease;
                      (g) authorise the immediate destruction without compensation of
                          any plant or article which on inspection appears to be
                          infested or infected with any pest or disease;
                      (h) direct or authorise the detention of classes of imported plants
                          in any specified place and specify the precautions to be
                          observed during such detention;
                      (i) require plants, or any class or classes of plants, to be
                          accompanied on importation by a plant certificate issued by a
                          competent person or persons.

     Occupier to give notice of notifiable disease or pest
        5. (1) The occupier of any land, on which any notifiable disease or
     notifiable pest occurs, shall as soon as practicable give notice thereof to a
     Plant Protection Officer.
            (2) Any occupier who fails to give such notice shall be liable on
     summary conviction to a fine of $240.
            (3) In any proceedings under this section it shall be no defence that
     the occupier was not aware of the occurrence of such disease or pest unless
     it shall be shown to the satisfaction of the Court that he and the persons
     employed by him on the land took all reasonable steps to discover such
     occurrence.

     Power of entry
        6. (1) Subject to any regulations made under this Act, a Plant
     Protection Officer may at all reasonable times enter without notice (with or
     without assistance as may to him seem fit) upon any land, or into any
     building or part of any building, not being a dwelling house, for the purpose
     of searching for and examining any animal or vegetable organism, or any
     disease-infected or pest-infested plant, or any soil, manure, straw or
     package, and may remain thereon or therein so long as may be reasonably
     necessary for any such purpose.
            (2) Before entering on any such land or building under the
     provisions of this section the Plant Protection Officer shall inform the
     occupier, if present at the time, of his intention so to do.
                                                                       LAWS OF
8        CAP. 09.02              Plant Protection                     MONTSERRAT
                                                                 Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013


Procedure for eradication of diseases and pests
   7. A Plant Protection Officer may, by notice in writing in the form in
the Schedule served upon the occupier of any land, require him to take at
his own expense and within a time specified in the notice, running from the
date of service, all such measures as may be necessary for the eradication
or the prevention of the spread of any disease or pest. Such measures may
include the total destruction if necessary of any plant whether infected by
any disease or infested with any pest or not.

Non-compliance with order
    8. (1) If an occupier fails to take any measure which by a notice under
the preceding section he is required to take, a Plant Protection Officer may,
on the expiration of the time specified in such notice, enter upon the land
and cause such measures to be taken.
        (2) Any expenses incurred by the Plant Protection Officer in
connection with such measures shall be paid by the person in default:
       Provided that, it shall be lawful for the Governor to dispense with the
payment of such expenses in cases where, owing to the person in default
being in needy circumstances, or for any other reason, the Governor thinks
fit so to do.
        (3) The expenses so incurred shall be recoverable as a civil debt by
the Plant Protection Officers.

Quarantine of nurseries
   9. (1) Where any Plant Protection Officer finds any nursery or any part
of any nursery to be affected by any disease or pest he may by notice in
writing served upon the occupier declare such nursery or part thereof to be
under quarantine.
       (2) The notice shall remain in force until a Plant Protection Officer
shall have given the owner or occupier of the nursery affected a certificate
in writing that the nursery is free from diseases and pests.
       (3) While the notice is in force no person shall remove, or allow or
cause to be removed any plant or any soil, manure, packages, or any
vegetable or animal organism, from the area under quarantine.
       (4) The occupier of a nursery having his nursery or any part thereof
thus placed under quarantine may, upon application to a Plant Protection
Officer, have his nursery examined free of charge to determine whether or
not the disease or pest has been eradicated.

Service of notice in absence of occupier
   10. If there is no person in actual occupation of any land, or if the
occupier cannot be found, service of any notice under this Act may be
made by affixing the same in some conspicuous place on the land and such
affixing shall be deemed to be good and sufficient service.
      LAWS OF
     MONTSERRAT                 Plant Protection               CAP. 09.02            9
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013


     Compensation
        11. It shall be lawful for the Governor, out of money voted for that
     purpose by the Legislative Assembly, to make grants by way of
     compensation to occupiers and to owners (according to their respective
     interests) in respect of healthy plants destroyed in order to prevent the
     increase of any disease or pest or the spread of any disease or pest into
     adjoining lands. (Amended by Act 9 of 2011)

     Informality not to invalidate proceedings
        12. Proceedings taken under this Act shall not be rendered invalid by
     reason of the informality of any order or notice made or given except as
     against any person prejudiced by such informality.

     Offences
        13. Every person who—
                (a) in any manner obstructs or impedes any person in the
                    execution of any of the powers conferred by this Act or by
                    regulations or proclamations made thereunder; or
                (b) knowingly introduces any disease or pest into any cultivated
                    or uncultivated land or to any plant whether cultivated or not
                    cultivated; or
                (c) fails to comply with or acts in contravention of any of the
                    provisions of this Act or any regulations or proclamations
                    made thereunder or any order given in pursuance thereof,
     when no other penalty is provided in this Act, shall be guilty of an offence
     and shall, for every such offence, be liable on summary conviction to a fine
     of $96 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months.

     Legal proceedings
        14. All proceedings under this Act shall be taken in the name of the
     Chief Plant Protection Officer and shall not be deemed to affect any civil
     liability which may exist independently thereof.

     Regulations
        15. The Governor acting on the advice of Cabinet may make regulations
     for all or any of the following purposes—
                 (a) for prohibiting, restricting or regulating the importation into
                      Montserrat of—
                      (i) any plant, vegetable organism or package;
                     (ii) any article or class of articles, whether of a nature similar
                          to plants or not;
                    (iii) any animal or animal organism,
                                                                 LAWS OF
10   CAP. 09.02             Plant Protection                    MONTSERRAT
                                                           Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013


         likely to cause infection by any animal or vegetable organism
         or other agent which is or is believed to be inimical to the
         growth of plants;
     (b) for requiring that any plant, or any other thing mentioned in
         paragraph (a) shall only be imported into Montserrat on the
         advice of and with the concurrence of the Plant Quarantine
         Committee previously obtained and subject to such
         conditions as the Committee may impose;
     (c) for authorising or requiring the inspection before import of
         any plant or article likely to infect any plant with any animal
         organism or vegetable organism or other agent which is or is
         believed to be inimical to the growth of plants;
     (d) for authorising or requiring the disinfection, treatment,
         destruction and disposal without compensation of any
         diseased plant or of any plant appearing to be infected with
         any animal or vegetable organism or other agent which is or
         is believed to be inimical to the growth of plants, or of
         anything whatever, whether of a nature similar to a plant or
         not, likely to infect any plant with any animal or vegetable
         organism or other agent which is or is believed to be inimical
         to the growth of plants;
     (e) for directing or authorizing the disinfection, treatment and
         fumigation of buildings, vehicles, vessels or aircraft used or
         suspected of having been used for the storage or conveyance
         of anything likely to infect a plant with any pest or disease;
         and for prohibiting any such vessels or aircraft from
         approaching or remaining within a distance of two miles
         from any point in Montserrat;
     (f) for prohibiting the importation of any plant or plants except
         at specified ports or places of entry;
     (g) for directing or authorising the detention of any imported
         plant or plants in any specified place and prescribing the
         precautions to be observed during such detention;
     (h) for requiring the importation of any plant or plants to be
         accompanied by a plant certificate issued by an authorised
         person or persons;
     (i) for authorising or requiring the issue and revocation of
         licences for and the inspection of nurseries in which plants
         are reared for the purposes of sale, and the imposition of fees
         for such licences, and the regulation of the sale or removal of
         plants, whether reared in nurseries or not;
     (j) for regulating or prohibiting the removal from any land or
         building, or the transference or conveyance from any part of
         Montserrat to any other part thereof, of any plant, soil,
      LAWS OF
     MONTSERRAT                      Plant Protection              CAP. 09.02         11
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013


                          manure, straw, package, vegetable organism, or animal
                          organism;
                      (k) for fixing the payment of fees for disinfection or treatment or
                          any other services rendered by officers under this Act;
                      (l) for defining the duties of Plant Protection Officers under this
                          Act;
                      (m) for regulating the manner in which applications are to be
                          made to a Plant Protection Officer; and
                      (n) generally for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.
                                     (Amended by Act 9 of 2011)

     Document to be evidence
        16. Every document purporting to be an instrument issued by the Plant
     Quarantine Committee and signed by the Chairman of the Committee shall
     be received in evidence and be deemed to be such an instrument without
     further proof unless the contrary is shown.
                                     ___________
                                                                                                                          LAWS OF
  12               CAP. 09.02                                Plant Protection                                            MONTSERRAT
                                                                                                                  Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013



                                                        SCHEDULE
                                                          (Section 7)

To ..........................................................................

               Nursery                      
               Plantation                   
               Land                         

Situate at ...............................................................................................................

          In pursuance of the powers vested in me by section 7 of the Plant Protection
Act, I hereby direct you within ........................ days of the service upon you of this
notice to do the following work on your

               Nursery                      
               Plantation                   
               Land                         

viz—

                                                                                              Plant Protection Officer.

(Date)


                                                       _____________
      LAWS OF
     MONTSERRAT                       Plant Protection               CAP. 09.02           13
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013                                                          [Subsidiary]



                            PLANT PROTECTION REGULATIONS – SECTION 15
                             (S.R.O.s 2/1951, 12/1952, 22/1956 and 14/1966)

     Short title
          1. These Regulations may be cited as the Plant Protection Regulations.

     Prohibition of importation
       2. It is hereby prohibited absolutely to import into Montserrat the articles
     mentioned in the first column of the First Schedule from the countries and places
     mentioned in the second column of the said Schedule.

     Restriction of importation
         3. It is hereby prohibited to import into Montserrat the articles mentioned in the
     first column of the Second Schedule from the countries and places mentioned in the
     third column of the said Schedule except upon the conditions specified in the second
     column of the said Schedule.
                                         ___________
                                                                                      LAWS OF
14             CAP. 09.02                    Plant Protection                        MONTSERRAT
[Subsidiary]                                                                    Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013


                                      FIRST SCHEDULE
                             ARTICLES ABSOLUTELY PROHIBITED


                  Articles prohibited from               Countries and places from which
                        importation                          importation prohibited

 (a)      The fruit of the banana                           All countries and places except
                                                        the United States of America,
                                                        Dominica, and the other Colonies of
                                                        the Leeward Islands.

 (b)      All fruit and plants of the citrus family        Cuba, Haiti, Santo Domingo,
          and parts of such fruit and plants            Jamaica, the United States of
                                                        America and the Commonwealth of
                                                        Australia except the State of
                                                        Tasmania.

 (c)      All other fruits except—                          The Commonwealth of Australia
            (i)    plantains                            except the State of Tasmania, the
           (ii)    nuts                                 Bahamas, Bermuda, British Guiana
          (iii)    dried, canned, candied or other      and all other countries and places
                   processed fruits                     except the British Isles, Canada, the
                                                        British West Indies and the United
                                                        States of America.

 (d)      All vegetables except—                                       ditto.
            (i)    onions
           (ii)    Irish (English) potatoes
          (iii)    canned or processed vegetables

 (e)      Cotton seed, cotton seed hulls, cake and         Cuba, Haiti, Santo Domingo and
          meal and other cotton seed products, seed     Venezuela.
          cotton, cotton lint and any part of the
          cotton plant and any other malvaceous
          plant and any part thereof

 (f)      Fertilizers and stock feeds containing                       ditto.
          cotton seed meal

 (g)      Pillows and bedding material containing                      ditto.
          seed cotton, cotton lint or any part of the
          cotton plant

 (h)      All agricultural produce in bags                             ditto.
      LAWS OF
     MONTSERRAT                        Plant Protection                    CAP. 09.02                15
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013                                                                     [Subsidiary]




     (i)        Second-hand empty bags and baling                              ditto.
                material

     (j)        Packages, containers and coverings which                       ditto.
                contain or are reasonably suspected to
                have contained any of the articles
                specified in item (e) of this Schedule

     (k)        Personal baggage and effects of any                            ditto.
                description which contain or are
                reasonably suspected to have contained
                any of the articles specified in item (e) of
                this Schedule

     (l)        Personal baggage and effects of any               All countries and places.
                description which have been in contact
                with or in close proximity to other
                baggage, cargo, produce or articles of any
                description infected or reasonably
                suspected to be infected with the cotton
                boll weevil (Anthonomus grandis
                Boheman)

     (m)        Articles which have formed part of the                         ditto.
                cargo of a ship another part of the cargo
                of which has been found to be infected or
                is reasonably suspected to be infected
                with the cotton boll weevil (Anthonomus
                grandis Boheman)

     (n)        Soil                                               Bahamas,      Bermuda,     British
                                                               Guiana, Trinidad and all other
                                                               countries and places except the
                                                               British Isles, Canada, the other
                                                               islands of the British West Indies not
                                                               in this paragraph mentioned, and the
                                                               United States of America.

     (o)        Plants and parts of plants of “Maga,”          From all countries and places.
                (Thespesia grandiflora PDC).

     (p)        Sunflower seeds                                  All countries and places in South
                                                               America.
                                                                                  LAWS OF
16             CAP. 09.02                  Plant Protection                      MONTSERRAT
[Subsidiary]                                                                Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013




(q)       All fruit and vegetables and any parts      The United States of America.
          thereof except
            (i)   canned fruit and vegetables;
           (ii)   fruit and vegetables which have
                  been dried, candied, preserved or
                  otherwise processed

(r)       All fruit and plants of the citrus family      Barbados
                                 (Inserted by S.R.O. 14/1966)
                                            ___________
      LAWS OF
     MONTSERRAT                        Plant Protection                 CAP. 09.02             17
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013                                                               [Subsidiary]



                                           SECOND SCHEDULE
                                  ARTICLES PROHIBITED CONDITIONALLY


                       Articles             Conditions of Importation   Countries and Places

       (a)      Sugar cane, sugar cane          Under licence granted      All countries and
                seedlings and plants, and   by the Governor             places.
                all parts of the sugar
                cane

       (b)      Banana plants and parts                ditto                Bahamas, Bermuda,
                of banana plants                                        British Guiana, Central
                                                                        America, Dutch
                                                                        Guiana, and any island
                                                                        or place in the West
                                                                        Indies and the other
                                                                        Colonies of the
                                                                        Leeward Islands.

       (c)      Cotton seed, cotton lint,       Under licence granted      All countries and
                seed cotton and all         by the Governor and         places other than Cuba,
                packages, coverings,        subject to fumigation of    Haiti, Santo Domingo
                containers, bags and        any cotton seed, bags and   and Venezuela.
                other articles and things   packages immediately on
                which have been used as     landing
                packings, coverings,
                con-tainers, or bags for
                any cotton seed, cotton
                lint or seed cotton

       (d)      Sprouted Coconuts               Under licence granted       Trinidad, St. Vincent,
                                            by the Governor             St. Lucia, Grenada,
                                                                        Cuba, Jamaica, and all
                                                                        parts of Central and
                                                                        South America.

       (e)      All fruits and plants of        Under licence granted       All countries and
                the citrus family and       by the Governor             places other than Cuba,
                parts of such fruits and                                Haiti, Santo Domingo,
                plants                                                  Jamaica, the United
                                                                        States of America and
                                                                        the Commonwealth of
                                                                        Australia except the
                                                                        State of Tasmania.

       (f)      Soil and plants growing         Under licence granted      All countries and
                                            by the Governor and
                                                                                      LAWS OF
18             CAP. 09.02                 Plant Protection                           MONTSERRAT
[Subsidiary]                                                                    Revision Date: 1 Jan 2013


          in soil                      subject to fumigation          places.
                                       immediately on landing

 (g)      All other fruits except          To be accompanied by          The British Isles,
            (i) plantains              a certificate of origin from   Canada, British West
           (ii) nuts                   a responsible authority        Indies, the State of
          (iii) dried, canned,         stating that such fruit was    Tasmania and the
                 candied or other      not grown in a country or      United States of
                 processed fruits      place from whence its          America.
                                       importation is prohibited

 (h)      All vegetables except                    ditto                        ditto
            (i) onions
           (ii) Irish     (English)
                potatoes
          (iii) canned or
                preserved
                vegetables

 (i)      All living material (other       Under licence granted         All countries and
          than seeds) of plants of     by the Governor                places.
          the family Gramineae
          (Grasses)

 (j)      Animal manure                    Under licence granted                ditto
                                       by the Governor

 (k)      Vegetable and flower             Under licence granted         All countries and
          seed                         by the Governor and            places.
                                       subject to being accompa-
                                       nied by a plant sanitation
                                       certificate from a responsi-
                                       ble authority in the
                                       exporting country
                                         ___________
