                TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS
              PLANT HEALTH ORDINANCE 2012
                      (Ordinance 39 of 2012)

                     ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION

                                PART 1
                             PRELIMINARY
   1.     Short title and commencement
   2.     Interpretation
   3.     Scope and status of the Ordinance

                                PART 2
                           ADMINISTRATION
   4.     Turks and Caicos Islands Plant Protection Service
   5.     Functions of the Service
   6.     Plant inspectors
   7.     Powers of entry, search and seizure
   8.     Other powers
   9.     Taking of samples
  10.     Directions by an inspector
  11.     Enforcement notices
  12.     Limitation on powers
  13.     Powers of arrest
  14.     Powers in relation to people
  15.     Rights and duties of plant inspectors
  16.     Offences relating to inspection, etc.
  17.     Authorised laboratories and analysts


                                PART 3
                        PLANT PEST CONTROL
  18.     Quarantine plant pests
  19.     Early detection system
  20.     Declaration of plant pest emergency
  21.     Plant pest emergency: Supplementary
  22.     Designation of plant pest zone
  23.     Plant pest zones: Supplementary
  24.     Designation of other zones
  25.     Destruction of plants for plant pest control purposes
  26.     Compensation
  27.     Control of movement of plants


                                   1
28.   Plant movement permits
29.   Offences relating to infested plants

                            PART 4
                     PLANT QUARANTINE
30.   Plant quarantine orders
31.   Plant quarantine stations and areas
32.   Management of quarantine stations and areas
33.   Quarantine offences

                            PART 5
                PLANT IMPORTS AND EXPORTS
34.   Importation of regulated articles
35.   Plant import permits
36.   Plant import conditions
37.   International phytosanitary certificates
38.   Prohibited plant imports
39.   Arrival notification
40.   Inspection of plant imports
41.   Plant exports
42.   Passengers and crew members
43.   Obligations of captains and owners of vessels and aircraft
44.   International transportation facilities

                            PART 6
                 PROSECUTION OF OFFENCES
45.   Procedure for offences
46.   Cancellation of licence, etc.
47.   Offences by corporations and employees
48.   Fixed penalties
49.   Forfeiture
50.   Presumptions
51.   Documentary evidence
52.   Seizure and detention of plants, etc.




                               2
                            PART 7
MISCELLANEOUS AND SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
53.   Plant audit and trace-back system
54.   Duty to assist and cooperate
55.   Right of appeal
56.   Good faith defence
57.   Publication and service of notices, etc.
58.   Keeping of records
59.   Regulations
60.   Repeal and savings
61.   Ordinance binds the Crown
                      ________________




                                3
                                 TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS
                              PLANT HEALTH ORDINANCE 2012
                                      (Ordinance 39 of 2012)


                  AN ORDINANCE TO PREVENT THE INTRODUCTION AND SPREAD OF
                  PLANT PESTS, TO PROTECT AND PROMOTE PLANT HEALTH, TO
                  CONTROL THE MOVEMENT OF REGULATED ARTICLES INTO, FROM AND
                  WITHIN THE TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS; AND FOR CONNECTED
                  PURPOSES.

                  ENACTED by the Acting Governor of the Turks and Caicos
                  Islands.

                                               PART 1
                                            PRELIMINARY


Short title and     1. (1) This Ordinance may be cited as the Plant Health
commencement
                  Ordinance 2012 and comes into operation on a day the Governor
                  appoints by notice published in the Gazette.
                        (2) The Governor may appoint different days for the
                  coming into force of different provisions of this Ordinance.

Interpretation      2. In this Ordinance—
                  “analyst” means a person who analyses samples taken for the
                       purposes of this Ordinance;
                  “approved” means officially approved by the Director as
                      evidenced by a written record in the files of the Department
                      and published in accordance with section 57;
                  “authorised analyst” means a person authorised as an analyst under
                       section 17;
                  “authorised laboratory” means a laboratory authorised for the
                       purposes of this Ordinance under section 17;
                  “buffer zone” means a zone so designated under section 24;
                  “captain”, in relation to a vessel or aircraft, means the master or
                       chief pilot or person in charge or control of the vessel or
                       aircraft;




                                                  4
“Chief Plant Protection Officer” means the person appointed as
    such in the public service;
“consignment” means a quantity of regulated articles being moved
    from one country to another and covered, when required, by a
    single phytosanitary certificate;
“country” includes a territory;
“CPPO” means the Chief Plant Protection Officer;
“contained”, in relation to a plant pest risk, means eliminated or
    reduced to an acceptable level;
“container”, in relation to a regulated article, means a receptacle,
    bag, package, cage or other thing capable of holding plants
    during a journey by one or several means of transport;
“decontaminate” means to reduce the pathogens on the surface of a
    plant, plant product or other item, whether by irradiation or
    any other means;
“Department” means the Department of Agriculture;
“detain” means to keep a consignment in official custody or
     confinement for phytosanitary reasons, and “detention” has a
     corresponding meaning;
“Director” means the Director of Agriculture;
“disinfestation” means the utilization of any approved substance or
     process designed to prevent, eliminate or reduce any pest or
     micro-organism with which an article or area may be infested;
“disposal”, in relation to a regulated article, means Destruction by
     burying or burning or any other means; “dispose of” includes
     “destroy”;
“enforcement action” means action to enforce phytosanitary
     measures in order to contain a plant pest risk;
“enforcement notice” means a notice issued by a plant inspector
     under section 11;
“export” as a verb, means to send an item to another country by
    any means, and “exportation” and related terms have a
    corresponding meaning;
“germplasm” means a plant intended for use in breeding or
    conservation programmes;
“health hazard” means a biological, chemical or physical agent in,
     or a condition of, a regulated article with the potential to
     cause an adverse health effect in plants or humans;
“importer” means anyone who, whether as owner, consignor,
    consignee, agent, broker or otherwise, is in possession of or in
    any way entitled to the custody of any plant, plant product,
    pest, beneficial organism or other regulated article landed or
    likely to be landed in the Islands from another country;
“infested”, in relation to an article or area, means that a plant pest
     is present in the article or area;


                                  5
“international phytosanitary certificate” has the meaning given that
     term by section 37;
“IPPC” means the International Plant Protection Convention;
“IPPC Secretariat” means the Secretariat of the Commission on
    Phytosanitary Measures established under the IPPC;
“island” means any island comprising the Turks and Caicos
     Islands;
“ISPM” means the International Sanitary and Phytosanitary
    Measures;
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for the Department;
“outbreak” means the occurrence of a plant pest, detected and
     expected to survive for the immediate future;
“phytosanitary certificate” means a certificate in the approved
    form, or to the same effect, issued by the Service and stating
    the plant health status of a regulated article for purposes of
    export;
“phytosanitary measure” means any action taken or ordered to be
    taken in accordance with this Ordinance for the purpose of
    plant pest control on the basis of plant pest risk assessment;
“plant” includes a seed, germplasm and part of a plant;
“plant establishment” means premises or an area in which plants
     are commercially grown, kept or destroyed;
“plant health status” means the status of a country, zone or
     regulated article with respect to plant pests;
“plant import conditions” means the phytosanitary requirements
     for the importation of regulated articles published under
     section 36;
“plant inspector” means the CPPO, every plant protection officer
     and any person assigned to serve as a plant inspector under
     section 6;
“plant movement permit” means a permit for the movement of
     plants in, into or from a zone, issued under section 28;
“plant pest” means any species, strain or biotype of any plant,
     animal or pathogenic agent injurious to plants or plant
     products;
“plant pest control” means the elimination, or reduction to an
     acceptable level, of a plant pest risk or health hazard resulting
     from a plant pest;
“plant pest emergency” means a plant pest emergency declared
     under section 20;
“plant pest risk” means the risk of a health hazard existing or
     developing as a result of the presence of a plant pest in a
     regulated article;




                                  6
“plant pest risk analysis” means the process of evaluating
     biological or other scientific and economic evidence to
     determine whether a pest should be regulated and the strength
     of any phytosanitary measures to be taken against it;
“plant pest risk assessment”, in relation to an activity involving a
     regulated article, means the process of identifying and
     estimating the plant pest risk associated with the activity and
     evaluating the biological and economic consequences of that
     risk in accordance with internationally accepted procedures
     and standards;
“plant pest zone” means a zone designated as a plant pest zone
     under section 22;
“plant pest-free zone” means a zone so designated under section
     24;
“plant product” means—
          (a) any non-manufactured material of plant origin
              (including grain); and
          (b) any manufactured product which, by its nature or
              that of its processing, may create a risk for the
              introduction and spread of a pest;
“plant protection officer” means a person who is appointed as a
     plant protection officer in the public service;
“plant-related item” includes packaging, and any container,
     equipment, or other appliance used for or on plants, and any
     object or material capable of harboring or spreading plant
     pests;
“port” means a port or airport prescribed or appointed under the
     Customs Ordinance (Cap.19.04);
“premises” includes a building, tent or other structure, whether
    permanent or otherwise, the land on which it is situated and
    any adjoining land employed in connection with it;
“quarantine plant pest” means a plant pest declared by order under
    section 18 to be a quarantine plant pest;
“quarantine station or area” means a facility for the holding of
    regulated articles for phytosanitary observation, research,
    inspection, testing, treatment, detention or destruction;
“regulated article” means—
          (a) any plant, plant product, storage equipment,
              packaging, vehicle, container or soil; and
          (b) any other organism, object or material capable of
              harbouring or spreading pests;
          (c) any other article that the Director by notice in the
              Gazette, on the advice of the CPPO, declares to be a
              regulated article for the purposes of this Ordinance;




                                 7
                   “sell” means offer, advertise, keep, store, display, transmit,
                        consign, convey or deliver for sale, or exchange or dispose of
                        to any person in any manner whether for a consideration or
                        otherwise, and “sold”, “selling” and “sale” have
                        corresponding meanings;
                   “serious plant pest” means the risk of introduction into or spread in
                        the Islands of any quarantine plant pest that would constitute
                        a serious threat to plant, animal, human or environmental
                        health;
                   “Service” means the Turks and Caicos Islands Plant Protection
                       Service established by section 4(1);
                   “surveillance” means an official process which collects and
                        records data on pest occurrence or absence by survey,
                        monitoring or other procedures;
                   “surveillance zone” means a zone so designated under section 24;
                   “vehicle” means any vessel, aircraft, conveyance, cart, container,
                       animal or other thing on land or at sea or in the air that can
                       convey a regulated article from one place to another;
                   “vessel” includes any marine vehicle;
                   “WTO SPS Agreement” means the World Trade Organisation
                      Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
                      Measures;
                   “zone” means a plant pest zone, a plant pest-free zone, a buffer
                       zone or a surveillance zone.

Scope and status      3. (1) This Ordinance is intended to prevent the introduction
of the Ordinance
                   and spread of plant pests, to protect and promote plant health, to
                   control the movement of plants and products into, from and within
                   the Islands, and to regulate related matters.
                           (2) This Ordinance provides for the issuance in accordance
                   with international standards and obligations of phytosanitary
                   certificates for all regulated articles for which a phytosanitary
                   certificate is required.
                        (3) This Ordinance is in addition to and does not derogate
                   from any enactment relating to food safety, human health,
                   immigration, customs control or plant health and movements.

                                                 PART 2
                                            ADMINISTRATION
Turks and Caicos      4. (1) There is to be a Turks and Caicos Islands Plant
Islands Plant
Protection         Protection Service within the Department of Agriculture.
Service
                          (2) The Service is to consist of the Chief Plant Protection
                   Officer and such other plant protection officers and other staff as
                   are assigned to it.




                                                    8
       (3) The CPPO is to be the head of the Service and the
National Plant Protection Officer for purposes of the international
obligations of the Government in relation to plant protection
matters.
       (4) The CPPO may delegate any of his functions under this
Ordinance to a plant inspector or plant protection officer, except
for his power of delegation, and a reference to ‘the Service’
includes a plant inspector or plant protection officer performing a
function of the Service on the authority of the CPPO.
      (5) The CPPO is answerable to the Director for the
performance of his functions and those of the Service under this
Ordinance and for the efficient operation of the Service.

    5. (1) The functions of the Service include, but are not limited   Functions of the
                                                                       Service
to, the following—
          (a) implement the IPPC, ISPM and the WTO SPS
              Agreement;
          (b) carry out surveillance of any ornamental and
              growing plants, including areas under cultivation
              and wild flora, and of any plant and plant product in
              storage or in transport, for the purpose of reporting
              the occurrence, outbreak and spread of quarantine
              pests, and of controlling those pests;
          (c) inspect any consignment of a plant and plant
              product and, if appropriate, inspecting any other
              regulated article, for the purpose of preventing the
              introduction and spread of quarantine pests;
          (d) disinfest consignments of any plant, plant product
              or other regulated article;
          (e) designate, maintain and survey pest-free areas;
          (f) conduct plant pest risk analyses as required;
          (g) decide on and publish the phytosanitary measures to
              be applied in the Islands, on the basis of plant pest
              risk assessment and by reference to applicable
              international standards;
          (h) provide information to other countries concerning
              the phytosanitary measures applied in the Islands,
              in accordance with international obligations;
          (i) ensure the phytosanitary security of consignments
              after certification and before export;
          (j) establish auditing and trace-back procedures for
              regulated articles for the purpose of phytosanitary
              certification;
          (k) publish information regarding quarantine pests and
              the means of their prevention and control;
          (l) review and enforce phytosanitary import conditions
              and other necessary legislation;


                                 9
                              (m) provide information regarding import and export
                                  regulations in force, and technical requirements for
                                  any regulated article, on the request of any
                                  interested international, regional or other national
                                  plant protection organisation;
                              (n) set up an early detection system for plant pests and
                                  pathogen outbreaks as provided by section 19;
                              (o) devise and publish a plant pest emergency plan in
                                  accordance with section 22;
                              (p) designate plant quarantine stations and areas and
                                  manage such stations and areas in accordance with
                                  Part 4;
                              (q) establish and publish phytosanitary requirements
                                  for the import, export and movement of regulated
                                  articles, on the basis of the IPPC standards and in
                                  consultation with other competent authorities;
                              (r) administer the system of permits for the import of
                                  regulated articles in accordance with section 35;
                              (s) issue phytosanitary certificates for the export of
                                  regulated articles in accordance with section 43;
                              (t) represent the Islands in bilateral, regional and
                                  international fora relating to phytosanitary matters;
                              (u) notify the IPPC of outbreaks of plant pests and fulfil
                                  other international reporting requirements in
                                  relation to plant pests;
                              (v) carry out communication, training and public
                                  awareness campaigns on plant health matters;
                              (w) issue permits required by or under this Ordinance;
                              (x) collect fees as required by or under this Ordinance;
                                  and
                              (y) advise the Minister on the development of
                                  regulations needed to implement this Ordinance;
                              (z) perform other functions assigned to it by the
                                  Director for the purposes of this Ordinance.
                          (2) The Service must at least once a year, and more often if
                   required in writing by the Director, give a written report to the
                   Director on the performance of its functions under this Ordinance.

Plant inspectors      6. (1) There may be assigned to the Service appropriately
                   qualified officers in the public service to serve as plant inspectors
                   for the purposes of this Ordinance.
                         (2) Every plant inspector must be issued with an
                   identification document or badge.
                         (3) Plant inspectors are answerable to the CPPO while
                   performing their functions under this Ordinance.



                                                    10
   7. (1) A plant inspector, with or without the assistance of a        Powers of entry,
                                                                        search and
police officer may—                                                     seizure
          (a) enter any plant establishment, vehicle, port facilities
              or other premises (other than a dwelling place)
              where activities in relation to plants are being
              carried out, or are suspected of being carried out;
          (b) inspect or search any such premises, and examine
              any plant, or open and examine any regulated
              article, object or substance which is, or is suspected
              of being used in activities relating to plants;
          (c) require any person to present any plant or thing for
              inspection in a manner and under conditions the
              inspector considers necessary to carry out the
              inspection;
          (d) require the owner or person in charge of the
              premises to provide any information or
              documentation regarding the regulated article,
              object or substance;
          (e) secure or prohibit access to the premises for as long
              as is needed to ensure that there is nothing on or in
              the premises that might cause the spread of a
              quarantine plant pest.
      (2) A plant inspector may, in relation to premises as
mentioned in subsection (1),—
          (a) open any container on the premises that the
              inspector believes on reasonable grounds contains
              any plant or thing in respect of which this
              Ordinance or the regulations apply;
          (b) weigh, count, measure, mark and open any such
              container, take photographs of any thing, read any
              values of any instruments and take samples in the
              prescribed manner of anything on the premises;
          (c) require any person on the premises to produce for
              inspection or copying, in whole or in part, any
              record or document that the inspector believes on
              reasonable grounds contains any information
              relevant to the administration of this Ordinance or
              the regulations;
          (d) examine, make copies of or take extracts from any
              book, statement or other document found at the
              premises that the inspector believes on reasonable
              grounds contains any information relevant to this
              Ordinance, and demand from the owner or any
              person in charge of the premises an explanation of
              any entry in it;
          (e) inspect any operation, process or system used or
              carried out on the premises;



                                11
          (f) seize any plant, appliance, product, material, object,
              substance, book or document on the premises which
              appears to provide proof of a contravention of any
              provision of this Ordinance.
       (3) In carrying out an inspection at any place under this
section, an inspector may—
          (a) use or cause to be used any data processing system
              at the place to examine any data contained in or
              available to the system;
          (b) reproduce any record or cause it to be reproduced
              from the data in the form of a printout or other
              intelligible output and take the print-out or other
              output for examination or copying; and
          (c) use or cause to be used any copying equipment at
              the place to make copies of any record or other
              document.
      (4) In carrying out an inspection at any place or in
performing his functions under this Ordinance a plant inspector
may—
          (a) in relation to any plant, make such examinations,
              apply such tests, take such samples, use of
              germplasm or any other genetic material and apply
              such marks as may be reasonably necessary, or as
              may be required or prescribed by or under this
              Ordinance;
          (b) enter any land or premises for the purpose of such
              examining, testing, sampling or marking;
          (c) require any person in charge of a plant, or the owner
              or occupier of or a person employed on land or
              premises so entered, to give assistance or to carry
              out instructions as reasonably necessary for the
              purpose of examining, testing, sampling or
              marking, or to give information as reasonably
              necessary in connection with the prevention or
              eradication of any quarantine plant pest or for the
              implementation of this Ordinance.
      (5) A plant inspector may at any time—
          (a) with the consent of the owner, enter and search a
              dwelling house for purposes of this Ordinance;
          (b) on a warrant issued under subsection (6), enter and
              search a dwelling house for plants or plant products
              that the inspector reasonably believes have been
              imported in contravention of this Ordinance or pose
              a serious plant pest risk.
       (6) If a magistrate is satisfied on evidence on oath by a
plant inspector or police officer that—




                                12
          (a) there may be in a dwelling house regulated articles
              that have been imported in contravention of this
              Ordinance or that pose a serious plant pest risk;
              and.
          (b) the consent of the owner or occupier to entry and
              search of the dwelling house cannot be obtained,
the magistrate may issue a warrant authorising the inspector to
enter and search the dwelling house for such regulated articles, and
the preceding provisions of this section apply to such a search.

   8. (1) A plant inspector may submit anything taken from             Other powers
premises under section 7 to an authorised laboratory for analysis;
        (2) A plant inspector may issue an enforcement notice
under section 10 ordering modifications to be made to a plant
establishment if the structure or internal design or contents are
likely to pose a health hazard or plant pest risk.
       (3) A plant inspector may, in order to contain a plant pest
risk, seize any regulated article, including food that is
contaminated or contagious, and if necessary order the destruction
of it.
       (4) A plant inspector may order the destruction and
removal of any infested plant that has died, wherever it may be
found.
       (5) A plant inspector may order the quarantining of any
plant for the purpose of further testing and analysis.
       (6) A plant inspector may decontaminate or disinfect, or
order the decontamination or disinfection of any container,
vehicle, premises or place.
      (7) In relation to any regulated article, a plant inspector
may make any examination, apply any test, take any sample, use
of germplasm or plant genetic material and apply any mark that is
reasonably necessary for the purposes of this Ordinance.
       (8) A plant inspector may stop and search any vehicle or
container upon entry into, movement within or exit from the
Islands, if the inspector reasonably suspects that the vehicle or
container is carrying a regulated article in contravention of this
Ordinance and that a plant pest risk is created as a result.

   9. (1) A plant inspector may, with the consent of the owner or      Taking of
                                                                       samples
person in charge of a regulated article, take samples from—
          (a) any part of an incoming vessel or aircraft that has
              on board a regulated article;
          (b) any warehouse containing a regulated article;
          (c) any consignment of regulated articles, wherever
              located;




                                13
                              (d) any container, baggage or thing that the officer
                                  reasonably suspects to be or include a regulated
                                  article.
                         (2) If an owner or person in charge refuses consent under
                   subsection (1), the inspector may require the person to provide
                   appropriate samples.
                          (3) If an owner or person in charge refuses either to allow
                   samples to be taken or to provide samples, when required to do so
                   under this section—
                              (a) the owner or person commits an offence;
                   Penalty: A fine of $5,000
                              (b) an import permit for an incoming consignment must
                                  be refused or revoked.
                          (4) A plant inspector may, with the consent of the owner or
                   person in charge of the article, take samples of any outgoing
                   regulated article if the taking of a sample is necessary for the issue
                   of a phytosanitary certificate.
                          (5) If the person in charge of a regulated article refuses
                   consent under subsection (4), the inspector may require the person
                   to provide a sample, failing which the phytosanitary certificate will
                   not be issued.
                         (6) A plant inspector may request the owner or person in
                   charge of a consignment to unpack it or break it up to facilitate
                   sampling, at the risk and expense of the owner or person.
                          (7) When exercising powers under subsection (1) or (4), an
                   inspector must give the owner or person in charge a written notice,
                   identifying the quantity of the sample and the place where the
                   sample is to be analysed.
                         (8) In other respects, the procedure for taking and analysing
                   samples, recording the results and disposing of the samples is as
                   approved by the Director.
                         (9) If, in the course of sampling, goods are destroyed or
                   damaged, without negligence or malice, no compensation is
                   payable to the owner of the goods.
                         (10) The owner or person in charge of a regulated article
                   from which samples are taken under subsection (1) or (4) must be
                   notified in writing of the findings in respect of the samples as soon
                   as reasonably practicable .
                          (11) The charges for taking and analysis of samples under
                   this section are as prescribed.

Directions by an      10. (1) A plant inspector may, to contain a plant pest risk from
inspector
                   any regulated article, direct or prohibit the movement of the article
                   from, to or in any place.
                           (2) If a plant inspector is satisfied that there has been a
                   failure on the part of the person in charge of a container or vehicle
                   to comply with a requirement of this Ordinance or with a condition


                                                    14
imposed pursuant to it, and that this poses a plant pest risk, the
inspector may, with the assistance of a police officer, detain the
container or vehicle or direct that the docking of the vessel or
offloading of regulated articles be stopped until the plant pest risk
is contained.
        (3) A plant inspector may issue a direction to stop the
distribution, sale or use of any regulated article which the inspector
has reason to believe is infested with or may spread a plant pest,
until the plant pest risk is contained.
       (4) Written notice of a direction issued under subsection
(1), (2) or (3) must be given to the CPPO, the Commissioner of
Police and the Collector of Customs as soon as reasonably
practicable.
       (5) Upon receiving a notice under this section, the CPPO
must, without delay, take the appropriate phytosanitary measures
to contain any plant pest risk arising from movement or sale of the
regulated article and the direction ceases to have effect once the
CPPO has taken such action.

   11. (1) If a plant inspector has reasonable grounds for believing     Enforcement
                                                                         notices
that an owner or person in charge of a regulated article has failed
to comply with any directions under section 9 or any provision of
this Ordinance, he may serve a notice on the owner or person—
           (a) stating the inspector’s grounds for believing that the
               direction or any provision of this Ordinance is not
               being complied with;
           (b) specifying the phytosanitary or other measures
               which the inspector considers the owner or person
               must take in order to remedy the failures referred to
               in paragraph (a);
           (c) requiring the owner or person to implement those
               measures, or measures which are at least equivalent
               to them, within the time specified in the notice.
        (2) If the person on whom an enforcement notice is served
fails to take the measures specified—
           (a) the person commits an offence;
Penalty: A fine f $10,000
           (b) the plant inspector must notify the CPPO and take
               enforcement action as directed by the CPPO.

   12 (1) The powers in sections 7 to 11 may only be exercised—          Limitation on
                                                                         powers
           (a) on the basis of plant pest risk assessment, for the
               purpose of detecting and controlling plant pests; or
           (b) on reasonable grounds that there has been or is
               about to be a breach of this Ordinance or the
               regulations.




                                 15
                            (2) The rights of entry conferred by section 7(1) to (4) may
                     be exercised without a warrant, but the plant inspector must
                     provide written justification to the owner or person in charge of
                     any premises before exercising those rights.
                            (3) Upon taking action under section 11(1) or (2), a plant
                     inspector must, without delay, give to the person in charge of the
                     container or vehicle a written and signed notice of detention,
                     giving reasons for it.
                           (4) A plant inspector must on request by any person
                     produce his identification card for inspection when exercising
                     powers under the foregoing sections.
                             (5) A plant inspector who seizes or detains a regulated
                     article or other thing under this Ordinance must immediately issue
                     a written and signed notice to the owner or person in charge of the
                     plant, product or item, giving reasons for exercising the power.

Powers in               13. (1) If a plant inspector is of the opinion that any person—
relation to people
                                (a) seeking to enter or leave the Islands;
                                (b) employed at a port or in a quarantine station or area;
                                    or
                                (c) engaged in importing or exporting regulated
                                    articles, is in possession or control of an article that
                                    poses a plant pest risk to the Islands, the inspector
                                    may detain and question the person.
                            (2) If a plant inspector suspects that there may be upon a
                     person seeking to enter the Islands an article the importation of
                     which would constitute an offence under this Ordinance, the
                     officer may cause the person and the person’s baggage to be
                     searched.
                            (3) If a plant inspector suspects that there may be upon a
                     person seeking to leave the Islands an article the exportation of
                     which would constitute an offence under this Ordinance, the
                     inspector may cause the person and the person’s baggage to be
                     searched.
                            (4) A search of a person under this section must be carried
                     out by an inspector of the same sex as the person searched.
                            (5) A person may be detained under this section only for as
                     long as is required to question and search the person and the
                     person’s baggage and to arrange for phytosanitary measures to be
                     taken in respect of it.

Powers of arrest         14. (1) If a plant inspector suspects that an offence under this
                     Ordinance is being committed by any person in relation to a
                     regulated article, and that a plant pest risk is created as a result, the
                     inspector may, without a warrant, direct the person to stop the
                     activity and may detain the regulated article for a period specified
                     in the direction.




                                                        16
       (2) If a person as mentioned in subsection (1) refuses to
comply with a direction or impedes or obstructs the inspector in
the performance of his duties, the inspector may, with the
assistance of the police, arrest the person.
       (3) A person arrested under this section must be taken as
soon as practicable, and in any event within 48 hours, before a
magistrate and must not be detained without a warrant longer than
is necessary.

   15. (1) A plant inspector may require the owner or person in         Rights and duties
                                                                        of plant
charge of any regulated article, or premises on which an article is     inspectors
found, to—
           (a) give any assistance or carry out any instructions
               reasonably necessary to facilitate the performance
               of the inspector’s functions or to enforce the
               provisions of this Ordinance;
           (b) give all information reasonably necessary in
               connection with the eradication of any plant pest or
               the enforcement of this Ordinance.
       (2) Plant inspectors have the right to request and receive the
assistance of police officers in the execution of their duties.
       (3) Every plant inspector following an inspection or issuing
of an enforcement notice must prepare a written inspection report
to the CPPO in a form approved by the Director.
       (4) A plant inspector must not disclose any confidential
information acquired in the performance of official duties relating
to any person, firm, or business, except when required to do so by
the CPPO or Director or by a court.
       (5) A plant inspector who—
           (a) in connection with his functions, directly or
               indirectly asks for or takes any payment or other
               reward to which he is not entitled;
           (b) agrees to do, abstains from doing, permits, conceals
               or
           (c) connives at any act or omission which is contrary to
               this Ordinance; or
           (d) knowingly discloses any information contrary to
               subsection (4),
commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of $20,000.

   16. A person who—                                                    Offences relating
                                                                        to inspection,
           (a) fails to provide access, samples or information to a     etc.
               plant inspector upon request, gives false
               information to a plant inspector, or otherwise fails
               to comply with an order properly given under this
               Ordinance;


                                 17
                             (b) refuses to submit to the lawful inspection of a plant
                                 inspector any equipment used in connection with
                                 the importation or movement of a regulated article;
                             (c) attempts to improperly influence a plant inspector in
                                 the performance of his functions under this
                                 Ordinance;
                             (d) tampers with any sample taken under this
                                 Ordinance or breaks any seal or alters any marking
                                 made by a plant inspector without permission;
                             (e) alters, forges, defaces, or destroys any document
                                 issued under this Ordinance or knowingly or
                                 recklessly provides information which is false, for
                                 the purpose of obtaining any document under this
                                 Ordinance;
                             (f) assaults, resists, threatens, or willfully obstructs a
                                 plant inspector or other representative of the
                                 Service while performing lawful functions under
                                 this Ordinance; or
                             (g) poses as a plant protection officer or plant inspector,
                   commits an offence.
                   Penalty: A fine of $10,000 or imprisonment for 12 months, or
                   both.

Authorised            17. (1) The Minister in Cabinet may, by order, specify a
laboratories and
analysts           laboratory, in the Islands or elsewhere, as an authorised laboratory
                   for purposes of this Ordinance.
                          (2) No person who has any actual or reasonably perceived
                   interest in a matter or other action to be taken by the Service,
                   whether such interest is direct or indirect, may act as a plant
                   inspector of an authorised laboratory.
                          (3) A person as mentioned in subsection (2) who becomes
                   aware that he or she has such an interest, must notify the Director
                   in writing within 3 days of becoming so aware, and the Director
                   must immediately assign another plant inspector.
                           (4) The Minister in Cabinet may, on the advice of the
                   CPPO, by notice specify one or more appropriately qualified
                   persons as authorised analysts to analyse samples for the purposes
                   of this Ordinance.
                           (5) A person duly employed in an authorised laboratory as
                   an analyst is deemed to be an authorised analyst for the purposes
                   of this section.
                          (6) A laboratory that is not a Government laboratory, and
                   an analyst who is not a public officer, may charge their usual fees
                   for services provided under this Ordinance.




                                                   18
                               PART 3
                       PLANT PEST CONTROL

   18. (1) The Minister may, by order published in the Gazette,           Quarantine plant
                                                                          pests
declare any plant pest to be a quarantine plant pest for the purposes
of this Ordinance.
       (2) A declaration of a quarantine plant pest must be on the
basis of plant risk analysis and whether the plant is of potential
economic importance to the Islands.
       (3) Any person in the Islands who becomes aware that a
plant in his possession or under his control is infested with a
quarantine plant pest must as soon as practicable notify—
           (a) the CPPO or any member of the Service; or
           (b) any police officer, in person or by electronic means.
       (4) A police officer who is notified of a quarantine plant
pest under subsection (3) must inform the CPPO as soon as
practicable.
      (5) A person who fails to notify or inform as required by
subsection (3) respectively commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of $5,000.

   19. (1) The Service must establish an early detection system           Early detection
                                                                          system
designed to detect plant pest risks or health hazards from regulated
articles.
       (2) The system established under subsection (1) must
include at least the following characteristics—
           (a) the legal obligation of private agriculturists to report
               to the Service;
           (b) a chain of command covering the whole of the
               Islands.
       (3) The Minister may by regulations make provisions—
           (a) for causing or requiring notice to be given of the
               appearance of any quarantine plant pest among
               plants; and
           (b) for enforcing an early detection system established
               under this section.

   20. (1) If there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is in    Declaration of
                                                                          plant pest
any area of the Islands an outbreak of a plant pest, or a high risk of    emergency
such an outbreak, and that such an outbreak poses or would pose a
serious plant pest risk, the Minister, on the advice of the Director
acting through the responsible permanent secretary, must by order
declare a plant pest emergency in that area.
      (2) The advice of the Director given under subsection (1)
must be based on—



                                  19
           (a) an inspection carried out; or
           (b) the analysis of a sample taken, in accordance with
               this Ordinance.
      (3) The Director, on the advice of the CPPO, may direct the
imposition of provisional measures to verify and control the risk of
an outbreak before a plant pest emergency is declared under
subsection (1).
       (4) The measures directed by the Director under subsection
(3) must be limited by a time specified in the direction that is
proportional to the risk, and upon the expiration of that time, if an
emergency has not been declared under subsection (1), the
direction lapses.
       (5) On the declaration of a plant pest emergency, the
Director may do or cause to be done any of the following—
           (a) mark the boundaries of the emergency area;
           (b) set up roadblocks at all exits from the area;
           (c) set up facilities for the cleansing and
               disinfection of all persons and vehicles entering
               or leaving the area and any other thing likely to
               spread a plant pest;
           (d) disinfect all vehicles, containers, regulated articles
               or other items that are likely to carry plant pests
               and which are being sent out of the area;
           (e) inspect and disinfect all persons and their
               possessions leaving the area so as to prevent any
               pathogen from leaving the area;
           (f) for the purposes of this subsection, detain persons,
               regulated articles and vehicles for as long as is
               necessary to minimise or eliminate the plant pest
               risk presented by them;
           (g) perform surveillance activities to ascertain the
               extent and status of the emergency.
       (6) A person who—
           (a) resists, knowingly obstructs, or knowingly and
               without reasonable excuse fails to comply with a
               direction of the Director, a plant inspector or any
               police officer or other person performing duties
               under this section;
           (b) knowingly enters or leaves a plant pest
               emergency area except with and in accordance
               with the permission of the Director or a plant
               inspector; or
           (c) knowingly moves any regulated article out of or
               into an emergency area, or from one place within
               the area to another place within that area, except with



                                 20
               and in accordance with the written permission of the
               Director or a plant inspector,
commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of $50,000 or 2 years imprisonment, or both.

   21. (1) The Service must prepare a plant pest emergency plan,          Plant pest
                                                                          emergency:
based on the powers set out in section 20(5). The plan must set out       Supplementary
the phytosanitary measures that are to be imposed during and in
the area of a plant pest emergency, including obtaining the
assistance of the police, fire and rescue services.
      (2) The declaration of a plant pest emergency triggers the
implementation of the plant pest emergency plan.
      (3) Phytosanitary measures declared in a plant pest
emergency must be—
           (a) based on plant pest risk assessment;
           (b) proportionate to the threat;
           (c) limited to the extent and duration necessary to
               minimize the threat; and.
           (d) published in the Gazette.
       (4) The Minister must revoke the plant pest emergency
declaration when the Director (acting through the responsible
permanent secretary), on the advice of the CPPO, determines that
the threat has ended.

   22. (1) If a plant inspector suspects that a quarantine plant pest     Designation of
                                                                          plant pest zone
posing a serious plant pest risk exists in any area of the Islands, the
inspector must—
           (a) without delay, sign a notice to that effect specifying
               the limits of the area and provisionally designating
               it a plant pest zone;
           (b) serve the notice on the owner or occupier of the
               area; and
           (c) provide a copy of the notice to the CPPO.
        (2) The area designated as a plant pest zone is subject to
confirmation within 14 days by the CPPO following an
investigation. If the designation is not confirmed in that period, or
if the CPPO earlier decides not to confirm the designation, the area
ceases to be a plant pest zone.
       (3) If the CPPO confirms the finding of a plant pest zone,
the CPPO may, by notice published in the Gazette, designate the
plant pest zone and specify—
           (a) the relevant quarantine pest;
           (b) the limits of the plant pest zone;
           (c) the phytosanitary measures to be imposed in the
               zone; and


                                  21
                              (d) the resulting duties of persons in the zone and in
                                  relation to regulated articles in the zone.
                           (4) The CPPO may in a notice under subsection (3) also
                    designate any other area containing, adjoining or surrounding the
                    infested area as a plant pest zone.
                          (5) If the CPPO considers that a plant pest zone has ceased
                    to be infested, he must by notice in the Gazette cancel the
                    designation of the plant pest zone.

Plant pest zones:      23. (1) The Director must continuously review the plant health
Supplementary
                    status of any plant pest zone to verify compliance with the
                    designation and the CPPO must revise the designation as
                    necessary.
                           (2) In a plant pest zone, the CPPO may in writing direct—
                              (a) the treatment or disposal of infested plants and plant
                                  products;
                              (b) the movement of regulated articles into, out of, or
                                  within the zone;
                              (c) the movement of humans and vehicles into, out or
                                  within the zone;
                              (d) the inspection and treatment of regulated articles in
                                  or entering or leaving the zone;
                              (e) the destocking, cleaning, disinfecting or other
                                  treatment of land, premises and vehicles;
                              (f) any other phytosanitary measure the CPPO
                                  considers necessary to contain the sanitary risk.
                           (3) A regulated article that has been in a plant pest zone
                    must not be exported until the CPPO is satisfied that it no longer
                    presents a plant pest risk.
                          (4) The cost of treatment or destruction under this section is
                    to be borne by the ministry, and the owner of a plant or plant
                    product is entitled to compensation in accordance with section 26.
                           (5) A person who—
                              (a) knowingly and without reasonable excuse fails to
                                  comply with a direction of the CPPO in a plant pest
                                  zone;
                              (b) knowingly enters or leaves a plant pest zone
                                  except with and in accordance with the
                                  permission of a plant inspector; or
                              (c) knowingly moves any regulated article out of or
                                  into a plant pest zone without the permission of a
                                  plant inspector,
                    commits an offence.
                    Penalty: A fine of $5,000 or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.



                                                    22
   24. (1) The CPPO may, by notice in the Gazette, designate any         Designation of
                                                                         other zones
part of the Islands as a plant pest-free zone, a buffer zone or a
surveillance zone for the purposes of this Ordinance.
       (2) A plant pest-free zone is a zone in which—
           (a) no quarantine a pest is present in the area;
           (b) phytosanitary measures have been implemented to
               keep the area free of such pests; and
           (c) a surveillance system has been instituted to verify
               that the area remains free of quarantine plant pests.
       (3) A buffer zone is a zone established to protect the health
status of plants in a pest-free zone from those in a zone of a
different plant health status. It must be established using measures
such as vaccination, movement control and plant pest surveillance
based on the epidemiology of the pest or pathogen under
consideration, in order to prevent the spread of the causative
pathogenic agent into a pest-free zone.
       (4) A surveillance zone is established within, and along the
border of, a pest-free zone separating the free zone from a plant
pest zone.
       (5) The CPPO must by notice specify the phytosanitary
measures that may be imposed in order to contain a plant pest risk
in a buffer or surveillance zone and to preserve the status of a plant
pest-free zone.

   25. (1) A plant inspector may cause any plant that has a              Destruction of
                                                                         plants for pest
quarantine plant pest, whether or not in a plant pest zone, to be        control purposes
destroyed in order to prevent the spread of any plant pest, and for
that purpose the plant inspector may give all necessary directions.
       (2) A plant inspector may require the owner or person in
charge of a plant to destroy the plant if the plant has been in
contact with, or in close proximity to, another regulated article or
an item that was, or is suspected of being (or having been) infested
by a quarantine plant pest.
       (3) A plant inspector may, for the purpose of observation
and treatment, take possession of and retain any plant liable to be
destroyed under this section and take appropriate phytosanitary
measures.
       (4) A plant destroyed under the provisions of this
Ordinance or which dies as the result of a quarantine pest, must be
disposed of as soon as possible by the owner of the plant under the
directions of a plant inspector and in accordance with guidelines
published by the CPPO.
      (5) Destruction for purposes of this section includes
burning or burying.
       (6) The provisions of this section apply to a plant product
or plant-related item as they apply to plants, except for the
reference to it dying.



                                 23
Compensation      26. (1) Owners may, on the discretion of the Department, be
               compensated for plant or plant product destroyed based on an
               assessment done to ascertain—
                          (a) if compensation should be granted;
                          (b) the fair market value of the plant or plant product
                              immediately before it is destroyed.
                      (2) No compensation is payable in respect of a plant or
               plant product destroyed while in a quarantine station or area if, in
               the opinion of the CPPO, the plant or product was infested at the
               time of importation into the Islands.
                      (3) Compensation is not payable if the owner of the plant or
               plant product failed to give notice of the presence of a quarantine
               plant pest in accordance with section 18.
                      (4) No compensation is payable to a person who commits
               an offence under this Ordinance and claims compensation in
               respect of any plant or plant product by means of or in relation to
               which the offence was committed.
                      (5) No compensation is payable under this section for—
                          (a) the detention of a regulated article or vehicle;
                          (b) consequential loss arising from the destruction of a
                              plant or plant product; or
                          (c) the destruction of any other regulated article.

Control of        27. (1) The Director, on the advice of the CPPO, may in order
movement of
plants         to ensure control of quarantine pests and the proper handling of
               plants which are to be moved from or to or within the Islands, by
               notice prohibit—
                          (a) the movement from or to or within the Islands of a
                              specified plant; or
                          (b) the movement from or to or within the Islands of
                              any plant on a specified vessel or aircraft, for a
                              period specified in the notice.
                      (2) No import permit and no phytosanitary certificate may
               be issued in relation to the import or export of a plant contrary to a
               prohibition notice under subsection (1).
                     (3) For the purposes of controlling or eradicating a
               quarantine pest and of preventing its introduction or spread, the
               Director, on the advice of the CPPO, may by notice—
                          (a) control the movement of regulated articles within,
                              into or out of a zone;
                          (b) provide for the establishment of compartments
                              within a zone and varying measures of control for
                              each compartment;
                          (c) authorise the disposal or treatment of regulated
                              articles that are or have been in a zone; or



                                                24
          (d) impose any other disinfestation measure,
              eradication measure or official control and
              stamping-out program that is required, for a period
              specified in the notice.
       (3) The period specified in a notice under subsection (1) or
(2) must not exceed 2 months, but the notice is renewable if the
conditions for making it are met.
       (4) In this section—
“compartment” means a terrestrial plant sub-population containing
    one or more establishments under a common plant health
    management system and a plant sub-population with a
    distinct health status with respect to a specific plant pest for
    which required surveillance, control and plant health
    measures have been applied for the purpose of international
    trade;
“population” means a group of plants sharing a common defined
    characteristic.

   28. (1) Any movement of plants into, from or within a zone          Movement
                                                                       permits
requires a movement permit issued by the Service.
       (2) If a plant inspector has reasonable grounds to believe
that any regulated article has been removed from or taken into a
zone in contravention of subsection (1), the inspector may—
          (a) seize the item, if it creates a plant pest risk;
          (b) direct that the movement be postponed for a period
              specified in the direction; or
          (c) take other phytosanitary measures as necessary.

  29. A person who, either personally or indirectly through an         Offences relating
                                                                       to infested plants
employee or agent—
          (a) possesses, sells, offers for sale, transports, imports
              or exports any regulated article knowing that it is
              infested or may transmit a quarantine plant pest;
          (b) intentionally or recklessly permits or causes the
              introduction or spread of any quarantine plant pest;
          (c) keeps or imports into the Islands a plant that the
              person knows or suspects is infested with a
              quarantine plant pest, without notifying the Service
              immediately upon his knowledge or suspicion of
              this circumstance;
          (d) sells or offers or exposes for sale or barter a plant
              which is infested with a quarantine plant pest or
              which he suspects on reasonable grounds to be so
              infested,
commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of $10,000 or imprisonment for 6 months, or both.



                                 25
                                                   PART 4
                                            PLANT QUARANTINE
Plant quarantine
orders                30. (1) If a plant inspector suspects that a plant—
                              (a) has a plant pest;
                              (b) may have been in contact, during its transportation,
                                  with any plant which has or may have a plant pest
                                  or with any plant which is not exempted from the
                                  requirement of being placed in quarantine; or
                              (c) has otherwise been exposed to the risk of infestation
                                  by a plant pest, the inspector may order the plant to
                                  be placed under quarantine in a quarantine station.
                           (2) If it is a condition of import of a regulated article that it
                   be placed in quarantine upon arrival in the Islands, the regulated
                   article must be placed under quarantine in a quarantine station.
                          (3) The period for which a regulated article must remain in
                   a quarantine station –
                              (a) in the circumstances mentioned in subsection (2) –
                                  depends on the terms of the import permit;
                              (b) in any other case – is to be determined by the
                                  CPPO, on the basis of a plant pest risk assessment.
                          (4) Any plant which develops a plant pest while in a
                   quarantine station or, in the opinion of a plant inspector, presents a
                   risk of the spread of any quarantine plant pest in the Islands may,
                   with the approval of the CPPO, be destroyed without payment of
                   compensation.

Plant quarantine      31. (1) The Minister may, on the advice of the CPPO, establish
stations and
areas              or designate buildings or areas at appropriate places on any public
                   or private land in the Islands as a quarantine station or area for
                   regulated articles for the purposes of this Ordinance.
                          (2) Quarantine stations or areas must be established at or
                   near to all designated ports.
                         (3)A quarantine station or area must be provided with such
                   buildings and facilities as are reasonably needed—
                              (a) to hold quarantined articles in quarantine;
                              (b) to prevent unauthorised persons from entering the
                                  station or area or removing items from the station
                                  or area;
                              (c) to enable the CPPO or a plant inspector to perform
                                  tests, provide treatment and apply other
                                  phytosanitary measures as required by or under this
                                  Ordinance.
                          (4) A quarantine station or area may be established under
                   this section for specific plants or for the surveillance of specific
                   diseases, or may be established for emergency purposes only.


                                                      26
   32. (1) A plant inspector must be assigned to each quarantine        Management of
                                                                        quarantine
station or area to provide necessary attention at the station or area   stations and
while any plant is kept there.                                          areas

      (2) The CPPO may issue written instructions as to the
examination, treatment, disposal or destruction of plants or plant
products while in a quarantine station or area or in transit to or
from a quarantine station or area. Such instructions must conform
to IPPC standards for the management of quarantine stations.
      (3) The fees or charges payable for keeping articles in
quarantine are as prescribed.
       (4) The cost of keeping a regulated article in quarantine is
to be borne by the importer or owner of the regulated article.
       (5) No compensation is payable for any loss or destruction
or consequential loss caused by a regulated article being detained
in quarantine, unless negligence or malice is proved.
        (6) Plants in a quarantine station or area must be kept in
isolation, with no direct or indirect contact with other plants, to
prevent the transmission of a plant pest or pathogen into the
surrounding environment while the plant is undergoing
observation and, if appropriate, testing and treatment.
      (7) No person, other than the person in charge of the station
or a plant inspector acting in the course of duty, may enter a
quarantine station or area without the written permission of the
CPPO or of the person in charge of the station or area.
        (8) A regulated article must not be released from
quarantine except upon the authority of a quarantine release
certificate issued by a plant inspector.
      (9) Before a regulated article can be released from
quarantine—
           (a) any treatment required as a condition of importation
               of the regulated article must have been applied; and
           (b) all quarantine fees must have been paid.
      (10) Once subsection (9) has been complied with, the
regulated article must be released from quarantine as soon as
practicable and a quarantine release certificate in an approved form
issued.

   33. (1) A person who—                                                Quarantine
                                                                        offences
           (a enters a quarantine station without permission being
              given under section 30(7); or
           (b) damages, interferes with or in any way reduces the
               effectiveness of measures taken to secure a
               quarantine station, or any quarantined regulated
               article in the station,
commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of $5,000.


                                 27
                            (2) A person who—
                                (a) fails to comply with directions for a plant to be or to
                                    remain in quarantine; or
                                (b) releases a plant from quarantine without the written
                                    authority of a plant inspector,
                     commits an offence.
                     Penalty: A fine of $10,000 and imprisonment for 6 months, or
                     both.

                                                   PART 5
                                        PLANT IMPORTS AND EXPORTS
Importation of
regulated articles     34. (1) A plant, plant product or other regulated article may be
                     imported into the Islands only at a port.
                           (2) No regulated article may be imported into the Islands
                     unless—
                                (a) a plant import permit has been issued under this
                                    Part;
                                (b) the regulated article meets the plant import
                                    conditions of the permit and of or under this
                                    Ordinance;
                                (c) the regulated article is accompanied by any other
                                    documentation required by or under this Ordinance
                                    or any other written law to accompany imports.
                            (3) A person who imports, or attempts to import, a
                     regulated article in contravention of this section commits an
                     offence.
                     Penalty: A fine of $50,000 and imprisonment for 2 years, or both.
                            (4) The Minister may make regulations—
                                (a) providing for cleansing and disinfection and
                                    subjection to quarantine of vehicles used for the
                                    transportation of plants to the Islands;
                                (b) regulating the examination, inspection, seizure and
                                    detention of any regulated article prior to its being
                                    landed in the Islands.
                             (5) The requirements of or under this Part are in addition to
                     any other requirements relating to the import or export of regulated
                     articles.

Plant import            35. (1) A person who wishes to import any regulated article
permits
                     into the Islands must apply to the Service for a plant import permit
                     in a form approved by the CPPO and must pay the prescribed fee.




                                                      28
       (2) An application for a plant import permit must be
submitted in writing to the Service before the importation and
must include—
           (a) the proposed date of entry;
           (b) the port of entry;
           (c) the country of origin and any country of transit;
           (d) the name of the species or item to be imported and
               the quantity;
           (e) the means of transport;
           (f) proof of ownership or custodianship of plants;
           (g) the final destination in the Islands;
           (h) evidence that an international phytosanitary
               certificate has been issued in respect of the article in
               the exporting country; and
           (i) any other information prescribed or that the CPPO
               requires in writing in any particular case.
      (3) On receipt of an application made in accordance with
subsection (2), the Service may issue to the applicant a plant
import permit in a form approved by the CPPO.
      (4) Every plant import permit is issued subject to the plant
import conditions and if those conditions are not met, the permit is
deemed to be cancelled.
       (5) A plant import permit may include a requirement that a
regulated article be placed in quarantine for a period and subject to
conditions specified in the permit.

   36. (1) The Director must, from time to time, publish the plant        Plant import
                                                                          conditions
import conditions for the importation of regulated articles into the
Islands.
       (2) Plant import conditions are the phytosanitary
requirements that must be met before a regulated article is
imported and it is the duty of the importer to inform himself of the
conditions and to comply with them.
      (3) Plant import conditions may include a requirement for
the tagging or other identification of plants that have been
imported.
       (4) Plant import conditions must be based on international
standards and science-based plant pest risk assessment conducted
in accordance with the IPPC standards and other established
international standards and with other requirements of or under
this Ordinance.
      (5) The plant import conditions must be regularly updated
and made public.




                                    29
International
phytosanitary
                      37. (1) The import conditions in relation to any regulated
certificates       article may include a requirement that the article be certified by an
                   international phytosanitary certificate.
                         (2) An international phytosanitary certificate is a
                   phytosanitary certificate issued by the plant protection authority of
                   the country from where a regulated article originated or was last
                   exported, which must be a country specified under subsection (3).
                          (3) The Director, on the advice of the CPPO, must by
                   notice specify the countries whose phytosanitary certificates will
                   be accepted for the purposes of this Part.
                         (4) An international phytosanitary certificate must be in
                   English or accompanied by an official English translation.

Prohibited plant      38. (1) The Minister may, from time to time, on the advice of
imports
                   the Director acting through the responsible permanent secretary,
                   and on the basis of plant pest risk assessment, by notice prohibit
                   the importation into the Islands of—
                              (a) a specified regulated article or species of plant or
                                  type of product; or
                              (b) all regulated articles from a specified country, if
                                  such importation would result in a serious plant pest
                                  risk to the Islands.
                           (2) If a notice prohibiting the importation of a regulated
                   article is issued under subsection (1), written reasons for the notice
                   must be stated.
                           (3) A person who imports or attempts to import a regulated
                   article the importation of which is prohibited under this section
                   commits an offence.
                   Penalty: A fine of $50,000 or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.

Arrival               39. (1) A customs officer or police officer who becomes aware
notification
                   of the arrival in the Islands of a consignment of regulated articles
                   must—
                              (a) notify a plant inspector as soon as practicable;
                              (b) if so required by a plant inspector, assist in the
                                  inspection of the articles; and
                              (c) detain the articles in a quarantine area until a plant
                                  inspector authorises their release.
                           (2) A postal worker or employee of the Civil Aviation
                   Authority or the Ports Authority who becomes aware of the arrival
                   in the Islands of a regulated article for which no import permit has
                   been issued, must notify a plant inspector as soon as practicable.
                          (3) Subsection (1) and (2) do not apply to the importation
                   of personal effects by a passenger or crew member, as provided by
                   section 42.
                         (4) A person who fails to comply with an obligation
                   imposed by subsection (1) or (2) commits an offence.


                                                    30
Penalty: A fine of $10,000.

   40. (1) All regulated articles are, upon importation into the          Inspection of
                                                                          plant imports
Islands, subject to inspection by a plant inspector at the port of
entry.
       (2) Inspections must be carried out during regular business
hours, unless the articles to be inspected are goods in transit or are
extremely perishable, in which case, on application by the importer
and on payment of the prescribed fee, the inspection must be
carried out at some other time agreed with the importer.
       (3) Upon an inspection under this section, if the plant
inspector determines that the imported item does not present any
risk for the introduction and spread of a quarantine plant pest, and
does not require quarantine, he may release the item to the
importer.
      (4) If upon such an inspection the inspector is satisfied that
the import of the regulated article would result or is likely to result
in a plant pest risk, or if the documentation accompanying the
shipment fails to meet the requirements of this Part, the inspector
must do one of the following—
           (a) take samples of the regulated article for submission
               to an authorised laboratory for analysis;
           (b) transfer the regulated article to a quarantine station
               or any other location specified by the Director for
               testing or disinfection;
           (c) return the regulated article to the country of origin;
               arrange for the destruction of the regulated article.
      (5)The inspector must inform the importer of the option that
the inspector proposes to take and must give the importer the
opportunity to appeal against the decision.
       (6) The inspector must inform the CPPO in writing of his
findings and of the action taken.
      (7) Any decision taken under subsection (3) or (4) must be
made based on plant pest risk assessment.
       (8) If the imported articles lie unclaimed for a prescribed
period after their entry into the Islands, or after treatment, the
Director may take action to dispose of them.
      (9) The cost of any action taken by the Director under
subsection (4) or (8) must be borne by the importer.

   41. (1) No regulated article may be exported from the Islands          Plant exports
except in accordance with this Ordinance.
       (2) A regulated article may only be exported from a port.
        (3) A person who intends to export a regulated article from
the Islands must submit it for examination by a plant inspector.
      (4) In submitting a regulated article for examination under
subsection (3) the person must complete the approved form, pay


                                  31
                 the prescribed fee, and provide any other document or information
                 reasonably needed to enable the examination to take place.
                         (5) If upon examination the inspector, taking into
                 consideration the requirements of the importing country, is
                 satisfied that the conditions for the issue of a phytosanitary
                 certificate in relation to the regulated article have been met, the
                 inspector must issue a certificate.
                       (6) The issue of a phytosanitary certificate is dependent upon
                 the payment of the prescribed fee.
                         (7) If upon examination as aforesaid the inspector is not
                 satisfied that the regulated article intended to be exported is free of
                 any risk for the exportation and spread of a quarantine plant pest,
                 or otherwise satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, the
                 inspector must—
                            (a) subject the plant or product to appropriate treatment
                                in order to remove the risk; or
                            (b) refuse to issue a phytosanitary certificate.
                       (8) For the purpose of issuing phytosanitary certificates the
                 Service may—
                            (a) carry out biological        tests   or   disinfestation
                                procedures;
                            (b) carry out inspection, approval and certification
                                procedures of plants and plant establishments;
                            (c) observe plants during transport to the place of
                                shipment and at the point of departure; and
                            (d) send advance notice to the importing country.
                        (9) Following the issue of a phytosanitary certificate, the
                 Service must undertake the appropriate measures to maintain the
                 plant health status of the regulated article until it leaves the
                 Islands.
                        (10) A person who exports or attempts to export a regulated
                 article in contravention of this section commits an offence.
                 Penalty: A fine of $50,000 or imprisonment for 2 years, or both.

Passengers and      42. (1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), every passenger or
crew members
                 crew member who arrives in the Islands on board a vessel or
                 aircraft must make to a plant inspector or customs officer a plant
                 health declaration.
                         (2) The plant health declaration must be in, or to the effect
                 of, a form approved by the Director and must contain all required
                 particulars relating to the person and any baggage that
                 accompanies the person.
                       (3) A passenger or crew member does not need to declare
                 personal effects, that is to say—
                            (a) articles of clothing worn on the body;



                                                   32
          (b) articles visibly attached or connected to the body or
              clothing; or
          (c) suitcases and other visible containers of personal
              baggage, unless a plant inspector so requests
              because of the phytosanitary risk posed by the item,
              and in the absence of any such request, the article or
              container is deemed to have plant import clearance.
      (4) A single declaration under subsection (1) may be made
by a person in respect of the person and the person’s spouse and
any member of the family aged 16 years or less travelling on the
same vessel or aircraft.
       (5) When a declaration is tendered under this section, a
plant inspector may—
          (a) question the passenger or crew member;
          (b) inspect the baggage to which it relates.
          (c) if necessary, question a spouse or family member
              included on the declaration.
       (6) After taking the steps in subsection (5), a plant
inspector may either grant plant import clearance of the persons
and baggage to which the declaration relates, or—
          (a) detain the passenger or crew member for further
              questioning and search; and
          (b) detain the baggage and other articles in the
              possession of the passenger or crew member for
              further inspection and application of other
              phytosanitary measures as the inspector considers
              appropriate;
          (c) An arriving passenger or crew member who fails
              to—
              (i) make a declaration as required by subsection (1);
                   or
              (ii) submit baggage for inspection when so directed
                    under subsection (5),
commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of $5,000.
       (7) Every passenger or crew member departing from the
Islands must—
          (a) submit for inspection on request by a plant
              inspector any regulated article on the person or in
              the person’s baggage;
          (b) permit the inspector to search the person’s baggage.
      (8) A departing passenger or crew member who fails to
comply with subsection (7) commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of $5,000.


                                33
                        (9) Section 14 applies to the questioning, detention and
                 searching of persons and baggage under this section.

Obligations of      43. (1) If there is on board a vessel or aircraft arriving in the
captains and
owners of        Islands any regulated article, the captain or owner of the vessel or
vessels and      aircraft on or before coming into a port must declare to the
aircraft
                 Service, in an approved form, the presence of the regulated article
                 on board the vessel or aircraft.
                        (2) If a plant inspector is satisfied that—
                            (a) there has been a failure on the part of the captain or
                                owner of a vessel or aircraft to comply with the
                                requirement in subsection (1); or
                            (b) there is on board the vessel or aircraft any regulated
                                article that is being imported in contravention of
                                this Part,
                 the inspector may cause the vessel or aircraft or the container
                 where the regulated article is kept to be detained until the Director
                 otherwise directs.
                        (3) The inspector must give the captain and owner written
                 notice of the failure or contravention referred to in subsection (2).
                        (4) The captain of every incoming vessel must, while the
                 vessel is in the Islands take all necessary steps to prevent any plant
                 or plant product from being landed unless permitted by a plant
                 inspector, and then only as directed by the inspector.
                        (5) A captain or owner who fails to comply with a
                 requirement of this section commits an offence.
                 Penalty: A fine of $20,000.
                         (6) If a regulated article is landed from any vessel or
                 aircraft in contravention of this Ordinance, the captain of the
                 vessel or aircraft or the owner of the article (depending on which
                 has possession or custody of it) commits an offence.
                 Penalty: A fine of $20,000 or imprisonment for 12 months, or
                 both.

International       44. (1) The owner or operator of an international transportation
transportation
facilities       facility must, if required in writing by the Director, provide and
                 maintain adequate areas, offices, laboratories and other facilities,
                 including buildings, accommodation, equipment, furnishings and
                 fixtures, for inspection or for any other purpose related to the
                 administration of this Ordinance.
                        (2) The Director may—
                            (a) require the making of any improvements he
                                considers necessary to any area, office, laboratory
                                or other facility to meet the obligation in subsection
                                (1);




                                                  34
           (b) post, on or about the area, office, laboratory or other
               facility for as long as is required, a notice to this
               effect.
       (3) If the owner or operator of a facility fails to comply
with a requirement under subsection (2)(a), the Director may cause
the construction or repairs to be carried out , whereupon the owner
or operator becomes liable for all reasonable costs incurred as a
debt due to the Crown.
       (4) The Minister may make regulations for the operation of
any international transportation facility, including the provision of
food, water and ventilation and protection during loading and
unloading necessary, for different categories of plants.
     (5) In this section, “international transportation facility”
means—
           (a) an airport that receives any aircraft operating on an
               international flight;
           (b) a port that receives any ship sailing on an
               international voyage; or
           (c) a warehouse or other facility that receives any
               international air or water traffic.


                              PART 7
                    PROSECUTION OF OFFENCES

   45. (1) If the CPPO reasonably believes, of his own knowledge         Procedure for
                                                                         offences
or on the information of a plant inspector, that a person has
contravened any provision of this Ordinance, and that the person is
not eligible for, or has not accepted, the fixed penalty procedure in
section 48, the CPPO must notify the Police Force who may lay an
information before a magistrate with a view to a summons being
issued.
       (2) The CPPO must inform the Director in writing of action
taken under subsection (1) as soon as practicable after it is taken.
     (3) All offences under this Ordinance are triable as
summary offences in the Magistrate’s Court.

   46. If a person is convicted of an offence under this Ordinance       Cancellation of
                                                                         licence, etc.
and the offence results in the spread of a quarantine plant pest or
poses a serious plant pest risk, the court may on conviction, and on
an application by or on behalf of the CPPO, order—
           (a) that any plant establishment operated by the person
               be closed; and
           (b) that any licence the person holds to operate such an
               establishment be suspended for a period specified
               in the order, or cancelled.




                                 35
Offences by           47. (1) If a corporation commits an offence under this
corporations and
employees          Ordinance, any officer, director or agent of the corporation who
                   directed, authorised, assented to or acquiesced or participated in
                   the commission of the offence is a party to and guilty of the
                   offence and is liable on conviction to the punishment provided for
                   the offence, whether or not the corporation has been prosecuted or
                   convicted.
                          (2) In any prosecution for an offence under this Ordinance,
                   it is sufficient proof of the offence to establish that it was
                   committed by an employee or agent of the defendant, whether or
                   not the employee or agent is identified or has been prosecuted for
                   the offence, unless the defendant establishes that—
                             (a) the offence was committed without the knowledge
                                 or consent of the defendant; and
                             (b) the defendant exercised all due diligence to prevent
                                 the commission of the offence.

Fixed penalties       48. (1) If a plant inspector has reasonable grounds to believe
                   that a person is committing or has committed an offence under this
                   Ordinance or the regulations for which the maximum penalty does
                   not include a term of imprisonment, the inspector may
                   immediately serve a notice in writing on the person, charging him
                   with the commission of the offence.
                        (2) The notice must inform the alleged offender that he
                   must—
                             (a) appear before a magistrate on the date specified; or
                             (b) in accordance with the procedure in subsections (3)
                                 and (4) of this section, pay the fixed penalty, in lieu
                                 of appearance before a magistrate.
                          (3) An alleged offender who chooses to pay the fixed
                   penalty referred to in subsection (2)(b) –
                             (a) must within 7 days of the date of the notice, sign the
                                 notice in acknowledgement of guilt and return it,
                                 together with the sum specified in the notice, to a
                                 Magistrate’s Court;
                             (b) is to be treated for all purposes in law as a person
                                 who has not committed, been charged with,
                                 prosecuted for, convicted of or sentenced for the
                                 offence in respect of which payment was made.
                          (4) The admission of guilt and the fixed penalty paid under
                   this section must be dealt with by the magistrate in the same
                   manner as an adjudication in court of an offence punishable on
                   summary conviction and for which no conviction is recorded.
                         (3) The fixed penalty is 1/10 of the maximum fine for the
                   offence.

Forfeiture            49. (1) Upon the conviction of any person for an offence under
                   this Ordinance, the court may, in addition to any other sentence


                                                   36
imposed, order any regulated article in respect of which the
offence was committed, and any object used in connection with the
offence, to be forfeited to the Crown.
       (2) An item declared forfeit under subsection (1) must be
disposed of as the court directs, on the advice of the CPPO, and if
sold, the proceeds of sale must be dealt with in accordance with
section 42 of the Interpretation Ordinance (Cap.1.03).
       (3) If the court does not order the forfeiture of an item, it or
any proceeds realized from its disposal must be returned to the
owner of the item or the person having the possession, care or
control of it when it was seized.
       (4) If the owner of an item or the person having possession,
care or control of it at the time of its seizure is convicted of an
offence under this Ordinance and a fine is imposed –
           (a) the item may be detained until the fine is paid;
           (b) the item may be sold under execution in satisfaction
               of the fine.

   50. (1) If the owner or person in charge of a plant is charged         Presumptions
with an offence under this Ordinance relative to a plant pest, he is
presumed to have known of the existence of the pest unless he
shows to the satisfaction of the court that he had no knowledge of
it and could not with reasonable diligence have obtained that
knowledge.
       (2) If a person is charged with an offence under this
Ordinance for not having duly cleansed or disinfested any place,
vehicle or thing belonging to him or in his charge, the burden of
proving the due cleansing and disinfestation lies on the person.

   51. (1) In a prosecution for an offence under this Ordinance, a        Documentary
                                                                          evidence
declaration, certificate, report or other document of the Director or
CPPO or of an authorised analyst, plant inspector or police officer,
made for the purposes of this Ordinance and purporting to have
been signed on behalf of the Director or CPPO or of the analyst,
inspector or police officer, is admissible in evidence without proof
of the signature or office of the person appearing to have signed it
and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, is proof of the
matters asserted in it.
        (2) In a prosecution for an offence under this Ordinance, a
copy of or an extract from any record or other document that is
made by the Director or CPPO or by an analyst, inspector or police
officer under this Ordinance and that appears to have been
certified under the signature of the Director, CPPO, analyst,
inspector or police officer as a true copy or extract is admissible in
evidence.
       (3) A document referred to in subsection (1) or (2) is, in the
absence of evidence to the contrary, deemed to have been issued
on the date shown on it.




                                  37
                       (4) The certificate of a qualified plant expert to the effect
               that any plant is or was infested with a plant pest specified in the
               certificate is for the purposes of this Ordinance prima facie
               evidence in a court of the matter certified.

Seizure and       52. (1) Without affecting any other provision of this Ordinance
detention of
plants, etc.   about seizure and disposal of regulated articles, a plant inspector or
               police officer may seize and dispose of any regulated article, or
               require its owner or any person having the possession, care or
               control of it to dispose of it, if the plant or product—
                          (a) is, or is suspected of being, infested by a quarantine
                              plant pest;
                          (b) has been in contact with or in close proximity to
                              another regulated article that was, or is suspected of
                              having been, infested by a quarantine plant pest at
                              the time of contact or close proximity; or
                          (c) is, or is suspected of being the causative agent of a
                              quarantine plant pest.
                      (2) A plant inspector or police officer who seizes and
               detains a regulated article under this Ordinance may—
                          (a) arrange for it to be stored it at the place where it
                              was seized or removed to some other place for
                              storage; or
                          (b) require the owner or the person having the
                              possession, care or control of it when it was seized
                              to remove it to any place and to store it.
                     (3) A person who fails to comply with a requirement under
               subsection (2)(b) commits an offence and is liable on summary
               conviction—
                          (a) to a fine of $5,000;
                          (b) to pay the Government the cost of recapturing and
                              confining or if necessary destroying the regulated
                              article.
                     (4) A person who fails to comply with a requirement under
               subsection (2)(b) is not entitled to any compensation for loss of or
               damage to the regulated article occasioned by its being recaptured
               and confined or if necessary destroyed in accordance with this
               Ordinance.
                      (5) A person who, except with the written authority of a
               plant inspector, removes, alters or interferes in any way with a
               regulated article seized under any provision of this Ordinance
               commits an offence.
               Penalty: A fine of $5,000.
                     (6) A plant or thing seized and detained under this
               Ordinance must not be detained after—




                                                38
          (a) a determination by an inspector that the plant or
              thing is in conformity with the provisions of this
              Ordinance; or
          (b) the expiration of 180 days after the day of seizure,
              unless before that time proceedings are instituted in
              relation to the plant or thing, in which case it, or the
              proceeds from its disposal, may be detained until
              the proceedings are finally concluded.
        (7) Any document or other article seized and detained as
evidence of an offence under this Ordinance must, at the
conclusion of any proceedings for the offence, or as soon as
reasonably practicable after it is decided not to bring proceedings
for the offence, be returned to the owner of the document or other
article unless it is ordered to be forfeited under section 50.

                              PART 8
                  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

   53. (1) The Service must establish a system for the audit of          Plant audit and
                                                                         trace-back
plants and trace-back of plant products.                                 system

      (2) The system must enable the Service—
          (a) to trace quarantine plant pest outbreaks;
          (b) to recall plant-based food if necessary;
          (c) to follow the movement of a plant through all stages
              of the production chain.
      (3) The Minister may make regulations—
          (a) providing for the establishment and functioning of a
              plant identification and tracing system; and
          (b) regulating the packaging and labelling of plant
              products for trace back to the country of origin.
       (4) A system established under this section must be
published in accordance with section 57(1).

   54. (1) All customs, port, airport, airline, postal, shipping,        Duty to assist
                                                                         and cooperate
police and local authorities must assist plant inspectors in the
performance of their functions under this Ordinance by providing
such facilities and assistance as the Director may reasonably
request from time to time.
       (2) The Service must collaborate with all relevant
ministries and departments, including the authorities responsible
for food safety and environmental health, and must establish
mechanisms for cooperation in this regard.

    55. (1) A person aggrieved by an action or decision of a plant       Right of appeal
inspector under this Ordinance may appeal to the CPPO in writing
received within 7 days of the action or decision becoming known
to the person aggrieved.


                                 39
                          (2) A person aggrieved by an action or decision of the
                  CPPO under this Ordinance, including a decision on an appeal
                  under subsection (1), may appeal in writing to the Director
                  received within 14 days of the action or decision becoming known
                  to the person aggrieved.
                         (3) The decision of the Director is final on technical matters
                  but does not prejudice the right of any aggrieved party to seek
                  recourse in the courts on matters of law.
                         (4) The CPPO or Director, when considering an appeal
                  under his section, must give the plant inspector or the CPPO, as
                  the case may be, an opportunity to make representations in writing
                  on the subject of the appeal.

Good faith           56. (1) Neither the Director, the CPPO nor any plant inspector,
defence
                  plant protection officer or other representative of the Service is
                  liable to suit or to prosecution in respect of anything done or
                  omitted, or any decision given, if the act, omission or decision was
                  in good faith and in the performance of official functions under
                  this Ordinance.
                         (2) Neither the Government, the Director, the CPPO nor
                  any other public officer has any liability for actions taken in good
                  faith for the destruction or disposal of regulated articles in
                  accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

Publication and     57. (1) Any notice, approval, list or guidelines to be published
service of
notices, etc.     under this Ordinance must be published in the Gazette.
                         (2) Service of documents required to be served under this
                  Ordinance may be effected by personal service, or by electronic
                  service in accordance with the Electronic Transactions Ordinance
                  (Cap. 2.14).
                         (3) If no person is in actual occupation of any premises, or
                  if the occupier or owner cannot be located, service of any notice
                  under this Ordinance relating to the premises must be made by
                  affixing the notice to a conspicuous place on the premises, and
                  such affixing is good service of the notice.

Keeping of           58. (1) The CPPO must maintain a plant protection records
records
                  needed for the administration of this Ordinance and the
                  performance of the functions of the Service.
                          (2) Without limiting the matters to be recorded details of
                  the following must be included—
                             (a) quarantine plant pests;
                             (b) prohibited plant imports;
                             (c) designated ports of entry and exit;
                             (d) international transport facilities in the Islands;
                             (e) plant quarantine stations and areas;




                                                    40
          (f) the plant import conditions for each type of
              regulated article, including the phytosanitary
              measures appropriate to each type;
          (g) plant import permits issued and refused under Part
              5;
          (h) a list of exporting countries approved under section
              37(3);
          (i) plant pest zones and other zones designated under
              Part 3;
          (j) occurrences of quarantine plant pests notified under
              this Ordinance;
          (k) forms approved for the purposes of this Ordinance;
          (l) any other matter that the Director in writing
              requires the Service to record in the register.
       (3) The CPPO must maintain records relating to the
functions of the Service, including, but not limited to—
          (a) financial management records, with budgets and
              records of expenditure;
          (b) personnel records including the identities, duty
              statements and terms and conditions of employment
              of all plant inspectors;
          (c) operational statistics relating to the Service.
       (4) Subject to any other written law, the plant protection
register and other records kept under this section must only be
used for the purposes of this Ordinance.
        (5) A copy of an entry in the plant protection records
certified by the Director to be an accurate copy may be produced
in court as prima facie evidence of the entry.
       (6) The plant protection records kept under this section may
be in electronic format, provided the information is readily
retrievable and is protected against unintended loss and
unauthorised alteration.
       (7) The Director may by notice, on the advice of the CPPO,
determine the period for which entries in the plant protection
records under this section must be kept, consistent with any other
written law relating to public records.

   59. (1) The Minister, on the advice of the Director, may make      Regulations
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
Ordinance.
      (2) Without limiting subsection (1), the regulations may
provide for—
          (a) additional requirements and procedures for permits
              to be issued under this Ordinance and the
              information about them that is to be kept in the
              records;


                                 41
                        (b) the taking and analysis of samples;
                        (c) the procedures to be followed by an authorised
                            laboratory or analyst in performing functions under
                            this Ordinance;
                        (d) additional rules and procedures for                the
                            implementation of phytosanitary measures;
                        (e) the mode of cleaning and disinfestation in a port
                            area of any item including the hands or feet, the
                            clothing or articles in the possession of any person
                            arriving in the Islands on a vessel used to transport
                            plants from a country in which there is an outbreak
                            of a quarantine pest;
                        (f) providing for the application to plants imported into
                            the Islands of any test for a quarantine pest or of
                            any treatment for such a pest;
                        (g) prohibiting or regulating the importation of any
                            equipment which has been used in connection with
                            regulated articles or refuse, and which is capable of
                            transmitting a quarantine pest;
                        (h) regulating the imposition of emergency quarantine
                            actions due to new hazards;
                        (i) the fees payable for services provided by or on
                            behalf of the Service under this Ordinance,
                            including the cost of inspections and analysis and
                            the services of an authorised laboratory;
                        (j) any other matter which by this Ordinance is to be
                            prescribed, or which is necessary to implement this
                            Ordinance.
                  (2) Regulations made under           this   section   must   be
             harmonized with the IPPC standards.
                    (3) Regulations under this or any other section may create
             offences and may prescribe a maximum penalty for such offences
             not exceeding a fine of $10,000.
                    (4) The Director must ensure appropriate consultation with
             the relevant public and private entities relevant to the agricultural
             sector before advising the Minister on the making of regulations
             under this section.

Repeal and     60. (1) The Plant Protection Ordinance (Cap.10.04) is repealed
savings
             and the Plant Protection Order 1996 made under it is revoked.
                    (2) Any enforcement action commenced under the repealed
             Ordinance, including any judicial proceedings arising out of such
             action, may be continued until it is completed in terms of that
             Ordinance.
                   (3) Any permit or certificate issued under the repealed
             Ordinance which is in force at the date of commencement of this
             Ordinance continues in force for 6 months after that date.


                                              42
  61. This Ordinance binds the Crown.   Ordinance binds
                                        the Crown

                      _______________

MADE this 11th day of October 2012.



PATRICK BOYLE
ACTING GOVERNOR




                             43
