             TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS


             PLANT HEALTH ORDINANCE


                   (Legal Notice 25 of 2024)


         PLANT HEALTH REGULATIONS 2024


          ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

                            PART 1
                          PRELIMINARY


   1.   Citation and commencement
   2.   Interpretation

                            PART 2
        FUNCTIONS OF THE SERVICE – SUPPLEMENTARY

   3.   Additional functions of the Service
   4.   Plant pest surveillance
   5.   Plant inspections
   6.   Disinfestation
   7.   Plant pest-free zones
   8.   Plant pest risk assessment
   9.   Auditing and traceback
  10.   Focal Point
  11.   Early detection system
  12.   Plant pest emergency plan
  13.   Phytosanitary measures
  14.   International reporting
  15.   Communication, training, and public awareness

                             PART 3
         POWERS OF THE SERVICE – SUPPLEMENTARY




                                  1
16.   Powers of entry, search and seizure
17.   Detention of articles
18.   Treatment, processing or disposition of regulated articles
19.   Sampling
20.   Authorised laboratories and analysts
21.   Plant quarantine
22.   Plant quarantine stations and areas

                            PART 4
        IMPORTATION OF REGULATED ARTICLES

23.   Prohibition on landing
24.   Ports of entry
25.   Mail exchange
26.   Plant import permits
27.   Application for a plant import permit
28.   Plant import conditions

                            PART 5
            EXPORT OF REGULATED ARTICLES



29.   Security of exports
30.   Export documentation

                            PART 6
                      MISCELLANEOUS

31.   Movement of things in a plant pest zone
32.   Prohibiting or restricting the use of a place
33.   Inspection of vehicles
34.   Labelling and packaging
35.   Electronic documents
36.   Receipts
37.   Fees
38.   Offence

SCHEDULE          Fees for Plant Health Services




                               2
              TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS
               PLANT HEALTH ORDINANCE


           PLANT HEALTH REGULATIONS 2024


                     (Legal Notice 25 of 2024)


MADE by the Minister under sections 19(3), 34(4), 44(4), 53(3)
and 59 of the Plant Health Ordinance.

                              PART 1
                           PRELIMINARY

Citation and commencement
   1. These Regulations may be cited as the Plant Health
Regulations 2024 and shall come into operation on the 15th day of
July 2024.

Interpretation
   2. In these Regulations—
“activity”, in respect of a thing, means the processing, handling,
       packaging, labeling, distributing, sale, disposition, loading,
       unloading, movement, use, treatment, preservation,
       safeguarding or storage of the thing;
“competent authority” of a country means the governmental or
     other authority in the country responsible for plant
     protection and plant quarantine and for issuing
     phytosanitary certificates;
“contracting party” means a party to the IPPC;
“CPHD” means Caribbean Plant Health Directors Forum;
“CPM” means the Commission on Phytosanitary Measure of the
    IPPC;
“inspection” means an official visual examination of a regulated
      article to determine if it is or is infected by a plant pest,
      done in compliance with phytosanitary requirements;
“phytosanitary certificate for re-export” means a phytosanitary
      certificate that indicates that a thing is considered to




                                 3
      conform with the laws of the importing country requesting
      phytosanitary import requirements, to which is attached a
      copy of the original phytosanitary certificate from the
      country of origin;
“plant import permit” means a permit issued under section 35 of
       the Ordinance;
“reciprocating country” means a country that is engaged in trade
       in agricultural produce with the Islands;
“WTO SPS Agreement” means the World Trade Agreement on
    Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, 1985.


                            PART 2
    FUNCTIONS OF THE SERVICE - SUPPLEMENTARY

Additional functions of the Service
  3. (1) Pursuant to its functions under section 5 of the
Ordinance, the Service shall—
          (a) develop and implement international standards for
              phytosanitary measures relevant to the operational
              system of the Service;
          (b) adopt and implement WTO SPS Agreement
              recommendations, including the basic WTO SPS
              principles relevant to trade in plants and plant
              products.
      (2) The Service shall take all reasonably practicable steps
to—
          (a) reduce the likelihood of plant pests from entering,
              becoming established or spreading in the Islands;
          (b) prepare and allow for effective responses to, and
              management of, new and emerging plant pests that
              enter, establish or spread in the Islands; and
          (c) ensure that, where appropriate, quarantine plant
              pests already in the Islands are contained,
              suppressed or otherwise managed.
      (3) The regulations under this Part supplement and do not
derogate from the functions of the Service set out in section 5 of
the Ordinance.




                                4
Plant pest surveillance
   4. (1) In conducting plant pest surveillance as contemplated
by section 5(1)(b) of the Ordinance, the Service shall—
           (a) utilize Global Positioning System (GPS) or
               equivalent technology as a standard protocol for
               plant pest surveillance;
           (b) identify areas such as farms, plant nurseries etc.
               where surveillance is required; and
           (c) conduct specific surveys (detection, delimiting,
               monitoring) where necessary.
      (2) The Service shall establish an electronic database where
collected information is stored and can be easily accessible.
      (3) Surveillance reports shall be distributed to all relevant
stakeholders upon request.
      (4) Surveillance data shall be kept safe under the control of
the Service for future use.

Plant inspections
   5. (1) In conducting inspections of plants and plant products
as contemplated by section 5(1)(c) of the Ordinance, the Service
shall—
           (a) adopt the guidelines set out in ISPM 23 for the
               inspection of regulated articles;
           (b) conduct inspections in the presence of the
               importer, the importer’s agent, or a customs
               official;
           (c) conduct inspections in an area free of contagion
               and that poses no or negligible risk of plant pest
               infestation;
           (d) examine     import/export     documents       for
               completeness, consistency, accuracy and validity;
               and
           (e) examine documents and articles to verify
               compliance with import/export phytosanitary
               regulations.
       (2) The Service shall prepare a detailed report on inspection
activities, which shall be made available to the parties concerned.
The report shall state the name of the property owner, reason for
inspection, time and date of entry and inspection, list of regulated
articles inspected, and the action/s taken based upon the
inspection findings.




                                 5
Disinfestation
   6. (1) In applying disinfestation to a regulated article or
consignment of regulated articles as contemplated by section
5(1)(d) of the Ordinance, the Service shall use the following
methods, as appropriate, or any other phytosanitary treatment
measures recommended by the Chief Plant Protection Officer—
           (a) methyl bromide fumigation;
           (b) hot water treatment;
           (c) irradiation;
           (d) chemical spraying; and
           (e) washing with potable water.
    (2) The Service may require the disinfestation, by any means
it directs, of any vessel or aircraft, or of the footwear (or the feet
if footwear is not worn) of any person arriving in any vessel or
aircraft—
           (a) used for the transportation of plants and plant
               products; or
           (b) arriving from any country in which there is known
               to the Service to be an outbreak of a quarantine
               plant pest.

Plant pest-free zones
   7. In designating, maintaining and surveying a plant pest-free
zone as contemplated by section 5(1)(e) of the Ordinance, the
Service shall observe the principles of ISPM 4.

Plant pest risk assessment
   8. (1) In performing plant pest risk assessment pursuant to
section 5(1)(f) of the Ordinance, the Service shall have regard to
the following categories—
           (a) commonly imported regulated articles that are
               associated with plant pests of economic
               importance to the Islands;
           (b) plant pests of economic significance;
           (c) requests for the importation of a new species of
               plant or plant product;
           (d) any plant material that would be introduced into
               the Islands for the first time and has the potential
               to pose a significant risk; and




                                  6
          (e) organisms not previously recognized as plant pests
              (such as plants, biological control agents or other
              beneficial organisms, living modified organisms).
      (2) The Service shall also maintain records of recognized
plant pests and pathways and any review of phytosanitary policy.

Auditing and traceback
  9. In order to perform its function under section 5(1)(j) of the
Ordinance, the Service shall—
          (a) ensure that consignments and their certification are
              traceable as appropriate through all stages of
              production, handling and transport to the port of
              export;
          (b) advise an importing country as soon as practicable
              of the obvious plant pest risk posed by a
              consignment, even after certification of the
              consignment; and
          (c) routinely assess and evaluate the import/export
              system effectiveness and usefulness.

Focal Point
   10. (1) In order to perform its function under section 5(1)(m)
of the Ordinance, the Service shall establish a Focal Point for the
sharing of technical information regarding plant health with
international counterparts and organizations, upon request.
      (2) The Focal Point shall encourage technical cooperation
and transparency with contracting parties, reciprocating countries
and other stakeholders.
      (3) The Chief Plant Protection Officer shall be the Focal
Point of the Service.

Early detection system
   11. (1) In order to perform its function under section 5(1)(n)
of the Ordinance, the Service shall—
          (a) develop tools and techniques to improve early
              detection of plant pests in surveillance
              programmes; and
          (b) educate farmers and the general public in order to
              stimulate early reaction and coordination for
              control and prevention of plant pests.
       (2) The activities contemplated by subregulation (1)
include, but are not limited to—




                                7
          (a) requiring plant nurseries, landscapers, farmers and
              other relevant individuals and/or entities to duly
              report all incidents of new plant pests discovered
              on their establishments;
          (b) encouraging registered establishments to provide
              regular reports on plant pest infestations and/or
              incursions;
          (c) developing and coordinating a functional Early
              Detection and Rapid Response System for plant
              pests in collaboration with private and
              governmental organisations; and
          (d) devising a priority list of plant pests and sharing
              the list with all stakeholders.

Plant pest emergency plan
   12. In order to perform its function under section 5(1)(o) of
the Ordinance, the Service shall—
          (a) devise a functional plant pest emergency plan,
              including the establishment of plant pest-free
              zones, quarantine areas, and compensation for
              farmers, where necessary; and
          (b) ensure that the plan is activated when necessary to
              mitigate and /or control a plant pest outbreak or
              incursion.

Phytosanitary measures
   13. (1) In order to perform its function under section 5(1)(q)
of the Ordinance, the Service shall—
          (a) develop and publish phytosanitary measures that
              are equivalent to those of reciprocating countries;
          (b) work collaboratively with reciprocating countries
              to ensure that all phytosanitary measures are
              harmonious;
          (c) notify reciprocating countries and other
              stakeholders immediately of any revision made to
              its phytosanitary measures that will affect the
              established import/export system; and
          (d) ensure that all phytosanitary measures are in
              congruence with ISPM principles for the
              protection of plants and the application of
              phytosanitary measures in international trade.




                               8
      (2) In order to perform its function under section 5(1)(s) of
the Ordinance, the Service shall do as regulation 30(1) requires.

International reporting
   14. (1) In order to perform its function under section 5(1)(u)
of the Ordinance, the Service shall—
          (a) notify the IPPC CPM of the occurrence and status
              of any plant pest outbreak or incursion in the
              Islands;
          (b) notify the IPPC CPM on the areas that are
              designated as plant pest-free or of low plant pest
              prevalence;
          (c) notify the IPPC CPM of changes made to the
              phytosanitary measures and provide a full account
              of the phytosanitary measures adopted specifically
              to address an outbreak;
          (d) apprise the IPPC CPM of any Rapid Response
              System in place under regulation 11(2)(e);
          (e) submit a description of the Service and of changes
              in organisational structure to the Secretary of the
              IPPC;
          (f) provide a description of the organisational
              arrangements for plant protection to a
              reciprocating country upon request;
          (g) disseminate information regarding plant pests and
              means of their prevention and control to the IPPC,
              CPHD, and contracting parties; and
          (h) provide necessary scientific evidence for the
              reciprocating country to conduct its own pest risk
              analysis.

Communication, training, and public awareness
  15. In order to perform its function under section 5(1)(v) of the
Ordinance, the Service shall –
          (a) ensure that local users and suppliers of biological
              control agents or other beneficial organisms, and
              farmers, farmer organisations and other
              stakeholders, are kept sufficiently informed and
              educated on the appropriate measures for their use;
          (b) apprise farmers and the general public of plant
              pest outbreaks and/or incursions, and recommend
              strategies for plant pest control and eradication;




                                9
          (c) inform the general public on plant food recalls,
              and changes of plant pest status nationally and
              regionally; and
          (d) conduct plant protection training targeting
              Quarantine Officers, Customs officers, farmers,
              importers, and other relevant stakeholders.


                            PART 3
     POWERS OF THE SERVICE – SUPPLEMENTARY

Powers of entry, search and seizure
  16. (1) In exercising the power of entry, search and seizure
under section 7 of the Ordinance an animal inspector shall—
          (a) notify the owner or manager of the plant
              establishment of the intent to enter and search
              before or at the time of inspection;
          (b) inform the owner or manager of the purpose of the
              inspection before or at the time of inspection; and
          (c) attach a detention tag to the premises or articles
              under seizure.
      (2) Any detention tag attached under subregulation (1) shall
bear the same detention number as the notice of detention.
     (3) After a search has been completed the plant inspector
shall—
          (a) provide a report to the owner or manager
              subsequent to the inspection, stating the date and
              time inspection was conducted and a list of the
              articles examined;
          (b) provide the owner or manager with copies of
              photographs, laboratory reports etc. of any animal
              disease found on the premises; and
          (c) give detailed recommendations for corrective
              actions to be taken if any animal disease is found
              on the premises.
      (4) Except as authorised by the Service, no person, other
than a plant inspector, may—
          (a) alter, deface or erase any information on a notice
              of detention or a detention tag;
          (b) remove a detention tag; or




                               10
           (c) undertake any activity in respect of an article that
               is detained.
     (5) If it would be impracticable for a plant inspector to
remove a detention tag, any plant inspector may authorise a
person in writing to do so on the plant inspector’s behalf.

Detention of articles
   17. (1) For the purposes of section 52 of the Ordinance the
period of detention is 180 days—
           (a) if required to permit a plant inspector to identify a
               virus, viroid, mycoplasma, mycoplasma-like
               organism, rickettsia-like organism, bacterium or
               fungus that is present or suspected of being
               present in an article;
           (b) if fraud has occurred or is suspected; or
           (c) to identify, test or analyze an article that has been
               grown, raised, cultured, produced or altered by
               biotechnology.
       (2) If in accordance with the Ordinance an article or any
proceeds realized from its disposition may no longer be detained,
a plant inspector shall release the article or proceeds from
detention and serve a notice of release from detention on the
owner or person having the possession, care or control of the
article.

Treatment, processing or disposition of regulated articles
    18. (1) In exercising the powers under section 8 of the
Ordinance, the Service shall destroy or decontaminate infested or
contaminated items utilizing only an IPPC recommended method,
including incineration, burying, chemical spraying and
irradiation.
       (2) In addition to the powers in section 25 of the Ordinance,
if a plant inspector believes on reasonable grounds that a
regulated article is a plant pest or is or could be infested or
contaminated or constitutes or could constitute a biological
obstacle to the control of a plant pest, the plant inspector may
require the owner or person having the possession, care or control
of the article to dispose of it or arrange for treatment of it that
will reduce or eliminate the plant pest risk.
      (3) A requirement under subregulation (3) shall be
communicated by serving a notice in writing on the owner or
other person, and the notice shall specify the manner of
disposition or method of treatment and the place of disposition




                                11
and the date by which the disposition or treatment shall be
completed.
      (4) If, pursuant to subregulation (2), a plant inspector
requires that an article be disposed of—
           (a) the plant inspector may also require the owner or
               person having the possession, care or control of
               the article to treat or cause to be treated any place
               or article in or on which the article to be disposed
               of was placed, contained, stored, detained or
               quarantined; and
           (b) no person may undertake any other activity in
               respect of the article without the approval of a
               plant inspector.
       (5) An owner or other person who receives a notice referred
to in subregulation (3) or (4) shall ensure that –
           (a) the disposal, treatment or process in respect of an
               article or place is carried out in accordance with
               the notice and any other instructions issued by a
               plant inspector in respect of the disposal, treatment
               or process; and
           (b) the plant pest or biological obstacle to the control
               of a plant pest is eradicated and the spread of the
               plant pest or biological obstacle is prevented.

Sampling
   19. (1) In conducting sampling of a consignment of a
regulated article as contemplated by section 9 of the Ordinance,
the Service shall—
           (a) collect samples of the consignment in the presence
               of the importer, owner or agent of the
               consignment;
           (b) vary sample sizes depending on the nature of the
               articles;
           (c) ensure that sample sizes do not exceed 10% of the
               consignment for any reason;
           (d) ensure that collected samples are carefully
               wrapped and secured in sealed, labelled containers
               and pose no or minimal risk of becoming
               contaminated with external agents;
           (e) ensure that collected samples are properly secured
               in the presence of the importer, owner, or agent;




                                12
           (f) ensure that samples are stored in an area which
               will not cause additional contamination or
               infestation; and
           (g) follow the specific guidelines as set out in ISPM
               31 for sample collection during the inspection of
               regulated articles.
      (2) Section 9 of the Ordinance applies as to providing
copies of test results and other matters in relation to samples.

Authorised laboratories and analysts
   20. Subject to the power of authorization in section 17 of the
Ordinance, and until that power is exercised, the Service shall
utilize only—
           (a) the services only of laboratories accredited to
               conduct entomological and pathological analysis
               of plants and plant products;
           (b) the services of an individual with the technical
               training to analyze plant samples; and
           (c) the services of a laboratory facility with the
               competency to conduct analysis of plant and plant
               product samples.

Plant quarantine
   21. (1) If the Service proposes to apply quarantine measures
pursuant to section 30 of the Ordinance, a plant inspector shall—
           (a) specify in writing the period of the quarantine and
                the conditions necessary for the purpose of
                detecting a plant pest or biological obstacle to the
                control of a plant pest or preventing or controlling
                the spread of a plant pest or biological obstacle to
                the control of a plant pest;
           (b) serve a notice of quarantine on the owner or person
                having the possession, care or control of the article
                unless it is specified in a permit that the article is
                to be quarantined; and
           (c) attach a quarantine tag to the article or its
               container.
      (2) Any quarantine tag shall bear the same quarantine
number as the notice of quarantine or, if it is specified in the
permit that an article be quarantined, the quarantine tag shall bear
the permit number.




                                 13
      (3) Except as authorised by a plant inspector, no person,
other than a plant inspector may—
          (a) alter, deface or erase any information on a notice
              of quarantine or a quarantine tag; or
          (b) remove a quarantine tag.
     (4) If it would be impracticable for a plant inspector to
remove a quarantine tag, any plant inspector may authorise a
person in writing to do so on the plant inspector’s behalf.
      (5) A plant inspector may authorise an activity in respect of
a quarantine article where the activity is necessary in order to
carry out the quarantine or would not adversely affect the
quarantine.
      (6) A plant inspector shall recommend to the Chief Plant
Protection Officer the release from quarantine of an article or
portion of the article if the plant inspector considers that –
          (a) the article or portion is not a plant pest, or is not or
              could not be infested;
          (b) the article or portion does not or could not
              constitute a biological obstacle to the control of a
              plant pest;
          (c) the plant pest has been eradicated from the article
              or portion; or
          (d) the article or portion no longer constitutes a
              biological obstacle to the control of a plant pest.
      (7) A plant inspector who releases an article or a portion of
the article from quarantine shall serve a notice of release from
quarantine on the owner or person having the possession, care or
control of the article.

Plant quarantine stations and areas
   22. If a plant quarantine station is to be established or
designated under section 31 of the Ordinance, the Service shall
ensure that—
          (a) the area chosen for the station is isolated from
              cropped areas and is weed free;
          (b) a sign board of suitable size is erected at the
              entrance of the station indicating a restricted area;
          (c) entry to the station is authorised only by the Chief
              Plant Protection Officer or the direct supervisor of
              the station;




                                14
           (d) a buffer zone of not less than 4 metres is
               maintained in vegetative free condition around the
               perimeter of the station; and
           (e) permanent structures are fully enclosed with
               double doors, insect proof screens and other basic
               features to prevent the entry and exit of plant
               pests.


                                PART 4
          IMPORTATION OF REGULATED ARTICLES

Prohibition on landing
   23. (1) Without affecting the powers of inspection under
section 40 of the Ordinance, a Customs officer or plant inspector
may refuse permission for a vessel or aircraft to offload cargo or
any part of it if the officer or inspector has reasonable grounds to
believe that the cargo or that part of it includes a regulated article
that is a prohibited import or is or is infected by a plant pest that
poses a serious plant pest risk to the Islands.
      (2)This power may be exercised whether or not a plant
import permit has been issued in respect of the regulated article,
but the Director shall be notified of any action taken under sub-
regulation (1) as soon as possible so that the import permit can be
revoked or varied or confirmed and any other necessary
enforcement action taken in respect of the article.

Ports of entry
   24. (1) A regulated article shall be presented at a port of entry
during regular working hours fixed by the Service.
      (2) A plant inspector or customs officer may require in
writing that any regulated article entering the Islands be directed
to another port of entry for the purpose of inspecting the article.
     (3) If, pursuant to subregulation (2), a plant inspector or
customs officer has required a regulated article to be directed to
another port of entry, no person may -
           (a) move the article to any place except the place
               indicated; or
           (b) open any conveyance or unpack any package
               containing the article,
except as authorised by a plant inspector or customs officer.




                                 15
Mail exchange
   25. (1) The mail exchange on Providenciales is a biosecurity
postal holding area where, subject to subregulation (2), postal
items arriving from overseas or destined for overseas may be held
for plant pest risk inspection pending clearance or other
disposition under the Ordinance.
      (2) Subregulation (1) only applies to regulated articles that
at the time of entry to or departure from the Islands are in a mail
bag or other container that conforms to the requirements of the
postal legislation of the Islands.
       (3) Regulated articles from or destined for overseas that
arrive in or depart from the Islands by courier, or are delivered to
households or businesses by courier, are not postal items and are
subject to the provisions of the Ordinance regarding regulated
articles.

Plant import permits
   26. (1) A plant import permit shall be in a form established by
the Service, and shall set out—
           (a) all information reasonably necessary to identify
               the regulated article;
           (b) the conditions, if any, under which the article to be
               imported may be admitted into the Islands and
               governing the article after it has entered the
               Islands; and
           (c) the expiration date of the permit.
      (2) A plant import permit remains in force for the period
specified in the permit, unless cancelled under section 35(4) of
the Ordinance but may on its expiration be renewed by the
Service, if it thinks fit, on application being made in the approved
form.
      (3) If an application for a plant import permit under section
35 of the Ordinance contains any false or misleading
information—
           (a) the Service shall refuse to issue a permit; or
           (b) the permit if issued is void from the date of its
               issuance.
       (4) If a foreign exporter has shipped to the Islands any
article that is an invasive plant species or that is or has a plant
pest or that contravenes any provision of or under the Ordinance,
the Service may revoke a permit issued to any person, or refuse to
issue a permit in respect of the article to any person, to import




                                 16
from that foreign exporter or from the country or place of origin
or reshipment until the article complies with the Ordinance or the
foreign exporter has given a written undertaking to comply with
it.

Application for a plant import permit
  27. (1) In addition to the requirements in section 35(2) of the
Ordinance, an application for a plant import permit shall—
          (a) be in writing, in English, signed and dated by the
              person applying for the permit; and
          (b) contain the following information—
              (i) both the common and scientific names of the
                    articles;
              (ii) the quantity of items in weight, in Kilograms
                     (Kg);
              (iii) the name, complete address and telephone
                    number of the importer or agent of the
                    consignment;
              (iv) the name, complete address and telephone
                   number of the exporter;
              (v) the intended use or purpose for which the article
                    thing is to be admitted into the Islands;
              (vi) the place where the article was propagated or
                    produced; and
              (vii) the number of packages, if sent by mail or
                    courier service.
     (2) An application for an import permit shall be
accompanied by an international phytosanitary certificate from a
country approved by the Director under section 37(3) of the
Ordinance, except that—
          (a) applications from the US and Canada do not
              require an international phytosanitary certificate
              until the articles arrive in the Islands; and
          (b) an import permit may be issued without an
              international phytosanitary certificate if the
              exporting country requires TCI Department of
              Agriculture’s authorisation before providing a
              phytosanitary certificate to the importer.
      (3) The international phytosanitary certificate in respect of
a regulated article shall include the following information—




                                17
           (a) official name, stamp or seal of the competent
               authority;
           (b) a unique certificate number;
           (c) particulars of treatment applied to the article,
               including     application    date,    chemical,
               concentration, and any relevant additional
               information;
           (d) name and address of the exporter;
           (e) name and address of the importer or consignee;
           (f) name and quantity of the articles, including
               botanical names where applicable;
           (g) number and description of packages;
           (h) means of conveyance;
           (i) place of origin of the articles;
           (j) port of entry in the Turks and Caicos Islands; and
           (k) signature of the authorised officer in the exporting
                country.
      (4) The certificate shall indicate that the articles have been
inspected and found to be free of plant pests and shall have been
issued within 7 days of export.
      (5) If the regulated articles were trans-shipped via another
country and repackaged, an international phytosanitary certificate
from the competent authority in the transit country shall be
obtained stating that the regulated articles did not leave the
quarantine area (noting the time in quarantine) and were not
exposed to any plant pest of quarantine significance.
       (6) In the case of a trans-shipment where the regulated
articles were kept in another country for more than 24 hours or
were re-packaged or split up, a re-forwarding phytosanitary
certificate from the country where the articles were trans-shipped
is required.
      (7) If an international phytosanitary certificate is in a
foreign language, a certified English translation shall be attached.
      (8) A person applying for a permit shall, if required by the
Service, provide to the Service, prior to the issuance of the
permit—
           (a)     proof of ownership or custodianship of the
                 regulated articles;




                                  18
           (b) laboratory test results of the article to be imported,
                without charge to the Government, for
                examination purposes; and
           (c) evidence that the person has adequate facilities for
                inspection and, if necessary, for quarantine of the
                article.

Plant import conditions
  28. (1) In order to perform its functions under sections 5(1)(r)
and 36 of the Ordinance, the Service shall—
           (a) revise and amend import conditions based upon
               plant pest risk assessment or new information on
               invasive plant species or plant pests that can
               potentially affect the country;
           (b) notify all stakeholders of any changes made to the
               import conditions; and
           (c) notify the IPPC CPM of any changes made to the
               import conditions.
      (2) If the Service considers that it is necessary to prevent
the introduction into the Islands or the spread within the Islands
of any invasive plant species or plant pest, the Service shall
amend a permit by adding, removing or amending a condition or
any information set out in it.
       (3) The Service may revoke a permit issued to a person or
refuse to issue any other permit to a person if the Service decides
that the person has not complied with—
           (a) any condition set out in the permit; or
           (b) any provision of or under the Ordinance.
      (4) A permit may include a condition that the holder keeps
a record in a form established by the Service and containing
information about activities undertaken in respect of the article to
which the permit relates. In such a case, the permit holder shall—
           (a) produce the record, on request, for inspection or
               copying by a plant inspector; and
           (b) retain the record for a period specified in the
               permit.
      (5) If the Service—
           (a) considers that a person to whom a permit has been
               issued has not complied with any condition set out
               in the permit; or




                                 19
           (b) believes on reasonable grounds that there is an
               infestation in the country of origin or the country
               from which the article was reshipped,
a plant inspector may detain the article or prohibit its admission
into the Islands or may order that it be disposed of.

                              PART 5
              EXPORT OF REGULATED ARTICLES

Security of exports
   29. (1) No person may export or re-export a regulated article
from the Islands unless it meets the laws of the receiving country
respecting phytosanitary import requirements.
      (2) Any article which is to be exported shall be packaged,
contained and moved in such a manner as to prevent the article
from spreading a plant pest or biological obstacle to the control of
a plant pest.
      (3) No person may export from the Islands anything for
which a phytosanitary certificate, phytosanitary certificate for re-
export or any other document is required by the authority
responsible for control of imports in the country of final
destination, unless the appropriate document is issued by a plant
inspector.
      (4) If the Service believes on reasonable grounds that a
vessel or aircraft that is about to leave the Islands has on board or
is about to load any plant or plant product that is or could be
infested or that constitutes or could constitute a biological
obstacle to the control of a plant pest, a plant inspector may, in
order to inspect the vessel or aircraft for the presence of a plant
pest, require the owner or person having the possession, care or
control of the vessel or aircraft to—
           (a) halt the loading (if in process); or
           (b) unload the vessel or aircraft (if already loaded).
      (5) If the inspector considers that the vessel or aircraft or
any of its cargo is infested or constitutes or could constitute a
biological obstacle to the control of a plant pest, the inspector
may require the owner or person having the possession, care or
control of the vessel or aircraft to –
           (a) treat or clean the vessel or aircraft; and
           (b) treat, move or dispose of anything found on or in
               the vessel or aircraft which may impose a
               phytosanitary risk.




                                 20
Export documentation
   30. (1) The Service shall—
           (a) develop phytosanitary certificates for the export of
               plants and plant products in accordance with
               ISPM 12;
           (b) conduct inspection of articles and certify their
               freedom from plant pests prior to the issuance of
               the phytosanitary certificate;
           (c) ensure the safety of the articles from infestation
               between inspection and departure from the
               Islands;
           (d) assess the phytosanitary situation and define an
               appropriate period of validity before export
               occurs, taking into account the likelihood of the
               consignment becoming infested or contaminated
               prior to export or re-export.
      (2) The likelihood mentioned in sub-regulation (4)(d) may
be affected by packaging (sealed carton or loose packing) and
storage environment (open air or enclosed), type of commodity
and conveyance, time of year and type of plant pests.
      (3) A plant inspector may issue a phytosanitary certificate
or phytosanitary certificate for re-export or any other document
required by the appropriate authority in the country of final
destination only if the plant inspector believes on reasonable
grounds that the article to be exported conforms with the laws of
that country respecting phytosanitary import requirements.
       (4) A phytosanitary certificate or phytosanitary certificate
for re-export or any other document issued for the purposes of the
Ordinance is void if any person other than a plant inspector has
altered, defaced or erased any information or statement in the
certificate.
      (5) If a phytosanitary certificate or phytosanitary certificate
for re-export is required by the phytosanitary certification
authorities of a foreign country with respect to any thing that is to
be exported from the Islands, a plant inspector may inspect the
conveyance prior to its being loaded and at any time during the
loading.




                                 21
                             PART 6
                        MISCELLANEOUS

Movement of things in a plant pest zone
   31. (1) If and where a plant pest zone has been designated
under section 22 of the Ordinance, a plant inspector may in
writing authorise a person to move anything that is prohibited
from being moved into, out of or within the zone if the plant
inspector is satisfied that the thing is being moved for the purpose
of being used for scientific research, educational, processing,
industrial or exhibition purposes.
      (2) Anything moved into, out of or within a plant pest zone
shall be packaged, transported, handled, controlled and used in a
manner that ensures that a plant pest or biological obstacle to the
control of a plant pest is not spread within the Islands.
      (3) If anything referred to in subregulation (2) or any
remains of the thing or portion of it is to be disposed of, the
owner or person having the possession, care or control of the
thing or portion shall dispose of it in a manner that—
           (a) ensures that a plant pest or biological obstacle to
               the control of a plant pest will not spread; and
           (b) destroys any plant pest or biological obstacle to
               the control of a plant pest or ensures that the plant
               pest or biological obstacle to the control of a plant
               pest is non-viable.

Prohibiting or restricting the use of a place
   32. (1) If the Service believes on reasonable grounds that a
place in the Islands is infested or suspected of being infested or
contains or is suspected of containing a biological obstacle to the
control of a plant pest, a plant inspector may prohibit or restrict
the use of the place until a decision is made whether to establish a
plant pest zone under section 22 of the Ordinance.
      (2) A prohibition or restriction under subregulation (1) shall
be communicated by serving a written notice on the occupier or
owner of the place or, if a plant inspector cannot, after the
exercise of due diligence, find the occupier or owner, by posting
the notice at the place in question.
      (3) A prohibition or restriction under subregulation (1)
takes effect on the communication or posting of the notice and
continues during the period specified in the notice or until the
notice is cancelled.




                                22
Inspection of vehicles
   33. (1) If a plant inspector believes on reasonable grounds that
any vehicle has on board any plant or plant product that is or
could be infested or that constitutes or could constitute a
biological obstacle to the control of a plant pest, a plant inspector
may require the owner or person having the possession, care or
control of the conveyance to—
           (a) halt the vehicle; and
           (b) permit the inspector to inspect the vehicle for the
               presence of a plant pest;
and if so directed by the inspector the owner or person shall—
           (c) unload the vehicle; and
           (d) treat, move or dispose of anything found on or in
               the vehicle.
      (2) If a plant inspector thinks it necessary in order to
prevent the introduction into the Islands or the spread within the
Islands of any plant pest or biological obstacle to the control of a
plant pest the inspector may require any vessel or aircraft used for
transporting a regulated article to be subject to quarantine for a
period the inspector directs.
      (3) If a vessel or aircraft or part of it is subject to quarantine
by virtue of sub-regulation (1), the master or captain shall carry
out all instructions given by the plant inspector in that regard.
      (4) If a plant inspector finds or suspects that a thing on
board a vessel or aircraft is or contains a plant pest, the inspector
may order the thing to be quarantined or destroyed or re-shipped
to the port of export.
     (5) The master, owner or charterer of a vessel or aircraft
who refuses to comply with a direction of a plant inspector given
under this rule commits an offence.

Labelling and packaging
  34. (1) A regulated article shall be packaged separately from
any unregulated article, and shall be labelled as such.
      (2) Anything that enters the Islands that—
           (a) is a plant pest;
           (b) is or could be infested; or
           (c) constitutes or could constitute a biological obstacle
               to the control of a plant pest enters the Islands,




                                  23
shall be marked on its container or accompanying invoice so as to
identify the person importing the thing, the foreign exporter of
the thing and, if applicable, the permit number or the
phytosanitary certificate number.
      (3) Anything referred to in subregulation (2) shall be
packaged in a container in a manner that prevents the thing from
becoming infested or spreading a plant pest or a biological
obstacle to the control of a plant pest.
      (4) Any plant or plant product imported under a waiver or
exemption granted by an import condition or by regulations under
section 59 of the Ordinance shall be clearly marked as such.
      (5) If, under these Regulations, a certificate is required to
state that a regulated article has been subjected to any
examination or test, it is valid only if it states the dates on which
the examination was carried out, the test was commenced, and
reactions were taken.
      (6) Any regulated article that is to be exported shall be
packaged, contained and moved in such a manner as to prevent
the article from spreading an animal disease.
       (7) The scientific names of all regulated articles in a
consignment shall be stated on the international sanitary
certificate.
      (8) This regulation does not preclude additional labelling
requirements being imposed by import conditions.

Electronic documents
   35. (1) Any document required to be provided to the Director,
the Chief Plant Protection Officer or a plant inspector by or under
the Ordinance may be provided in electronic form.
      (2) If a document is provided in electronic form, an original
hard copy of it shall, if requested in writing by the Service, be
provided to the Service within a reasonable period after the
document is provided in electronic form.
      (3) The hard copy of a document referred to in subsection
(2) is not required if the document is sent in electronic form
directly from the phytosanitary certification authorities of a
foreign country to the Service in accordance with an agreement
between the Service and those authorities to provide documents
directly to the Service in electronic form.

Receipts
   36. If a plant inspector takes possession of any regulated
article under the Ordinance or these Regulations, the inspector




                                 24
shall give to the owner or person in charge of the article a written
receipt, stating the nature of the article, the reason for taking
possession, and the intended disposal of the article.

Fees
   37. The fees set out in the Schedule are payable by an
importer or exporter of a regulated article on an invoice from the
Service.

Offence
  38. A person who contravenes any provision of these
Regulations commits an offence and is liable on summary
conviction to a fine of $10,000.




                                25
                        SCHEDULE


                       (Regulation 37)


          FEES FOR PLANT HEALTH SERVICES

Permit Fees
   •   Import Permit
       (home consumption/domestic usage)              $10.00
   •   Commercial Import Permit
       (Day/ Single Entry)                            $30.00
   •   Rush Single Entry Import Permit                $50.00
   •   Commercial Import Permit (1 Month)             $500.00
   •   Commercial Import Permit (3 Months)          $1,000.00
   •   Phytosanitary Certificate                       $30.00


Inspection Fees
   •   Inspection during working hours                  $75.00
   •   Inspection after working hours                 $100.00
   •   Vessels Inspection (working hours)              $150.00
   •   Vessels Inspections
       (after working hours or
       weekend holidays)                              $200.00
   •   Boxed/Break bulk cargo               $5.00 per box/sack
   •   Cruise Ships and Yachts                          $50.00




                              26
Plant Quarantine Fees
   •   Seedlings in trays                  $10.00 per day
   •   Individual plants in pots or bags    $5.00 per day
   •   Cuttings                             $5.00 per day
   •   Other plant products                 $5.00 per day




MADE this 10th day of July 2024.



JOSEPHINE CONNOLLY
MINISTER RESPONSIBLE FOR AGRICULTURE




                              27
             EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM
            (This Note is not part of the Regulations)


These Regulations are made under the powers conferred on the
Minister by various sections of the Plant Health Ordinance. They
are intended to supplement the provisions in the Ordinance
conferring powers on the Director, the Chief Plant Protection
Officer and plant inspectors to control the movement into and in
the Islands of plants and plant products. The main aim of those
powers is to avoid or reduce the risk of plant pests and invasive
plant species coming into or spreading in the Islands.
These Regulations should be read in conjunction with the Animal
Health Regulations made under the Animal Health Ordinance,
which supplement similar provisions in that Ordinance in relation
to animals and animal products.
Part 2 of the Regulations adds some functions to those imposed
on the Plant Health Service by the Ordinance.
Part 3 adds to or amplifies the powers conferred on the Service
both in general, and in relation to plant quarantine.
Part 4 makes more detailed provisions than those in the
Ordinance about the importation of plants and plant products,
including the requirement for import permits and the imposing of
import conditions.
Part 5 supplements the requirements in the Ordinance relating to
the export of plants and plant products.
Part 6 deals with various matters that were not included in the
Plant Health Ordinance when enacted but which were
contemplated as being dealt with by regulations. It provides for
charging of fees and creates an offence.
The Schedule sets out the fees payable for various services
provided by the Plant Health Service.




                               28
