           LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt




                FOOD AND DRUGS ACT

                        CHAPTER 30:01




                                 Act
                              8 of 1960
                             Amended by
                              39 of 1968
                               156/1972
                             *31 of 1980
                              16 of 1986
                              12 of 1987
                               6 of 1993
                              16 of 1998
                               6 of 2005

                  *See Note on Validation at page 2




                   Current Authorised Pages
                       Pages             Authorised
                    (inclusive)           by L.R.O.
                        1–2         ..
                       3–20         ..
                      21–245        ..




                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION          L.R.O.

                      UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

2                Chap. 30:01                        Food and Drugs

                                Index of Subsidiary Legislation

                                                                                                      Page
Food and Drugs Regulations (GN 130/1964)                        …         …          …         …         25
Official Method Notification (GN 54/1972)          …     …                           …         …        124
*Approval of New Drugs Notification        …       …     …                           …         …        129
†Withdrawal of Approval of New Drugs Notification (GN 51/1969)                       …         …        200
Fish and Fishery Products Regulations (LN 220/1998)…     …                           …         …        201
†This Notification (i.e. 51/1969) has been amended by LNs 99 and 114/1984 which have been omitted.



                       *Note on Approval of New Drugs Notification
The list of new drugs set out in the Schedule to this Notification has been consolidated as at
31st December 1977. This list is so voluminous and changes to it so frequent that, especially
in view of its very limited use by the general public, it is not practicable to update it annually.
The references to the amendments to this list since 31st December 1977 are contained in the
Current Consolidated Index of Acts and Subsidiary Legislation.


                                      †Note on
                   Withdrawal of Approval of New Drugs Notification
For references to the Withdrawal of Approval of New Drugs Notifications subsequent to the
year 1969 — See the current Consolidated Index of Acts and Subsidiary Legislation.


                                         Note on Omissions
A. Food and Drugs (Angostura Aromatic Bitters) (Exemption) Regulations, 1970 (LN 199/1970).
B. Food and Drugs (Analysis and Inspection Services) Regulations, 1993 (LN 73/1993).


                                         Note on Validation
The Act of this Chapter was re-enacted with retrospective effect and all acts done under it
validated by Act 31 of 1980.


                                         Note on Adaptation
Under paragraph 6 of the Second Schedule to the Law Revision Act (Ch. 3:03) the
Commission amended certain references to public officers in this Chapter. The Minister’s
approval of the amendments was signified by LN 120/1980, but no marginal reference is
made to this Notice where any such amendment is made in the text.




                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                    Chap. 30:01                    3

                             CHAPTER 30:01

                     FOOD AND DRUGS ACT
                    ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

SECTION
    1. Short title.
    2. Interpretation.

                                GENERAL
    3. Power of Minister to order the furnishing of particulars relating to
          composition, use and effects of substances used in food and drugs.
    4. Prohibition against advertising cures for certain diseases, etc.

                                   FOOD
    5. Prohibition against sale of harmful, unfit, adulterated or unsanitary
          food.
    6. Prohibition against various forms of misleading with regard to foods.
    7. Maintenance of food standards.
    8. Prohibition against unsanitary conditions as regards to foods.
   8A. Offences created by sections 5 to 8.

                                  DRUGS
    9.    Prohibition against unsanitary or adulterated drugs.
   10.    Prohibition against various forms of misleading with regard to drugs.
   11.    Maintenance of drug standards.
   12.    Prohibition against unsanitary conditions as regards drugs.
   13.    Restriction of distribution of drug samples.

                               COSMETICS
   14. Prohibition against sale of harmful or unsanitary cosmetics.
   15. Maintenance of standards for cosmetics.
   16. Prohibition against unsanitary conditions as regards cosmetics.

                                 DEVICES
   17. Prohibition against the sale of injurious devices.
   18. Prohibition against various forms of misleading with respect to devices.
   19. Maintenance of standard for devices.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                            L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                          LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

4           Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs

                        ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS—Continued

            SECTION
                      ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
               20. Appointment of analysts and inspectors.
               21. Power of inspectors to enter, examine, take samples, make copies of
                      documents, demand information and seize articles.
               22. Power of inspector with regard to importations and exportations.
               23. Forfeiture.
               24. Analysis.
               25. Regulations.
               26. Drug Advisory Committee and Food Advisory Committee.
               27. Offences by corporations.
               28. Jurisdiction.
               29. Defences.
               30. Evidence and sufficiency of proof.
               31. Presumptions.
               32. Declaration by manufacturer and certificate in respect of imported
                      foods, drugs, cosmetics or devices.
               33. Penalties.
               34. Time limit on prosecutions.

            FIRST SCHEDULE.
            SECOND SCHEDULE.
            THIRD SCHEDULE.




                              UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                       UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                            Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01                    5

                           CHAPTER 30:01

                     FOOD AND DRUGS ACT

               An Act respecting Food and Drugs.                            8 of 1960.

                         [1ST JANUARY 1965]                                 Commencement.
                                                                            108/1964.
     1. This Act may be cited as the Food and Drugs Act.                    Short title.

     2. In this Act—                                                   Interpretation.
                                                                       [16 of 1998].
“advertisement” includes any representation by any means
     whatever for the purpose of promoting directly or indirectly
     the sale or disposal of any food, drug, cosmetic or device;
“analyst” means any person appointed as such under section 20;
“cosmetic” includes any substance or mixture of substances
     manufactured, sold or represented for use in cleansing,
     improving or altering the complexion, skin, hair or teeth,
     and includes deodorants and perfumes;
“device” means any instrument, apparatus or contrivance, including
     components, parts and accessories thereof, manufactured, sold
     or represented for use in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or
     prevention of a disease, disorder, abnormal physical state, or
     the symptoms thereof, in man or animal;
“drug” includes any substance or mixture of substances
     manufactured, sold or represented for use in—
              (a) the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention
                  of a disease, disorder, abnormal physical state, or
                  the symptoms thereof, in man or animal; or
              (b) restoring, correcting or modifying organic
                  functions in man or animal;
“exporter” in relation to any article to be exported, includes any
     person who, whether as owner, consignor, agent or broker is
     in possession of the article or in any way entitled to the
     custody or control of it;
“food” includes any article manufactured, sold or represented for
     use as food or drink for man, chewing gum, and any ingredient
     that may be mixed with food for any purpose whatever;
“importer” in relation to an imported article, includes any person


                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                         L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

6                 Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs

                       who, whether as owner, consignee, agent or broker is in
                       possession of the article or in any way entitled to the custody
                       or control of it;
                  “inspector” means any person appointed as such under section 20;
                  “label” includes any legend, word or mark attached to, included
                       in, belonging to or accompanying any food, drug, cosmetic,
                       device or package;
                  “manufacturer” means a person who, under his own name or
                       under a trade, design, or word mark, trade name or other
                       name, word or mark controlled by him, sells a food or a drug
                       to the general public or to a wholesaler, jobber, or other
                       distributor for resale to the general public; and includes a
                       firm, partnership or corporation;
                  “package” includes anything in which any food, drug, cosmetic
                       or device is wholly or partly contained, placed or packed;
                  “prescribed” means prescribed by Regulations made under
                       this Act;
                  “preparation” in relation to food, includes manufacture and any
                       form of treatment; and “preparation for sale” includes
                       packaging; and “prepare” and “prepared for sale” shall be
                       construed accordingly;
                  “sell” includes offer for sale, expose for sale, have in possession
                       for sale, and distribute;
                  “unsanitary conditions” means such conditions or circumstances
                       as might contaminate a food, drug or cosmetic with dirt or
                       filth or render the same injurious to health.

                                              GENERAL
Power of               3. (1) For the purpose of enabling him to exercise his
Minister to
order the         functions under this Act, the Minister may by Order require every
furnishing of
particulars
                  person who at the date of the Order or at any subsequent time,
relating to       carries on a business which includes the production, importation,
composition,
use and effects   or use of substances of any class specified in the Order to furnish
of substances     to the Minister, within such time as may be so specified, such
used in food
and drugs.        particulars as may be so specified, of the composition and use of
                  any such substances which in the course of that business are used,
                  or sold for use, in the preparation of food, drugs or cosmetics.

                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                            Food and Drugs               Chap. 30:01                   7

        (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1),
an Order made thereunder may require the following particulars
to be furnished in respect of any substance:
             (a) particulars of the composition and chemical
                 formula of the substance;
             (b) particulars of the manner in which the substance
                 is used or proposed to be used in the preparation
                 of food, drug or cosmetic;
             (c) particulars of any investigations carried out by
                 or to the knowledge of the person carrying on
                 the business in question, for the purpose of
                 determining whether and to what extent the
                 substance, or any product formed when the
                 substance is used as aforesaid, is injurious to, or
                 in any other way affects health;
             (d) particulars of any investigations of inquiries
                 carried out by or to the knowledge of the person
                 carrying on the business in question for the
                 purpose of determining the cumulative effect on
                 the health of a person consuming the substance
                 in ordinary quantities.
        (3) Any person who, without the previous consent in
writing of the person carrying on the business in question,
discloses particulars furnished in accordance with an Order under
this section, or information relating to any individual business
obtained by means of such particulars, except—
             (a) in accordance with directions of the Minister, so
                  far as may be necessary for the purposes of this
                  Act; or
             (b) for the purposes of any proceedings for an
                  offence under this Act or of any report of
                  such proceedings,
is guilty of an offence.

     4. (1) Except as prescribed or exempted by Regulations, Prohibition
                                                                   against
any person who advertises any food, drug, cosmetic or device to advertising
the general public as a treatment, preventative or cure for any of cures for certain
                                                                   diseases, etc.
the diseases, disorders or abnormal physical states mentioned in
the First Schedule, is guilty of an offence.                       First Schedule.



                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

8                  Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs

                           (2) Except as prescribed or exempted by Regulations,
                   any person who sells any food, drug, cosmetic or device—
                               (a) that is represented by label; or
                               (b) that he advertises to the general public,
                   as a treatment, preventative or cure for any of the diseases,
First Schedule.    disorders or abnormal physical states mentioned in the First
                   Schedule, is guilty of an offence.

                                                  FOOD
Prohibition             5. Any person who sells an article of food which—
against sale of
harmful, unfit,               (a) has in or upon it any poisonous or harmful
adulterated or                     substance;
unsanitary food.
                              (b) is unfit for human consumption;
                               (c) consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid,
                                   disgusting, rotten, decomposed or diseased
                                   animal or vegetable substance;
                              (d) is adulterated; or
                               (e) was manufactured, prepared, preserved,
                                   packaged or stored under unsanitary conditions,
                   is guilty of an offence.
Prohibition              6. (1) Any person who labels, packages, treats, processes,
against various
forms of           sells or advertises any food in a manner that is false, misleading
misleading with
regard to foods.
                   or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression
                   regarding its character, value, quantity, composition, merit or
                   safety is guilty of an offence.
                           (2) An article of food that is not labelled or packaged as
                   required by the Regulations, or is labelled or packaged contrary
                   to the Regulations shall be deemed to be labelled or packaged
                   contrary to subsection (1).
Maintenance of           7. Where a standard has been prescribed for a food, any
food standards.
                   person who labels, packages, sells or advertises any article in such
                   a manner that it is likely to be mistaken for the food, is, unless the
                   article complies with the prescribed standard, guilty of an offence.

Prohibition             8. Any person who manufactures, prepares, preserves,
against
unsanitary         packages or stores for sale any food under unsanitary conditions
conditions as      is guilty of an offence.
regards foods.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                   Chap. 30:01                    9

   8A. The offences created by sections 5 to 8 shall apply to food Offences created
                                                                   by sections 5 to 8.
processed or prepared or to be processed or prepared for export. [16 of 1998].

                                 DRUGS
     9. Any person who sells any drug which—                 Prohibition
                                                             against
           (a) was manufactured, prepared, preserved, packed unsanitary or
                                                             adulterated
                or stored under unsanitary conditions; or    drugs.
           (b) is adulterated,
is guilty of an offence.

     10. (1) Any person who labels, packages, treats, processes, sells Prohibition
                                                                           against various
or advertises any drug in a manner that is false, misleading, or deceptive forms of
or is likely to create an erroneous impression regarding its character, misleading     with
                                                                           regard to drugs.
value, quantity, composition, merit or safety, is guilty of an offence.
        (2) A drug that is not labelled or packaged as required
by the Regulations, or is labelled or packaged contrary to the
Regulations, shall be deemed to be labelled or packaged contrary
to subsection (1).

    11. (1) Where a standard has been prescribed for a drug, any Maintenance of
                                                                       drug standards.
person who labels, packages, sells or advertises any substance in such
a manner that it is likely to be mistaken for the drug, is, unless the
substance complies with the prescribed standard, guilty of an offence.
          (2) Where a standard has not been prescribed for a drug,
but a standard for the drug is contained in any publication
mentioned in the Second Schedule, any person who labels, Second
                                                                   Schedule.
packages, sells or advertises any substance in such a manner that
it is likely to be mistaken for the drug, is, unless the substance
complies with the standard, guilty of an offence.
         (3) Where a standard for a drug has not been prescribed
and no standard for the drug is contained in any publication
mentioned in the Second Schedule, any person who sells the drug Second
                                                                 Schedule.
is, unless—
             (a) it is in accordance with the professed standard
                 under which it is sold; and


                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                           L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

10                Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs

                                (b) it does not resemble, in a manner likely to
                                    deceive, any drug for which a standard has been
                                    prescribed or is contained in any publication
Second                              mentioned in the Second Schedule,
Schedule.
                  guilty of an offence.

Prohibition           12. Any person who manufactures, prepares, preserves,
against
unsanitary        packages or stores for sale any drug under unsanitary conditions
conditions as
regards drugs.    is guilty of an offence.

Restriction of        13. (1) Any person who distributes or causes to be
distribution of
drug samples.     distributed any drug as a sample is guilty of an offence.
                          (2) Subsection (1) shall not apply to the distribution of
                  samples of drugs by mail or otherwise to physicians, dentists or
                  veterinary surgeons or to the distribution of drugs other than
Third Schedule.   those mentioned in the Third Schedule to registered pharmacists
                  for individual redistribution to adults only or by a distributor in
                  compliance with individual requests.

                                             COSMETICS
Prohibition          14. Any person who sells any cosmetic which—
against sale of
harmful or                  (a) has in or upon it any substance that may cause
unsanitary
cosmetics.                       injury to the health of the user when the
                                 cosmetic is used—
                                   (i) according to the directions on the label or
                                        accompanying the cosmetic; or
                                  (ii) for such purposes and by such methods of
                                        use as are customary or usual therefor;
                            (b) consists in whole or in part of any filthy or
                                 decomposed substance or of any foreign
                                 matter; or
                             (c) was manufactured, prepared, preserved, packed
                                 or stored under unsanitary conditions,
                  is guilty of an offence.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01                  11

    15. Where a standard has been prescribed for a cosmetic, any Maintenance of
person who labels, packages, sells or advertises any article in standards     for
                                                                     cosmetics.
such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken for the cosmetic, is,
unless the article complies with the prescribed standard, guilty of
an offence.

   16. Any person who manufactures, prepares, preserves, Prohibition
packages or stores for sale any cosmetic under unsanitary against
                                                          unsanitary
conditions is guilty of an offence.                       conditions as
                                                                         regards
                                                                         cosmetics.
                             DEVICES
    17. Any person who sells any device which, when used Prohibition
according to directions or under such conditions as are customary against sale of
                                                                  injurious
or usual, may cause injury to the health of the purchaser or user devices.
thereof, is guilty of an offence.

    18. (1) Any person who labels, packages, treats, processes, Prohibition
sells or advertises any device in a manner that is false, misleading against
                                                                     forms of
                                                                             various

or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression misleading with
regarding its character, value, composition, merit or safety, is respect
                                                                     devices.
                                                                             to

guilty of an offence.
        (2) A device that is not labelled or packaged as required
by the Regulations, or is labelled or packaged contrary to the
Regulations, shall be deemed to be labelled or packaged contrary
to subsection (1).

    19. Where a standard has been prescribed for a device, any Maintenance of
person who labels, packages, sells or advertises any article in standard
                                                                    devices.
                                                                             for

such a manner that it is likely to be mistaken for the device, is,
unless the article complies with the prescribed standard, guilty of
an offence.

          ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   20. The Minister may appoint one or more persons to be Appointment of
analysts or inspectors for the purpose of this Act and shall furnish analysts and
                                                                     inspectors.
every such person with a certificate of his appointment as such.

    21. (1) An inspector may at any reasonable time—           Power of
                                                               inspector to
            (a) enter any place where on reasonable grounds he enter, examine,
                believes any article to which this Act or the take  samples,
                                                               make copies of
                Regulations apply is manufactured, prepared, documents,
                                                               demand
                                                                         information and
                                                                         seize articles.

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                           LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

12          Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs

                              preserved, packaged or stored, examine any such
                              article and take samples thereof, and examine
                              anything that he reasonably believes is used or
                              capable of being used for the manufacture,
                              preparation, preservation, package or storing;
                          (b) open and examine any receptacle or package that
                              on reasonable grounds he believes contains any
                              article to which this Act or the Regulations apply;
                          (c) examine any books, documents or other records
                              found in any place mentioned in paragraph (a)
                              which on reasonable grounds he believes
                              contain or are likely to contain any information
                              relevant to the enforcement of this Act with
                              respect to any article to which this Act or the
                              Regulations apply and make copies thereof or
                              extracts therefrom; and
                          (d) seize and detain for such time as may be
                              necessary any article by means of or in relation
                              to which he reasonably believes any provision
                              of this Act, or the Regulations has been violated.
                     (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the expression
            “article to which this Act or the Regulations apply” includes—
                         (a) any food, drug, cosmetic or device;
                         (b) anything used for the manufacture, preparation,
                             preservation, packaging or storing thereof; and
                         (c) any labelling or advertising material.
                    (3) An inspector on entering any place pursuant to
            subsection (1) shall if so required, produce his certificate of
            appointment to the person in charge thereof.
                     (4) The owner or person in charge of a place entered by an
            inspector pursuant to subsection (1) and every person found therein
            shall give the inspector all reasonable assistance in his power and
            furnish him with such information as he may reasonably require.
                    (5) Any person who—
                        (a) fails to comply with subsection (4);
                        (b) obstructs an inspector in the carrying out of his
                            duties under this Act or the Regulations;

                              UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                       UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                            Food and Drugs               Chap. 30:01                13

             (c) knowingly makes any false or misleading
                 statement either verbally or in writing to any
                 inspector engaged in carrying out his duties
                 under this Act or the Regulations; or
             (d) removes, alters or interferes in any way with any
                 article seized under this Act without the
                 authority of an inspector,
is guilty of an offence.
        (6) Any article seized under this Act may at the option
of an inspector be kept or stored in the building or place where it
was seized or may at the direction of an inspector be removed to
any other proper place.

   22. (1) Any inspector when authorised thereto by the Power           of
                                                                 inspector with
Minister shall have the right to examine any Customs entries of regard to
food, drugs or cosmetics imported into Trinidad and Tobago or importations
                                                                 and
any documents relating to the export of food, drugs or cosmetics exportations.
                                                                 [16 of 1998].
and to take samples thereof and to submit the samples to an
analyst for analysis or examination.
        (2) In any case where samples are taken such food, drug
or cosmetic shall not be delivered to the importer or exporter until
the analyst has reported upon the samples taken.
        (3) If it appears from the report of the inspector or the
analyst that the sale of the food, drug or cosmetic would be in
violation of this Act or the Regulations if sold in Trinidad and
Tobago, the food, drug or cosmetic shall not be admitted for use
as a food, drug or cosmetic.

    23. (1) An inspector shall release any article seized by Forfeiture.
him under this Act when he is satisfied that all the provisions of
this Act and the Regulations with respect thereto have been
complied with.
         (2) Where an inspector has seized an article under this
Act and the owner thereof or the person in whose possession the
article was at the time of seizure consents to the destruction thereof
the article shall be thereupon forfeited to the State and may be
destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the Minister may direct.

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

14             Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs

                        (3) Where a person has been convicted of an offence
               under this Act or the Regulations, the Court or Magistrate may
               order that any article by means of or in relation to which the
               offence was committed or any article or thing of a similar nature
               belonging to or in the possession of the accused or found with the
               article, whether or not the article or thing has been proved to be
               in violation of this Act, or the Regulations, be forfeited, and upon
               such order being made, the articles and things shall be forfeited
               to the State and may be disposed of as the Minister may direct.
                        (4) Without prejudice to the operation of subsection (3),
               a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the place where any article
               was seized under this Act may, on the application of an inspector
               and on such notice to such persons as the Magistrate directs,
               order that the article and all articles of a similar nature found
               therewith, whether or not the articles are proved to be in violation
               of this Act and the Regulations, be forfeited to the State to be
               disposed of as the Minister may direct, if the Magistrate finds,
               after making such inquiry as he considers necessary, that the
               article so seized is one by means of or in relation to which any of
               the provisions of this Act or the Regulations were violated.

Analysis.          24. (1) An inspector may submit any article seized by him
               or any sample therefrom or any sample taken by him to an analyst
               for analysis or examination.
                        (2) Where an analyst has made an analysis or
               examination he shall issue to the inspector a certificate or report
               setting forth the results of his examination or analysis.

Regulations.       25. (1) The Minister may make Regulations for carrying the
[16 of 1986
12 of 1987     purposes and provisions of this Act into effect, and, in particular,
6 of 1993
16 of 1998].   but not so as to restrict the generality of the foregoing, may make
               Regulations—
                            (a) declaring that any food or drug or class of food
                                 or drugs is adulterated if any prescribed
                                 substance or class of substances is present
                                 therein or has been added thereto or extracted or
                                 omitted therefrom;

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01                 15

            (b) respecting—
                    (i) the labelling and packaging and the
                        offering, exposing and advertising for sale
                        of food, drugs, cosmetics and devices;
                   (ii) the size, dimensions, fill and other
                        specifications of packages of food, drugs,
                        cosmetics and devices;
                  (iii) the sale or the condition of sale of any
                        food, drug, cosmetic or device; and
                  (iv) the use of any substance as an ingredient
                        in any food, drug, cosmetic or device,
                 to prevent the consumer or purchaser thereof
                 from being deceived or misled as to its quantity,
                 character, value, composition, merit or safety or
                 to prevent injury to the health of the consumer
                 or purchaser;
            (c) prescribing standards of composition, strength,
                 potency, purity, quality or other property of any
                 article of food, drug, cosmetic or device;
            (d) as regards the importation or exportation of foods,
                 drugs, cosmetics and devices in order to ensure
                 compliance with this Act and the Regulations;
           (dd) providing for the issue of licences for the importation
                 or exportation of food, drugs, cosmetics or devices;
            (e) as regards the method of preparation,
                 manufacture, preserving, packing, storing and
                 testing of any food, drug, cosmetic or device in
                 the interest of or for the prevention of injury to,
                 the health of the consumer or purchaser;
             (f) requiring persons who sell food, drugs, cosmetics
                 or devices to maintain such books and records as
                 may be prescribed or as the Minister considers
                 necessary for the proper enforcement and
                 administration of this Act and the Regulations;
            (g) as regards the powers and duties of inspectors and
                 analysts and the taking of samples and the seizure,
                 detention, forfeiture and disposition of articles;

                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                         L.R.O.

                       UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

16              Chap. 30:01                  Food and Drugs

                               (h) exempting any food, drug, cosmetic or device from all
                                    or any of the provisions of this Act or the Regulations
                                    and prescribing the conditions of the exemption;
                                (i) prescribing forms for the purposes of this Act
                                    and the Regulations;
                                (j) providing for the analysis of food, drugs, cosmetics
                                    and industrial goods and inspection services at the
                                    request of members of the public, and prescribing a
                                    tariff of fees to be paid for the analysis and inspection;
                               (k) providing for the making of special Schedules of
                                    drugs and for the listing or describing of drugs
                                    therein and for the conditions under which the
                                    drugs shall be sold including the process or
                                    condition of manufacture, the kind and conditions
                                    of the premises wherein manufactured, the
                                    qualification of technical staff engaged therein,
                                    and such other matters as are necessary to ensure
                                    that any drug so listed and described will not be
                                    unsafe for use;
                                (l) providing for the maintaining of a register of
                                    approved new drugs and a tariff of fees to be charged
                                    with respect to each application for approval;
                              (m) adding anything to any of the Schedules, in the
                                    interest of, or for the prevention of injury to, the
                                    health of the consumer or purchaser, or deleting
                                    anything therefrom; and
                               (n) prescribing anything authorised or required to
                                    be prescribed under this Act.
                         (2) Regulations made under this section may prescribe
                in respect of any contravention thereof or failure to comply
                therewith, liability, on summary conviction for a first offence, to
                a fine of one thousand, five hundred dollars and imprisonment for
                three months and for a subsequent offence to a fine of three
                thousand dollars and imprisonment for six months.
Drug Advisory       26. (1) The Minister may establish in the interest and for the
Committee and
Food Advisory   protection of public health—
Committee.                   (a) a Drug Advisory Committee to assist and advise
[39 of 1968].
                                 him with respect to—
                                   (i) drug standards, schedules of drugs,
                                       conditions of sale of drugs; and


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01                 17

                   (ii) cosmetic standards, labelling of cosmetics,
                        and any other matters connected therewith;
              (b) a Food Advisory Committee to assist and advise
                  him with respect to food standards, labelling and
                  other matters connected with the manufacture
                  and distribution of food.
       (2) The committees mentioned in subsection (1) shall be
representative of lay and professional interests and shall
comprise such persons as by reason of their knowledge, interest
and experience are considered suitable for appointment thereto.

    27. Where a person committing an offence against this Act is Offences by
                                                                       corporations.
a body corporate, the chairman, president, the officers and every
director thereof concerned in the management of the body
corporate, is guilty of the same offence unless he proves that the act
constituting the offence took place without his knowledge or that
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission thereof.

    28. A prosecution for an offence under this Act or the Jurisdiction.
Regulations may be instituted, heard, tried or determined in the
place in which the offence was committed or the subject matter
of the prosecution arose or in any place in which the accused is
apprehended or happens to be.

    29. (1) Subject to subsection (2), in a prosecution for the sale Defences.
of any article in contravention of this Act or the Regulations, if the
accused proves to the satisfaction of the Court or Magistrate that—
              (a) he purchased the article from another person in
                   packaged form and sold it in the same package
                   and in the same condition the article was in at
                   the time he purchased it; and
              (b) that he could not with reasonable diligence have
                   ascertained that the sale of the article would be
                   in contravention of this Act or the Regulations,
the accused shall be acquitted.
        (2) Subsection (1) shall not apply in any prosecution
unless the accused, on or before the day fixed for the trial, has
given to the prosecutor notice in writing that he intends to avail

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

18               Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs

                 himself of the provisions of the said subsection and has disclosed
                 to the prosecutor the name and address of the person from whom
                 he purchased the article and the date of purchase.

Evidence and         30. (1) A certificate of an analyst stating that he has
sufficiency of
proof.           analysed or examined an article or a sample submitted to him by
                 an inspector and stating the result of his examination shall be
                 admissible in evidence in a prosecution for an offence under this
                 Act or the Regulations, and shall be prima facie proof of the
                 statements contained in the certificate, subject to the right of the
                 party against whom it is produced to require the attendance of the
                 analyst for the purpose of cross-examination; but no such
                 certificate shall be received in evidence unless the party
                 intending to produce it has, before the trial, given to the party
                 against whom it is intended to be produced, reasonable notice of
                 the intention together with a copy of the certificate.
                          (2) Proof that a package containing any article to which
                 this Act or the Regulations apply bore a name or address
                 purporting to be the name or address of the person by whom it
                 was manufactured or packaged shall be prima facie proof, in a
                 prosecution for an offence under this Act or the Regulations, that
                 the article was manufactured or packaged, as the case may be, by
                 the person whose name or address appeared on the package.
                          (3) In a prosecution for an offence under this Act or the
                 Regulations it shall be sufficient proof of the offence to establish
                 that it was committed by an employee or agent of the accused
                 whether or not the employee or agent has been prosecuted for the
                 offence; and for the purposes of this subsection, any person
                 selling or ostensibly employed to sell shall be presumed to be
                 employed to sell.
                          (4) In a prosecution for an offence under this Act or the
                 Regulations a copy of any document or record or an extract
                 therefrom certified to be a true copy by the inspector who made
                 it pursuant to section 21(1)(c) shall be receivable in evidence and
                 shall be prima facie proof of the contents thereof.
                         (5) Where a person is prosecuted under this Act for having

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01                19

manufactured an adulterated food or drug for sale, and it is
established that—
             (a) the food or drug has by Regulation been
                 declared to be adulterated if any prescribed
                 substance has been added thereto; and
             (b) the person had in his possession or on his
                 premises any such prescribed substance,
the onus of proving that the food or drug was not adulterated by
the addition of the substance shall be on the accused.

    31. For the purpose of this Act and the Regulations Presumptions.
thereunder—
            (a) any article commonly used for human
                consumption shall if sold be presumed, until
                the contrary is proved, to have been sold for
                human consumption;
            (b) any article commonly used for human
                consumption which is found on premises used
                for the preparation, storage, or sale of that article
                and any article commonly used in the
                manufacture of products for human consumption
                which is found on premises used for the
                preparation, storage or sale of these products,
                shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved,
                to be intended for sale, or for manufacturing
                products for sale, for human consumption;
            (c) any substance capable of being used in the
                composition or preparation of any article
                commonly used for human consumption which
                is found on premises on which that article is
                prepared shall, until the contrary is proved, be
                presumed to be intended for such use.

    32. (1) The Minister may order that the manufacturer of any Declaration by
                                                                 manufacturer
article of food, drug or cosmetic shall furnish a declaration in and certificate
prescribed form that the article in question as manufactured by in respect of
                                                                 imported foods,
him has been made in accordance with all requirements of this drugs,
                                                                 cosmetics, or
Act and the Regulations, and any person who fails to comply devices.
with any such order is guilty of an offence.

                              UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

20              Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs

                          (2) Except as provided by the Regulations, no article of
                food, drug, cosmetic or device shall be imported into Trinidad and
                Tobago unless the article wholly conforms to the law of the country
                in which it was manufactured or produced and is accompanied by a
                certificate in prescribed form and manner that the article does not
                contravene any known requirement of the law of that country and that
                its sale therein would not constitute a violation of the law thereof.

Penalties.           33. Every person who commits an offence under this Act
                is liable—
                             (a) on summary conviction for a first offence to a
                                 fine of one thousand five hundred dollars and to
                                 imprisonment for three months, and for a
                                 subsequent offence to a fine of three thousand
                                 dollars and imprisonment for six months; and
                             (b) on conviction on indictment to a fine of fifteen
                                 thousand dollars and to imprisonment for
                                 three years.

Time limit on       34. A prosecution under section 33(a) may be instituted at
prosecutions.
                any time within twelve months from the time the subject matter
                of the prosecution arose.




                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                        Chap. 30:01                   21

                           FIRST SCHEDULE                                           Section 4.

Alcoholism                                 Heart Diseases
Appendicitis                               High Blood Pressure
Arteriosclerosis                           Infantile Paralysis
Blood Poisoning                            Lockjaw
Bright’s Disease                           Locomotor Ataxia
Cancer                                     Obesity
Cataract                                   Pleurisy
Diabetes                                   Pneumonia
Diphtheria                                 Ruptures
Disorders of Menstrual Flow                Scarlet Fever
Disorders of the Prostatic                 Sexual Impotence
  Gland                                    Small Pox
Dropsy                                     Spinal Meningitis
Epilepsy                                   Trachoma
Erysipelas                                 Tuberculosis
Gallstones, Kidney Stones,                 Tumours
  Bladder Stones                           Typhoid Fever
Gangrene                                   Ulcers of the Gastro-Intestinal
Glaucoma                                     Tract
Goitre                                     Venereal Diseases


                         SECOND SCHEDULE                                            Section 11.

                     Name                           Abbreviation




                                                               }
Pharmacopoeia Internationalis    …     …            (Ph.I.)
The British Pharmacopoeia…       …     …            (B.P.)
The Pharmacopoeia of the United States of                          Latest
  America        …        …      …     …            (U.S.P.)       Edition
Codex Francais …          …      …     …            (Codex)        and
The Canadian Formulary …         …     …            (C.F.)         Addenda
The British Pharmaceutical Codex …     …            (B.P.C.)
The National Formulary …         …     …            (N.F.)


                           THIRD SCHEDULE                                           Section 13.
                                                                                    [130/1964
                                    PART I                                          94/1969
                                                                                    156/1972
Amitriptyline and its salts                                                         12 of 1987
                                                                                    6 of 2005].
Appetite suppressant agents (anorectics), excluding amphetamine, its
  derivatives and their salts, except those specifically exempted by the Director
Bemegride
Bromal and the following derivatives:
  Bromal hydrate
  Brometone
  Bromoform


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                            LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

22          Chap. 30:01                  Food and Drugs

                               THIRD SCHEDULE—Continued
            Carbromal and the following derivatives:
               Acetylcarbromal
               Allylisopropylacetylurea
               Bromisoval
               Diethylbromacetamide
            Chloral and the following derivatives:
               Butyl chloral hydrate
               Alpha-chloralose
               Choral hydrate (except in preparations for external use containing not more
                  than 1 per cent)
               Chloralformamide
               Chloralimide
            Disulfiram
            Imipramine and its salts
            Iproniazid and its salts
            Isocarboxazid and its salts
            Metaldehyde
            Nialamide and its salts
            Paraldehyde
            Pemoline and its salts
            Phenelzine and its salts
            Pheniprazine and its salts
            Pipamazine and its salts
            Sulphonal and alkyl sulphonals
            Sulphonamides and their salts and derivatives.

                                              PART II
            Adrenocortical hormones and their salts and derivatives
            Aminopterin and its salts
            4-aminopteroylaspartic acid and its salts
            4-aminopteroyl-N-methyglutamic acid and its salts
            Aminopyrine and its derivatives and their salts
            Anticoagulants
            Antihypertensive drugs
            Anticonvulsants
            Azacyclonol 1
            Benactyzine
            Busulfan
            Captodiame
            Chlorambucil and its salts and derivatives
            Chlorprothixene and its salts
            Cinchophen and its salts


                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                            Food and Drugs                   Chap. 30:01                 23

Cyclizine and its salts
Cyclophosphamide
2, 4-dinitrophenol and its salts
Diuretics, excluding caffeine and its salts
Emylcamate
Ephedrine and its salts, optical isomers (except in cough and decongestant
   preparations) and salts of optical isomers (except in cough and
   decongestant preparations)
Ergot alkaloids and their salts and derivatives
Hydroxyzine
Isoniazide
Mebanazine and its salts
Mephenoxalone and its salts
6-mercaptopurine
Mustine (or Meclorethamine) and its salts
Neocinchophen and its salts
N-Methylephedrine and its salts, optical isomers (except in cough and
   decongestant preparations) and salts of optical isomers (except in cough
   and decongestant preparations)
N-Methylpseudoephedrine and its salts, optical isomers (except in cough and
   decongestant preparations) and salts of optical isomers (except in cough
   and decongestant preparations)
Norpseudoephedrine and its salts, optical isomers (except in cough and
   decongestant preparations) and salts of optical isomers (except in cough
   and decongestant preparations)
Oral hypoglycaemic drugs for the control of diabetes
Pargyline and its salts
Phenothiazine derivatives, the following and their salts:
   Acepromazine
   Chlorpromazine
   Fluphenazine
   Levomepromazine (or Mepromazine or Methotrimeprazine)
   Perphenazine
   Pecazine (or Mepazine)
   Prochlorperazine
   Promazine
   Thiethylperazine
   Thiopropazate
   Thioproperazine
   Thioridazine
   Trifluoperazine
   Trifluopromazine
   Trimeprazine
Phenylbutazone and its salts


                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                          L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

24          Chap. 30:01                   Food and Drugs

            Phenylpropanolamine and its salts, optical isomers and salts of optical isomers
            Prothipendyl hydrochloride
            Pseudoephedrine and its salts, optical isomers (except in cough and
               decongestant preparations) and salts of optical isomers (except in cough
               and decongestant preparations)
            Pyrazinamide
            Rauwolfia, and the following Rauwolfia alkaloids and their salts and derivatives:
               Deserpidine
               Raubasine
               Rescinnamine
               Reserpine
            Sex Hormones, natural and synthetic, or their derivatives (except cosmetic
               preparations for external use and oral contraceptive preparations which
               have been shown to have no significant side effects)
            Sulfinpyrazone and its salts
            Tetrabenazine
            Thiotepa
            Thiouracil and its derivatives
            Thyroid
            Thyroxin and its salts
            Tranylcypromine
            Tretamine
            1-triiodothyronine
            Trimethadione
               All drugs containing more than 0.75 per cent by weight of Hexachlorophane
            [Synonyms:—Hexachlorophene, di—(3, 5, 6—Trichloro—2 Hydroxyphenyl)—
            Methane].




                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01                 25

                   SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION


             FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS


                ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

                                  PART I
    1. Citation.
    2. Requirements prescribed by Regulation.

                         INTERPRETATION
    3. Interpretation.
    4. Request to Director.

                               INSPECTORS
    5. Functions, duties, responsibilities of Inspectors.
    6. Certificate of appointment.
    7. Taking of photographs.

                           IMPORTATIONS
    8. Taking samples and detention pending further examination.
    9. Violation of Act or Regulations and re-labelling or re-conditioning
          of food, drug, cosmetic or device.
   10. Issue of certificate.

                                SAMPLING
   11. Taking a sample, notification of intention and division of sample.
   12. Division an interference and objection to procedure by owner or
         person.

                   CERTIFICATE OF ANALYSIS
   13. Certificate of Analysis.
                                  PART II
   14. Definition of terms in Part II.
   15. Offence to sell unlabelled food.


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

26             Chap. 30:01                 Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                            Food and Drugs Regulations

               REGULATION

                  16. Labelling of package.
                 16A. Labelling of breastfeeding substitutes.
                 16B. Labelling of beverages containing alchohol.
                 16C. Labelling of brewery products.
                  17. Declaration of net contents not required on certain labels.
                  18. List of ingredients not required on certain labels.
                  19. Declaration not required.
                  20. Declaration not required to indicate presence of flavouring.
                  21. Dried or dehydrated products.
                  22. Food from vending machine.
                  23. Non-application of regulation 16.
                  24. Standard for a food.
                  25. Name of designation given to standard, grade or definition.
                  26. Adulteration of food.
                  27. Non-adulteration.
                  28. Contents of package.
                  29. Display of information on label.
                  30. First Schedule.
                  31. Offence.
                                           PART III—DRUGS

                                              GENERAL
                  32. Definition of terms in Part III.
                  33. Labelling of drug.
                  34. Contents of label.
                  35. Label on bulk package.
                  36. Drug sold on prescription.
                  37. Packing cases.
                  38. Name and proportion of drug to be stated on label.
                  39. Label to contain all information.
                  40. Information clearly and prominently displayed.
                  41. Reference to drug.
                  42. Drug to conform to standard.


                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                   Chap. 30:01               27
                         Food and Drugs Regulations                           [Subsidiary]

          ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS—Continued
REGULATION


   43.   Parenteral, Third Schedule or controlled drugs.
   44.   Exemption from sections 4(1).
   45.   Drug in form of tablet.
   46.   Variations from declared quantity.
   47.   Caution on label of drug.
   48.   Third Schedule or a controlled drug not to be advertised.
   49.   Prohibition.
   50.   Second Schedule.
   51.   Contravention or non-compliance with Part III.
   52.   Date Regulations became effective.

FIRST SCHEDULE.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
THIRD SCHEDULE.




                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

28                Chap. 30:01                        Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]

130/1964.                         *FOOD AND DRUGS REGULATIONS
[94/1969
53/1972
52/1974                                            made under section 25
105/1974
9/1985].
                                                          PART I
Citation.             1. These Regulations may be cited as the Food and Drugs
                  Regulations.

Requirements            2. These Regulations, where applicable, prescribe the standards
prescribed by
Regulation.       of composition, strength, potency, purity, quality, or other property of
                  the article of food, drug, cosmetic, or device, to which they refer.

                                                   INTERPRETATION
Interpretation.        3. In these Regulations—
[94/1969].
                  “acceptable method” means a method of analysis or examination
                       indicated by the Minister as acceptable for use in the
                       administration of the Act;
                  “cubic centimetre” and its abbreviation “cc” shall be deemed to
                       be interchangeable with the term “millilitre” and its
                       abbreviation “ml” ;
                  “Director” means the Chief Chemist and Director of Food and Drugs;
                  “inner label” means the label on or affixed to an immediate
                       container of a food, drug, cosmetic, or device;
                  “lot number” or “batch number” means any combination of
                       letters or figures, or both, by which any food or drug can be
                       traced in manufacture and identified in distribution;
                  “official method” means the method of analysis or examination
                       designated by the Minister by Notification for use in the
                       administration of the Act;
                  “outer label” means the label on or affixed to the outside of a
                       package of a food, drug, cosmetic, or device.
Request to               4. The Director shall, upon request—
Director.
[94/1969].                      (a) furnish copies of official methods; and
                                (b) indicate that a method submitted to him for his
                                    ruling is acceptable or otherwise.
                  *These Regulations have been further amended by LNs 111/1986; 49/1987; 37/1991; 72/1996;
                   192/1999; 199/1999; 118/2003.


                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01                 29
                        Food and Drugs Regulations                           [Subsidiary]

                            INSPECTORS
    5. (1) Inspectors shall perform the functions and duties, Functions,
and carry out the responsibilities, prescribed by the Act, these duties,
                                                                 responsibilities
Regulations and the Minister.                                    of Inspectors.

       (2) The authority of an inspector extends to and includes
the whole of Trinidad and Tobago.

     6. A certificate that a person has been appointed as an Certificate of
                                                              appointment.
inspector shall be in the form set out as Form A in the Third Form A.
Schedule and shall be signed by the Minister and the person Third Schedule.
appointed.

      7. (1) An inspector may take photographs of premises and Taking        of
                                                                      photographs.
articles as may be relevant to the administration of the Act or these
Regulations, in so far as they apply to unsanitary conditions.
         (2) For the purposes of subregulation (1), the expression
“articles” includes—
              (a) food, drugs, cosmetics, and devices, and anything
                  used for the manufacture, preparation, preservation,
                  packaging or storing of such articles; and
              (b) any labelling or advertising material.

                          IMPORTATIONS
     8. (1) An inspector may examine, take samples of, and Taking       samples
                                                                 and detention
detain pending further examination, any food, drug, cosmetic, or pending further
device, imported into Trinidad and Tobago but not delivered out examination.
of the charge of Customs.
         (2) Where a sample of a food, drug, cosmetic, or device is
taken, the inspector shall, as soon as may be practicable thereafter,
submit the sample to an analyst for examination or analysis.

     9. (1) Subject to subregulation (2), where, as a result of an Violation of Act
                                                                     or Regulations
examination or analysis of a sample of a food, drug, cosmetic, or and re-labelling
device, an analyst reports that the food, drug, cosmetic, or device or  re-conditioning
                                                                     of food, drug,
would, if sold in Trinidad and Tobago, constitute a violation of the cosmetic
                                                                     device.
                                                                               or

Act or of these Regulations, the food, drug, cosmetic, or device
shall not be admitted into Trinidad and Tobago for use as a food,

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

30                Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations


                  drug, cosmetic, or device, as the case may be, and the inspector
                  shall send a report of the analysis or examination to the
                  Comptroller of Customs and a copy to the importer.
                           (2) Where a food, drug, cosmetic, or device, sought to
                  be admitted into Trinidad and Tobago would, if sold in Trinidad
                  and Tobago, constitute a violation of the Act or of these
                  Regulations, the food, drug, cosmetic, or device may be admitted
                  into Trinidad and Tobago for the purpose of re-labelling or re-
                  conditioning under the supervision of an inspector in compliance
                  with such written conditions as may be specified in the report of
                  an analyst, and where the re-labelling or re-conditioning is not
                  satisfactorily carried out within three months after the report is
                  made, or such lesser period as may be specified in the report, the
                  food, drug, cosmetic, or device shall be exported, and, if not
                  exported within a further period of three months, are forfeited to
                  the State and may be disposed of as the Minister may direct; but
                  the Minister may extend the time for complying with conditions
                  or for exporting the said goods.

Issue of              10. A certificate required under section 32(2) of the Act shall
certificate.
                  be a certificate in the English Language issued by the official
                  body or Government Department having authority to issue the
                  certificate in the country in which the article of food, drug,
                  cosmetic, or device was manufactured or produced; and where no
                  official body or Government Department has authority to issue
                  such a certificate, the certificate may be issued by any person
                  acceptable to the Minister.

                                              SAMPLING
Taking a              11. When taking a sample pursuant to section 21 of the Act,
sample,
notification of   an inspector shall, after procuring a suitable quantity of the article
intention and
division of       in question and paying for the same the usual price therefor,
sample.           notify the owner thereof or the person from whom the sample
                  was obtained of his intention to submit a sample thereof to an
                  analyst for analysis or examination, and
                               (a) if the owner or the person from whom the sample


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01                 31
                       Food and Drugs Regulations                          [Subsidiary]


                 was obtained, demands it, but not otherwise, then and
                 there divide the quantity into three parts, and shall—
                    (i) cause each of the three parts to be marked
                        and sealed in such manner as the nature of
                        such sample will permit;
                   (ii) deliver one of the parts to the owner or
                        person from whom the sample was obtained,
                        or leave the same upon the premises wherein
                        the sample was obtained; and
                  (iii) retain one of the parts for future
                        comparison or verification, and shall
                        submit the third part to the analyst for
                        analysis or examination;
             (b) if no demand is made for the division of the
                 sample into three parts, the inspector shall—
                    (i) divide the same into two parts;
                   (ii) cause each of those parts to be marked
                        and sealed in such manner as the nature of
                        the sample will permit; and
                  (iii) retain one of the parts for future comparison
                        or verification, and submit the other to the
                        analyst for analysis or examination.

    12. (1) Notwithstanding regulation 11, where in the opinion Division an
of the inspector division of the procured quantity of a sample interference
                                                                    objection to
                                                                                 and

would interfere with analysis or examination, the inspector may, procedure
                                                                    owner or
                                                                               by
subject to subregulation (2), seal and submit the entire sample for person.
analysis or examination.
        (2) Where the owner or person from whom the sample
was obtained objects to the procedure provided for in
subregulation (1) at the time the sample was obtained, and
supplies at his own expense a sufficient quantity of the article, the
inspector shall follow the procedure described in regulation 11.

                 CERTIFICATE OF ANALYSIS
    13. A certificate of an analyst stating that he has analysed or Certificate of
examined an article or a sample submitted to him by an inspector Analysis.
                                                                    Form B.
shall be in the form set out as Form B in the Third Schedule, with Third   Schedule.
                                                                    [94/1969].
such variations as circumstances may require.

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

32                  Chap. 30:01             Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                                                 PART II

Definition of           14. In this Part—
terms in Part II.
[94/1969            “alcoholic beverage” means a liquid food containing sufficient
52/1974
118/2003].               ethyl alcohol to make it liable to Excise duty and includes—
                                 (a) a spirit, liqueur, wine, cider, perry, champagne
                                     or spirit compound used as a food; and
                                 (b) a brewery product containing sufficient ethyl
                                     alcohol to make it liable to Excise duty,
                         but does not include a flavouring preparation or liquid food
                         in which ethyl alcohol is used as a preservative;
                     “alcoholic content by volume” means the volume of ethyl
                         alcohol in a food, expressed as a percentage of the total
                         volume of the food;
                    “baked confectionery” means any solid or semi-solid food ready
                         for human consumption without any further preparation
                         except heating, and which is principally composed of
                         ground cereal (not including a filling) whether or not
                         flavoured, coated or containing sweetening agents,
                         chocolate or cocoa and includes cakes, pastries, sponges and
                         meringues but does not include bread, biscuits, rusks or
                         any product containing meat, fish, fruit or fruit pulp as
                         a filling;
                    “batch number” or “lot number” means any letters or figures or a
                         combination of both used for marking, identifying or tracing
                         a batch or lot of pre-packaged food when manufactured,
                         distributed or sold, and includes a date mark;
                    “biscuits” includes crisp bread, wafers, rusks, oatcakes and
                         biscuits which have been coated, filled or flavoured with
                         chocolate or cocoa;
                    “brewery product” means a beverage which is derived from a
                         cereal and includes a beverage which is manufactured,
                         distributed or sold under any of the following common
                         names:
                                  (a) ale;
                                  (b) beer;
                                  (c) lager or lager beer;


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs               Chap. 30:01                33
                      Food and Drugs Regulations                       [Subsidiary]


             (d) malta;
             (e) malt liquor;
              (f) porter;
             (g) shandy; or
             (h) stout;
“bulk container” means a container in which more than one duly
     labelled package of a food and its contents are placed for
     purposes of wholesale, but in which the packages and their
     contents are not intended to be retained for retail sale;
“chocolate confectionery” means any solid or semi-solid food
     principally composed of chocolate or cocoa with or without
     the addition of fruits or nuts, and includes food made by
     covering, coating or embodying sugar confectionery in
     chocolate but does not include biscuits which have been
     cooked, filled or flavoured with chocolate or chocolate ice
     cream, or baked confectionery flavoured with chocolate;
“common name” means the name printed in bold type in these
     Regulations or—
             (a) where the name is not so printed, the name by
                  which the food is generally known and which is
                  sufficient in each particular case to indicate to
                  the purchaser the true nature of the food; or
             (b) where the name of the food consists of the
                  common names of two or more of its principal
                  ingredients, the common names of these
                  ingredients arranged in descending order of
                  proportion by weight;
“component” means any substance which forms part of an ingredient;
“confectionery” includes baked confectionery, chocolate
     confectionery and sugar confectionery;
“date mark” means any declaration by letters or figures, whether
     declared expressly or in code, of any date indicative of the
     age of a food;
“expiry date” means any date after which the manufacturer or
     packager of a food does not guarantee the quality or any
     other property of the food;

                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                       UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

34                Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations


                  “flavouring preparation” includes any food for which a standard is
First Schedule.        prescribed or which is defined in Division 5 of the First Schedule;
                  “food additive” means any substance the use of which would
                       result or is likely to result in the substance or any of its by-
                       products becoming a part of or affecting the characteristics
                       of a food and includes a preservative and a food colour, but
                       does not include—
                               (a) a nutritive material used, recognised or
                                     commonly sold as an article of food;
                               (b) vitamins, mineral nutrients or amino-acids;
                                (c) spices, seasonings, essential oils, oleoresins or
                                     extractives from plants;
                               (d) veterinary drugs that may be used on animals
                                     that may subsequently be consumed as food or
                                     be used to produce food;
                                (e) pesticides or their by-products;
                                (f) materials used for packing or any substance
                                     from such materials that may have entered food
                                     packed therein;
                  “food colour” means those colours permitted for use in or upon
First Schedule.        food by Division 2 of the First Schedule;
                  “ingredient” means any substance including a food additive used
                       in the preparation of a food and which is present in the final
                       product;
                  “instant” means in relation to a food so described, that the food
                       has been processed to such a degree that it may be converted
                       into a state similar to that in which it is usually consumed,
                       merely by the addition of one or more substances with
                       which it may be easily and readily mixed;
                  “main panel” means that part of a label normally intended to be
                       presented to the consumer or intended to be most
                       conspicuous to the consumer at the time when the food to
                       which the label relates is offered or exposed for sale;
                  “package” means anything in which a food is wholly or partly
                       contained, placed, packed or enclosed for sale;
                  “prepackaged” means packaged or made up in advance in a
                       package for retail sale;

                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                 Chap. 30:01                 35
                       Food and Drugs Regulations                           [Subsidiary]


“preservative” means a substance classified as such in Division 7
     of the First Schedule;                                         First Schedule.

“proof spirit” means proof spirit as defined in the Customs Act or Ch. 78:01.
     the Excise (General Provisions) Act;                           Ch. 78:50.
“registration number” means any letters or figures or a
     combination of letters and figures assigned to a food factory
     in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations so as
     to identify its products;
“storage instructions” means information on the manner in which
     a pre-packaged food should be handled and stored so that its
     quality, safety or properties may be retained until the expiry
     date, or in the event that there is no such date such
     information that is necessary to ensure the retention of the
     quality, safety or properties of the food;
“sugar confectionery” means any solid or semi-solid food, ready
     for human consumption, which is composed principally of
     sugar with or without the addition of edible oil or fats, milk
     products, gelatine, edible gums, nuts, fruits, natural or
     synthetic flavours, food additives, food colours or preserved
     fruit and includes sugar-cake, sweetened liquorice and
     chewing gum, but does not include chocolate confectionery,
     sugared baked marzipan, meringues or sweetened flavoured
     powders which may be used in the preparation of soft drinks;
“sweetening agent” means a sugar, molasses, honey or any other
     carbohydrate which may be used as a sweetener;
“vending machine” means a machine one of the purposes of
     which is to dispense or supply a food automatically when
     money or money’s worth is inserted into it whether or not
     any further operation is required prior to its dispensing or
     supplying the food.

   15. Any person who sells a food that is not labelled in Offence to sell
accordance with the provisions of this Part is guilty of an offence. unlabelled
                                                                     [52/1974].
                                                                                food.


    16. (l) Except as otherwise provided by this Part the label Labelling of
                                                                package.
of a package of food shall carry—                               [94/1969
                                                                52/1974
            (a) on the main panel of the label—                 9/1985
                                                                118/2003].
                  (i) the brand or trade name of the food;

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

36             Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                          Food and Drugs Regulations


                                    (ii) the common name of the food; and
                                   (iii) a correct declaration of the net contents of
                                         the package in terms of weight, volume or
                                         number in accordance with the usual
                                         practice in describing the food;
                             (b) on any panel except the bottom of the package—
                                     (i) in the case of a food which consists of
                                         more than one ingredient, a complete list
                                         of ingredients in descending order of
                                         proportion by weight or a complete list of
                                         ingredients in which the proportion or
                                         quantity of each ingredient is stated in
                                         terms of percentage;
                                    (ii) the name and address of the manufacturer
                                         or the person preparing the food and its
                                         country of preparation or origin as
                                         required by subregulations (8) and (9);
                                   (iii) a declaration by name of any added Class II,
                                         Class III or Class IV preservative;
                                   (iv) a declaration of any added food colour;
                                    (v) a declaration of any added flavouring
                                         preparation;
                                   (vi) the expiry date or other date mark;
                                  (vii) storage instructions, where applicable;
                                 (viii) preparation instructions, where applicable;
                                   (ix) instructions for safe handling, where
                                         applicable; and
                                    (x) any other statement which may be
                                         required to be declared or made by these
                                         Regulations; and
                             (c) on any panel, including the panel at the bottom
                                  of the package—
                                     (i) the batch or lot number; and
                                    (ii) any registration number which may be
                                         required by these Regulations.
                      (2) The declaration of net contents specified in
               subregulation (1)(a)(iii) shall be made in terms of metric

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs               Chap. 30:01                37
                      Food and Drugs Regulations                       [Subsidiary]


(Systeme Internationale) units or imperial (Avoirdupois) units, or
any accepted abbreviations thereof until such terms are varied
with respect to any class of food by notice made by the Minister
and published in the Gazette; the notice shall state specifically
the date on or after which the variation becomes effective.
        (3) Where a food is packed in a liquid medium which is
usually not consumed with the food, a declaration of the drained
weight of the food shall be made.
         (4) The list of ingredients required by subregulation
(1)(b)(i) shall include the components of any ingredient which is
not exempted by these Regulations from being labelled with a list
of its ingredients.
         (5) In the case of a dehydrated food the ingredients shall
be listed in descending proportion by weight in the food when it
is reconstituted and the list shall begin with a statement such as
“ingredients when reconstituted”.
        (6) Except when it is present as a usual component of an
ingredient (such as gravy, broth, brine, milk or syrup), or when it
is used in usual manufacturing processes, added water shall be
declared as an ingredient.
        (7) A distinct and specific name shall be used in the list
of ingredients for each ingredient (other than a food additive sold
as such) except that the class titles may be used—
             (a) in the case of ingredients falling into the
                 following classes:
                     animal fats (except pork and beef fats
                        and tallow);
                     animal oils (except pork and beef oils
                        and tallow)
                     animal shortening (except pork and beef
                        shortening);
                     herbs;
                     marine oils (that is to say oils from marine
                        animals);
                     spices;
                     starches (except modified starches);


                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                       UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

38             Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Food and Drugs Regulations


                                    vegetable fats;
                                    vegetable oils;
                                    vegetable shortening;
                             (b) for food additives falling into the following
                                 classes:
                                    acidifiers;
                                    anticaking agents (or free-flowing agents);
                                    antifoaming agents;
                                    antioxidants (or Class IV preservatives);
                                    bleaching agents;
                                    carbohydrate binder;
                                    cereal binder;
                                    food colours;
                                    emulsifiers;
                                    emulsifying salts;
                                    enzymes;
                                    firming agents;
                                    maturing agents;
                                    modified starches;
                                    natural or synthetic flavours;
                                    neutralisers;
                                    preservatives (except Class II preservatives);
                                    stabilisers;
                                    thickening agents;
                                    vegetable or edible gums.
                       (8) Where the food is prepared by a person in
               Trinidad and Tobago who is not the manufacturer within the
               meaning of section 2 of the Act, the name and postal address
               in Trinidad and Tobago of the person by whom the food was
               prepared shall be legibly stated next to the name and address of
               the manufacturer.
                       (9) Where the food is prepared in a country other than
               the country of the manufacturer a declaration of the country of
               preparation or origin shall be made on the label.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                 Chap. 30:01                 39
                       Food and Drugs Regulations                           [Subsidiary]


        (10) The declarations specified in subregulation (1) and
in regulation 16A shall be made in English but where a label is
applied to a food in a country the official language of which is not
English, the declarations shall appear in English on any panel
except the bottom of the package.

  16A. (1) Every manufacturer or distributor of a breast-milk Labelling of
                                                                      breastfeeding
substitute shall display on the outer label of the container—         substitutes.
             (a) a statement headed “Important Notice” [9/1985].
                  proclaiming the superiority of breastfeeding over
                  other methods of infant feeding and advising that
                  such substitute should be used only on proper
                  medical advice having been obtained as to the
                  need for, and the proper methods of its use;
             (b) directions for use and a warning of the
                  consequences of failure to follow those directions.
         (2) The manufacturer or distributor of a breast-milk
substitute shall not display on the container or label—
             (a) any statement, picture or other visual impression
                  of a person that would tend to encourage the use
                  of that substitute in preference to breast-milk;
             (b) the words “humanised” or “maternalised” or
                  any such words that may tend to extol the
                  virtues of that substitute.
        (3) The manufacturer or distributor of every food
product which is not a breast-milk substitute but which is capable
of being modified to become one, shall include on the label a
warning that the product is not to be used as the sole source of
nourishment for babies.
        (4) The manufacturer or distributor of condensed milk
shall not include on the label, instructions for its modification as
a baby food.
         (5) In addition to the provisions of this regulation the
provisions of regulation 16 also apply to manufacturers or
distributors of breast-milk substitutes.


                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

40             Chap. 30:01              Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Food and Drugs Regulations


Labelling of     16B. (1) This regulation applies to the labelling of a beverage
beverages
containing     containing alcohol in addition to regulation 16.
alcohol.
[118/2003].             (2) The common name of an alcoholic beverage
               associated with a particular country or locality shall not be
               applied to an alcoholic beverage produced in any country unless
               the name is generally recognised as being associated with the
               distinctive type of alcoholic beverage.
                        (3) The common name of an alcoholic beverage
               associated with a particular type of alcoholic beverage produced
               in a particular country or locality and protected by the law of the
               country, may only be applied to an alcoholic beverage produced
               in another country where the common name is preceded by a
               name or adjective in identical lettering, indicating the true
               country or locality of origin.
                       (4) Subject to subregulations (5) and (6), the common
               name “wine” shall be applied to an undistilled fermented
               alcoholic beverage prepared from fresh or preserved grapes.
                        (5) The common name “(naming the fruit, flower, leaf,
               grain or other botanical substance) wine” shall be applied to an
               undistilled fermented alcoholic beverage prepared wholly or
               principally from a fruit, flower, leaf, grain or other botanical
               substance, other than fresh or preserved grapes.
                       (6) The common name “non-alcoholic wine” may be
               applied to a beverage prepared principally from a fruit, which
               although not an alcoholic beverage, resembles it but shall not be
               applied to a beverage which contains more than 0.5 per cent
               alcoholic content by volume.
                       (7) The label on the package of a beverage containing
               more than 1.0 per cent alcoholic content by volume, shall state on
               its main panel, its alcoholic strength in terms of any of the
               following:
                           (a) alcoholic content by volume;
                           (b) degrees Gay-Lussac (ºG.L.);
                           (c) degrees proof spirit or per cent proof spirit;
                           (d) degrees or per cent U.S. proof; or
                           (e) any other term authorised by the Minister.

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                 Chap. 30:01                 41
                       Food and Drugs Regulations                           [Subsidiary]


         (8) The common names “brandy”, “rum”, “gin” or “vodka”
shall not be applied to an alcoholic beverage, the alcoholic strength of
which is below seventy-five degrees proof spirit, except in the case of
fruit brandy and brandy that has been matured in a cask.
        (9) The common names referred to in subregulations (2)
and (3) may be in a language other than English, but shall be printed
in the English alphabet, with accent marks where appropriate.

  16C. (1) This regulation applies to the labelling of a brewery Labelling of
product in addition to regulation 16 and where there is a conflict brewery
                                                                     products.
between this regulation and regulation 16, this regulation prevails. [118/2003].
         (2) The label on the package of a brewery product for
retail sale shall state, on any panel except the panel at the bottom
of the package—
              (a) the name and address of the manufacturer;
              (b) the name and address of the person preparing
                   the brewery product, where different from the
                   name and address of the manufacturer;
              (c) the country of origin;
              (d) the name and address of the importer or the
                   distributor, if any;
              (e) its alcoholic strength in terms of alcoholic
                   content by volume; and
               (f) a declaration of the net contents.
       (3) Notwithstanding regulation 18(1)(d), the label on a
package of shandy for retail sale shall state, in addition to the
information set out in subregulation (2)—
            (a) the vegetable flavour, juice or extract used in the
                 shandy, if any; and
            (b) a list of ingredients in descending order of
                 proportion by weight.
       (4) Notwithstanding regulation 18(1)(d), the label on a
package of malta for retail sale shall state, in addition to the
information set out in subregulation (2)—
            (a) the word “non-alcoholic”; and
            (b) a list of ingredients which may include the
                 word “wort”.

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                         L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

42             Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Food and Drugs Regulations


                        (5) The label on the package of a brewery product for
               retail sale may state the following information:
                            (a) nutritional information, in terms of the
                                 Recommended Daily Allowances for vitamins
                                 and minerals set by the Caribbean Food and
                                 Nutrition Institute or by authorities in the United
                                 States of America;
                            (b) a warning as to the effects of alcohol on health
                                 or safety;
                            (c) whether the package may be returned to the
                                 dealer or manufacturer, in which case, the
                                 word “returnable” may be used, or disposed
                                 of otherwise;
                            (d) whether a refund or payment is made for an
                                 empty package which is returned; or
                            (e) where the package is made of plastic or metal,
                                 whether the package may be recycled.
                       (6) The label on a bulk package of a brewery product
               shall state—
                           (a) the common name;
                           (b) the brand or trade name;
                           (c) the name and address of the manufacturer;
                           (d) the name and address of the person preparing
                                the brewery product, where different from the
                                name and address of the manufacturer;
                           (e) the average net contents as determined by an
                                acceptable method;
                            (f) where the brewery product is imported or
                                exported, the name of the country of origin;
                           (g) the name and address of the importer or the
                                distributor, if any; and
                           (h) the expiry date or other date mark.
                        (7) In this regulation “bulk package” includes a package
               in which one or more duly labelled packages of a brewery product
               and its contents intended for retail sale are placed for the purpose

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                 Chap. 30:01                 43
                       Food and Drugs Regulations                           [Subsidiary]


of wholesale and a barrel, cask or pressurized container in which
a brewery product is placed for sale from draught.

    17. Notwithstanding the provisions of regulation 16(1)(a)(iii), Declaration of
                                                                     net contents not
a declaration of net contents in terms of weight, volume or number required on
is not required on the label of—                                     certain labels.
                                                                     [52/1974].
              (a) any package of food, the weight of which
                  including the package is less than two ounces
                  (56 grams) or the volume of net contents is less
                  than two fluid ounces (56 millilitres);
              (b) milk, sterilised milk, flavoured sterilised milk,
                  skim milk or U.H.T. milk sold in glass, plastic or
                  laminated plastic containers the capacity of
                  which is ten fluid ounces (half pint), twenty
                  fluid ounces (one pint), one quart or half gallon;
              (c) eggs, fresh fruit or fresh vegetables packaged in
                  transparent, colourless and flexible materials
                  where the fruit or vegetable is customarily sold
                  by number, or if sold by weight by multiples of
                  one pound or of half a kilogram provided that a
                  true statement of the number or the weight per
                  package is prominently displayed adjacent to
                  the place, shelf or bin where the packages are
                  displayed;
              (d) eggs packed in cartons which may be easily
                  opened so that their contents may be checked.

   18. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of regulation List              of
                                                                     ingredients not
16(1)(b)(i), a list of ingredients is not required on the labels of— required on
                                                                     certain labels.
              (a) preparations of synthetic food colours for [52/1974].
                   household use containing less than fifteen per
                   cent of pure dye and sold in containers of two
                   fluid ounces ( 56 millilitres) or less;
              (b) dairy products, except ice cream, dairy ice
                   cream, milk ices and water ices;
              (c) flavouring preparations;
              (d) carbonated beverages, soft drinks and
                   flavouring syrups;

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

44             Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                          Food and Drugs Regulations


                             (e) bread, cakes and plain biscuits;
                              (f) sugar confectionery and baked confectionery;
                             (g) blood pudding;
                             (h) gelatin desserts;
                              (i) alcoholic beverages;
                              (j) packages less than fifty millimetres in size and
                                  with a capacity of less than two ounces (56
                                  grams) or two fluid ounces (56 millilitres);
                             (k) foods for which a compositional standard is
                                  provided in these Regulations, unless the standard
                                  requires a list of ingredients to be declared;
                              (l) Angostura aromatic bitters.
                        (2) The provisions of subregulation (1) do not apply to
               any food exempted from the provisions of regulation 16(1)(b)(i)
               if that food is labelled with any statement of an ingredient other
               than its brand, trade or common name, or any other statement
               required by the Regulations.
                       (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of regulation
               16(1)(b)(iv), no declaration is required to indicate the presence of
               added food colour in the following:
                            (a) bakery products, except brown bread;
                            (b) butter, margarine, shortening;
                             (c) cheese or processed cheese;
                            (d) sugar confectionery or baked confectionery;
                             (e) gelatin desserts;
                             (f) ice cream, water ices or milk ices;
                            (g) icing sugar;
                            (h) liqueurs, alcoholic cordials or Angostura
                                 aromatic bitters;
                             (i) sherbets;
                             (j) carbonated beverages.
                       (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of regulation
               16(1)(b)(iv), no declaration is required to indicate the presence of
               caramel as a food colour in the following:
                            (a) non-excisable fermented beverages;

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                 Chap. 30:01                45
                       Food and Drugs Regulations                         [Subsidiary]


             (b) sauces;
             (c) spirits (except gin);
             (d) vinegar;
             (e) wine;
              (f) dilute acetic (food grade).

   19. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of regulation Declaration not
                                                                 required.
16(1)(b)(v), no declaration is required—                         [52/1974].
             (a) to indicate the presence of sulphur dioxide,
                 sulphurous acid or its salts, in or upon—
                    (i) glucose or glucose syrup;
                   (ii) molasses, fancy molasses, table molasses
                        or refined molasses;
                  (iii) white sugar, granulated sugar, yellow
                        crystal sugar or washed grey sugar;
                  (iv) confectionery;
                   (v) malt liquors;
                  (vi) wines;
                 (vii) syrups;
             (b) to indicate the presence of Class III
                 preservatives in—
                    (i) bread;
                   (ii) bakery products;
                  (iii) wines;
                  (iv) cheese, processed cheese or processed
                        cheese products.
       (2) Class I preservatives shall be declared by name as if
they were ingredients of a food.

     20. Notwithstanding the provisions of regulation 16(1)(b)(iv), Declaration not
no declaration is required to indicate the presence of added required
                                                                    indicate
                                                                             to

artificial or imitation flavouring preparation in or upon—          presence of
                                                                    flavouring.
               (a) bakery products;                                 [52/1974].
               (b) confectionery;
               (c) ice cream or water ices;
               (d) sherbets;

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

46             Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Food and Drugs Regulations


                             (e) soft drinks, including flavouring syrups unless
                                  they are labelled as “fruit drink” or “juice” ;
                              (f) carbonated beverages;
                             (g) flavoured sterilised milk, flavoured skim milk,
                                  flavoured malted milk, or flavoured malted milk
                                  products;
                             (h) sugar confectionery.
Dried or           21. (1) Where a food is commonly sold both in its normal
dehydrated
products.      state and as a dried or dehydrated product, the latter shall be
[52/1974       labelled with the words “dried”, “dehydrated” or “desiccated” as
37/1991
118/2003].     part of its common name.
                       (2) Subregulation (1) does not apply to a food prepared
               by drying or dehydration if—
                           (a) the Regulations prescribe a standard for the food
                                so prepared;
                           (b) a common name is customarily and exclusively
                                applied to such food; or
                            (c) the word “instant” is used with the name of the
                                food so prepared.
                       (3) Where a food is prepared by adding water to
               concentrated or dehydrated ingredients the word “reconstituted”
               shall appear clearly on the label in close proximity to the
               common name if—
                           (a) the food resembles another food commonly sold
                               under a common name or for which a standard
                               is prescribed by Regulations; and
                           (b) the food is packaged and sold as a reconstituted
                               food and its composition is similar to that of the
                               other food.
                      (4) Where a food is sold pre-packaged by retail as a
               mixture of ingredients, dry or otherwise, and is intended to be
               made into other food for human consumption by the addition of
               any food or substance other than water—
                           (a) the name of the substance required to be added
                               shall appear on the label preceded by such words
                               as “Add” “Needs”, or “Mixed With”; and

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01                  47
                      Food and Drugs Regulations                         [Subsidiary]


             (b) the words required by paragraph (a) shall appear
                 in close proximity to the common name of the
                 mixture of the ingredients sold.
         (5) A food          which      contains      saccharin,   or
cyclohexylsulphamic acid (cyclamate) or the salts of either of them
shall state clearly on the label the name of the artificial sweetener
it contains, and a statement that it is a non-nutritive sweetener.
        (6) Every person is guilty of an offence who—
            (a) makes on a label or in any advertisement of a
                food a reference, direct or otherwise to the Act,
                the Regulations made thereunder, the Ministry
                of Health or the Food and Drugs Division,
                unless the reference is a specific requirement of
                the Act or the Regulations made thereunder;
            (b) uses on a label or in any advertisement of a food a
                name or designation given to any standard, grade or
                definition prescribed for a food by any law in force
                in Trinidad and Tobago, unless the food conforms
                to the prescribed standard, grade or definition;
            (c) uses on a label or in any advertisement of a food
                any words, mark, device or design generally
                recognised as certifying or implying conformity
                with a specification, standard or grade, unless
                the food conforms with the specification,
                standard or grade certified or implied by the
                words, mark, device or design.
        (6A) Subregulation (6)(a) does not apply to a label on
meat or poultry products intended for export to the effect that the
product has been inspected and passed for wholesomeness by an
inspector appointed under the Act.
         (7) Where a food or any of its ingredients is derived
from an animal, the common name of the animal or of its meat
shall be used in any declaration required by these Regulations.
        (8) (Revoked by LN 118/2003).

    22. (1) No person shall sell food in or from a vending machine Food from
unless there is on the machine, in a position clearly visible to the vending
                                                                     machine.
                                                                        [52/1974].


                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

48                  Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations


                    purchaser, a label bearing all information regarding the food as
                    prescribed by these Regulations, and in particular the trade name or
                    common name of the food and the quantity thereof to be sold.
                            (2) Where a food that has been pre-packaged is sold in
                    or from a vending machine each package shall be labelled as
                    prescribed by these Regulations.
                            (3) For the purposes of regulation 16, the outer surface
                    of any crown cork or closure on a glass bottle used for packaging
                    carbonated beverages or liquid dairy products may be accepted as
                    a main panel for a period not exceeding ten years after the
                    coming into operation of the Food and Drugs (Amendment)
                    Regulations 1974 (that is, 28th February 1974).
                            (4) Any new glass bottles used for packaging carbonated
                    beverages or liquid dairy products shall, on the expiration of one
                    year from the coming into operation of the Food and Drugs
                    (Amendment) Regulations 1974 (that is, 28th February 1974),
                    bear clearly and legibly as a label fixed on the body of the bottle,
                    the name and address of the manufacturer and a statement of net
                    contents as prescribed by regulation 16.
                            (5) Glass bottles, used for packaging international
                    brands of carbonated beverages, which may be imported by way
                    of a chandler’s trade with ships, aircraft or hovercraft or any other
                    means of international transport may be used for packaging such
                    brands in Trinidad and Tobago if the Director is satisfied that the
                    brands are international brands.
                            (6) A manufacturer of carbonated beverages who has
                    changed his address may continue to use his former address on
                    old glass bottles if the Director is informed of the new address.
Non-application        23. (1) Regulation 16 does not apply to a food which is—
of regulation 16.
[52/1974                       (a) sold unpackaged, or in an open or uncovered
118/2003].
                                   package;
                               (b) weighed or measured in or counted into the
                                   package in the presence of the purchaser, or
                                   weighed, measured or counted in the presence
                                   of the purchaser before being packaged;

                                      UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01                49
                     Food and Drugs Regulations                         [Subsidiary]


            (c) pre-packaged from bulk at the place where the
                food is sold by retail provided that there is
                placed on every shelf, bin or any other place
                where the food is displayed in a position clearly
                visible to an intending purchaser a legible
                statement in English giving correct details of—
                   (i) the common name or trade name of
                       the food;
                  (ii) the net contents of the package;
                 (iii) the price of the unit quantity of the food as
                       it is customarily measured; and
                 (iv) the price of the package;
            (d) a pastelle sold only in the vegetable wrapping in
                which it was cooked provided that the name and
                address of the manufacturer are clearly shown
                on the shelf, bin or any other place where it is
                displayed for sale if retailed by a person other
                than the manufacturer.
        (2) Notwithstanding regulation 16, the label on a bulk
container of a food or food additive shall state—
             (a) the common name;
             (b) the name and address of the manufacturer,
                 packager, importer or wholesaler;
             (c) the country of origin;
             (d) the net contents; and
             (e) the expiry date or other date mark,
and may state the batch or lot number, registration number and
storage instructions.
        (3) Notwithstanding regulation 16(1), a package
containing a food additive or a mixture of food additives (other
than a preparation of synthetic food colours for household use)
and no other food ingredient may carry a batch number, date
mark or expiry date and shall be labelled with—
            (a) the common or chemical name of the food additive
                 and the specification to which it conforms;
            (b) the brand or trade name of the food additive;
            (c) the net contents of the package;

                              UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                       UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

50                Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                            Food and Drugs Regulations


                                (d) the name and address of the manufacturer or
                                     packager of the food additive;
                                (e) any direction in English that the Director may
                                     consider necessary to ensure its safe use in
                                     accordance with the Act, Regulations made
                                     thereunder or with food manufacturing practice,
                                     or to prevent injury to the consumer or to
                                     persons who may use the food additive in the
                                     preparation of a food;
                                 (f) the name, percentage by weight and the
                                     specification of each food additive present,
                                     where there is a mixture of food additives.

Standard for a        24. Where a standard for a food is provided in this Part, only
food.
                  those ingredients named in the standard shall be used in the food.
Name of               25. Where by any law in force in Trinidad and Tobago a
designation
given to          standard, grade or definition is prescribed for a food and the
standard, grade
or definition.
                  standard, grade or definition is given a name or designation by
[94/1969].        the law, no person shall use that name or designation on a label
                  or in any advertisement of a food unless the food conforms to the
                  standard, grade or definition prescribed.

Adulteration of       26. For the purposes of the Act and these Regulations, a food
food.
[53/1972          is adulterated if any of the following substances or classes of
192/1999].        substances is present therein or has been added thereto:
                               (a) mineral oil or paraffin wax, or any preparation
                                   thereof;
                               (b) coumarin or an extract of tonka beans, the seed
                                   of Dipteryx odorata Willd. or Dipteryx
                                   oppositifolia Willd.;
                               (c) synthetic sweetener(s) other than those
                                   approved by the Minister;
                               (d) iso-propyl alcohol;
                               (e) synthetic food colours in a proportion greater
                                   than 0.03 per cent of the food when prepared for
                                   consumption as directed, or as it is usually
                                   consumed (except in food colour preparations as
First Schedule.
                                   defined in Division 2 of the First Schedule).

                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01                51
                      Food and Drugs Regulations                         [Subsidiary]


   27. Notwithstanding regulation 26—                             Non-
                                                                  adulteration.
          (a) a food is not adulterated by reason only that it
               contains mineral oil not exceeding 0.3 per cent if
               good manufacturing practice required its use; and
          (b) chewing gum is not adulterated by reason only
               that it contains a paraffin wax base.

    28. (1) Where the contents of a package of food are Contents of
                                                                   package.
expressed in terms of weight, measure, or number, no variations
below the quantity declared on the label are permitted except,
subject to subregulation (2)—
             (a) variations due exclusively to differences in the
                 capacity of containers resulting solely from
                 unavoidable difficulties in manufacturing; and
             (b) variations in weight, measure, or number that
                 unavoidably result from the ordinary and
                 customary exposure of the package to
                 evaporation, or to the absorption of water, under
                 normal atmospheric conditions.
        (2) Where the contents of a package of food are expressed
in terms of minimum weight, measure, or number, the contents of
the package shall not be less than the minimum expressed.

    29. (1) All information required by this Part to be carried on Display of
                                                                   information on
a label shall be—                                                  label.
              (a) clearly and prominently displayed thereon; and
              (b) readily discernible to the purchaser or
                  consumer under the customary conditions of
                  purchase and use.
         (2) For the purpose of regulation 16(1)(a), a common
name consisting of more than one word shall be deemed to be
clearly and prominently displayed on the main panel of the label
if each word (other than article, conjunction, or preposition) is in
identical type and identically displayed.
        (3) On any label of or in any advertisement of an artificial,
imitation, substitute, or synthetic food, the word “artificial”,

                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

52                Chap. 30:01              Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                            Food and Drugs Regulations


                  “imitation”, “substitute”, “synthetic”, or other appropriate word
                  shall be stated in full, and shall—
                                (a) be an integral part of the name of the food; and
                                (b) be an identical type and be identically displayed
                                     with the name.
                          (4) Where inner and outer labels are employed on a
                  package of food, all label declarations required by this Part shall
                  appear on both the inner and outer labels.
First Schedule.      30. The provisions of the First Schedule shall be read as one
                  with this Part.
Offence.              31. A person who contravenes a provision of this Part is
                  liable on summary conviction to a penalty of three hundred
                  dollars or to imprisonment for three months.

                                           PART III—DRUGS

                                              GENERAL
Definition of        32. In this Part—
terms in Part
III.              “antibiotic” means any of the substances, whether made by the
[94/1969
52/1974].              action of micro-organisms or synthetically, specified in the
                       Schedule to the Antibiotics Act, and includes all compounds
Ch. 30:02.             of, and all medicinal preparations containing any of, such
                       substances;
                  “bulk package” means—
                               (a) a package in which one or more duly labelled
                                   packages of a drug and its contents intended for
                                   retail are placed for the purpose of wholesale;
                               (b) a package containing a drug intended to be sold
                                   by wholesale; or
                               (c) a package containing a drug supplied by a
                                   wholesaler to a pharmacist or dispensary and
                                   intended to be re-packaged by the retailer in
                                   smaller quantities for dispensing or retail, but
                                   does not include packing cases used in import or
                                   export for the protection of drugs;
                  “common name” means, with reference to a drug, the name in
                       English by which the drug is commonly known, or the

                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs              Chap. 30:01               53
                              Food and Drugs Regulations                      [Subsidiary]


     name by which the drug is commonly known in Trinidad
     and Tobago;
“controlled drug” means any of the drugs classified as such in
     Division 2 of the Second Schedule, and includes a preparation; Second
                                                                    Schedule.
“dentist” means a person qualified by law to practise dentistry in
     Trinidad and Tobago;
“expiration date” means the date after which a drug is not
     recommended by the manufacturer for use;
“hospital” means any public hospital or licensed private hospital;
“internal use” means ingestion by mouth or application for
     systemic effect to any part of the body in which the drug
     comes into contact with mucous membrane;
“narcotic drug” means any of the substances specified in the
     Schedule to the Narcotics Control Ordinance;                   *27 of 1961.

“official drug” means any drug for which a standard is provided—
              (a) in this Part; or
              (b) in any of the publications mentioned in the
                  Second Schedule to the Act;                       Second
                                                                    Schedule.
“parenteral use” means administration of a drug by means of a
     hypodermic syringe, needle, or other instrument, through or
     into the skin or mucous membrane; and “parenteral” shall be
     construed accordingly;
“Patent or Proprietary Medicine” means any drug which—
              (a) is intended for internal or external use by man,
                  and the name, composition, or definition of
                  which is not to be found in any of the
                  publications mentioned in the Second Schedule Second
                                                                    Schedule.
                  to the Act, or in any formulary, pharmacopoeia,
                  or publication issued by any official body
                  approved by the Minister; and
              (b) is sold and labelled with a trade name or
                  registered trade mark indicating that the drug is
                  manufactured by a particular person or
                  company; and includes any drug approved as a
                  Patent or Proprietary Medicine by the Pharmacy
                  Board of Trinidad and Tobago;

*Act No. 27 of 1961 was repealed by Act No. 38 of 1991.

                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION                 L.R.O.

                                UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

54             Chap. 30:01            Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                       Food and Drugs Regulations


                “per cent” means per cent by weight unless otherwise stated;
                “pharmacist” means a person who is registered as a member of
                     the Pharmacy Board of Trinidad and Tobago;
                “pharmacy” means an establishment where drugs or devices are
                     dispensed or prepared or sold by retail;
                “physician” means a person who is registered as a member of the
                     Medical Board of Trinidad and Tobago;
Third Schedule. “poisonous drug” means a drug mentioned in the Third Schedule
Ch. 29:52.           to the Pharmacy Board Act;
                “practitioner” means a dentist, physician, or veterinary surgeon;
                “preparation” means a drug that contains in a recognised
                     therapeutic form, a controlled drug and one or more drugs
                     other than controlled drugs;
                “prescription” means a direction given in writing, and dated and
                     signed, by a practitioner, that a stated amount of a drug or
                     mixture of drugs be dispensed for the person named therein;
                “proper name” means with reference to a drug—
                             (a) the name in English that is assigned to the drug
                                 by this Part;
                             (b) the name in English of the drug printed in bold
                                 type in this Part, and, where the drug is
                                 dispensed in a form other than described in this
                                 Part, the name of the dispensing form;
                             (c) the name published by—
                                    (i) the British Pharmacopoeia Commission of
                                        the General Medical Council of the United
                                        Kingdom as the approved name; or
                                   (ii) the Adopted Name Council of the United
                                        States Pharmacopoeial Convention as the
                                        adopted name of the drug; or
                             (d) in the case of a drug not included in paragraph
                                 (a), (b) or (c), the name in English assigned to
Second                           the drug in any of the publications mentioned in
Schedule.
                                 the Second Schedule to the Act; or
                             (e) international non-proprietary names proposed
                                 by the World Health Organisation;

                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                 Chap. 30:01                 55
                       Food and Drugs Regulations                          [Subsidiary]


“Third Schedule drug” means any drug mentioned in the Third Third Schedule.
     Schedule to the Act;
“veterinary drug” means a drug sold for veterinary use, and
     includes a drug supplied on a prescription given by a
     veterinary surgeon;
“veterinary surgeon” means a person who is registered under the
     Veterinary Surgeons (Registration) Act.                    Ch. 67:04.


    33. No person shall sell a drug that is not labelled as required Labelling of
                                                                     drug.
by this Part.

    34. Except as provided in this Part, the label of a drug Contents
                                                                    label.
                                                                             of
shall carry—                                                        [94/1969
            (a) on the main panel of both the inner and the 52/1974].
                outer labels—
                   (i) the proper name and the standard under
                       which the drug was manufactured which,
                       if the standard is contained in any
                       publication mentioned in the Second Second
                                                                    Schedule.
                       Schedule to the Act, shall be stated in full
                       or by the abbreviation therein provided; or
                  (ii) if there is no proper name, the common name;
            (b) on both the inner and outer labels—
                   (i) the name of the manufacturer or
                       distributor of the drug;
                  (ii) the address of the manufacturer or
                       distributor, except that where the
                       immediate container contains five
                       millilitres or less, this statement need not
                       be made on the inner label;
                 (iii) where a drug is intended for internal or
                       parenteral use, the lot number or batch
                       number, the number being preceded by
                       the words “Lot number”, or “Lot”, “Batch
                       Number” or “Batch”, or by an
                       abbreviation of the words “lot” or
                       “batch”, except on labels of Patent or
                       Proprietary Medicines;

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

56              Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                           Food and Drugs Regulations


                                   (iv) adequate directions for use in the
                                         English Language;
                                    (v) the proper name, or, if there is no proper
                                         name, the common name, of each
                                         medicinal ingredient contained therein,
                                         except on official drugs, and Patent or
                                         Proprietary Medicines;
                                   (vi) an expiry date if applicable or if required
                                         by these Regulations; and
                                  (vii) directions as to the type of storage necessary
                                         to maintain the potency, efficacy, safety or
                                         properties of the drug, if applicable or if
                                         required by these Regulations;
                              (c) on the outer label—
                                     (i) a correct statement of net contents in
                                         terms of weight, measure, or number; and
                                    (ii) where the drug is intended for parenteral
                                         use, the name and proportion of any
                                         preservative present therein.
Label on bulk
package.
                   35. The label on the bulk package of any drug shall carry—
[52/1974].                 (a) the proper name and standard under which the
                               drug was manufactured; if the standard is
                               contained in any publication listed in the
Second                         Second Schedule of the Act, the standard
Schedule.
                               shall be stated in full or by the abbreviation
                               provided in the publication;
                           (b) the common name of the drug if there is no
                               proper name;
                           (c) the name and address of the manufacturer or
                               distributor of the drug;
                           (d) the lot number or batch number which shall be
                               preceded by the words “lot number” or “lot”,
                               “batch number”, or “batch” or by an
                               abbreviation of the words “lot” or “batch”
                               where a drug is intended for internal or
                               parenteral use;
                           (e) a correct declaration of net contents in terms of
                               weight, measure or number; and

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                 Chap. 30:01                57
                      Food and Drugs Regulations                          [Subsidiary]


             (f) an expiry date, if applicable or if specified by
                 these Regulations; and may carry—
                    (i) adequate directions for use, in the English
                        language, or a statement of dosages;
                   (ii) directions on the kind of storage required
                        to maintain the potency, efficacy, safety or
                        properties of the drug.

   36. Regulation 34 does not apply—                                Drug sold on
                                                                    prescription.
          (a) to the label of a drug sold on a prescription
               where the label carries—
                  (i) the name and address of the pharmacist
                      or pharmacy;
                 (ii) the date and number of the prescription;
                (iii) adequate directions for use;
                (iv) the name of the person for whom the drug
                      is dispensed or prescribed;
                 (v) the name of the physician, dentist, or
                      veterinary surgeon, issuing the prescription;
                (vi) where the drug is a Third Schedule drug
                      or a controlled drug and unless otherwise
                      directed by the person issuing the
                      prescription, the name of the drug; and
          (b) to the label of a drug packaged from bulk on
               the premises where the drug is retailed, if the
               label carries—
                  (i) the name of the drug; and
                 (ii) the name and address of the pharmacist
                      or pharmacy.

    37. Regulations 34 and 35 do not apply to packing cases used Packing  cases.
                                                                  [52/1974].
for the protection of bulk packages of drugs which are in transit
for the purpose of import or export.

                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

58                  Chap. 30:01              Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations


Name and               38. Notwithstanding regulation 34(b)(v), where a Patent or
proportion of
drug to be stated   Proprietary Medicine contains a narcotic drug, a Third Schedule
on label.
                    drug, or a controlled drug, the name and proportion of such
                    drug shall, subject to regulation 36, be stated on the label.

Label to contain        39. Where a package of a drug has only one label, that label
all information.
                    shall contain all the information required by these Regulations to
                    be shown on both the inner and outer labels.

Information             40. All information required by this Part to be carried on a
clearly and
prominently         label of a drug shall be clearly and prominently displayed
displayed.
                    thereon, and readily discernible to the purchaser or consumer
                    under the customary conditions of purchase or use.

Reference to            41. No reference, direct or indirect, to the Act, to these
drug.
                    Regulations, or to the Ministry of Health, shall be made upon any
                    label or in any advertisement, of a drug unless the reference is a
                    specific requirement of the Act or of these Regulations.
Drug to
conform to
                        42. Where by any law in force in Trinidad and Tobago, a
standard.           standard is prescribed for a drug and that standard is given a
                    name or designation by the law, no person shall use that name or
                    designation on a label, or in any advertisement, of that drug,
                    unless the drug conforms to the standard.

Parenteral,             43. Where it is necessary to provide adequate directions for
Third Schedule
or controlled       the safe use of parenteral drugs, Third Schedule drugs, or
drugs.
                    controlled drugs, that are used in the treatment or prevention of
                    any of the diseases, disorders, or abnormal physical states,
First Schedule.     mentioned in the First Schedule to the Act, the diseases,
                    disorders, or abnormal physical states may be mentioned in the
                    inserts accompanying the drugs, and, to such extent, the drugs are
                    hereby exempted from the provisions of section 4(1) of the Act.

Exemption from          44. A drug when distributed in accordance with section 13(2)
section 4(1).
                    of the Act is hereby exempted from the provisions of section 4(1)
                    of the Act as regards any inserts accompanying the drug.

                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01                59
                      Food and Drugs Regulations                        [Subsidiary]


    45. (1) No person shall sell a drug in the form of a tablet Drug in form of
which is intended to be swallowed whole, unless the tablet tablet.
disintegrates in not more than 60 minutes when tested by the
official method.
        (2) Subregulation (1) does not apply to tablets which are
represented on the label as being enteric coated, or as having
delayed action.

   46. (1) Where the contents of a package of a drug are Variations from
                                                                     declared
expressed in terms of weight, measure, or number, no variations quantity.
from the quantity declared on the label are permitted except,
subject to subregulation (2)—
             (a) variations due exclusively to weighing,
                 measuring, or counting, that occur in packaging
                 conducted in accordance with good commercial
                 practice, which variations are, except where the
                 contents are expressed in terms of number, not
                 to be such that the average content is less than
                 the quantity declared on the label, as determined
                 by the official method;
             (b) variations due exclusively to differences in the
                 capacity of containers resulting solely from
                 unavoidable difficulties in manufacturing;
             (c) variations in weight or measure that unavoidably
                 result from the ordinary and customary exposure of
                 the package to evaporation, or to the absorption of
                 water, under normal atmospheric conditions; and
             (d) where a drug, other than an official drug, consists
                 of several ingredients, the amount of each
                 ingredient so dispensed shall be not less than 90
                 per cent and not more than 110 per cent of the
                 amount calculated from the label description.
         (2) Where the contents of a package of a drug are expressed
in terms of minimum weight, measure or number, the contents of the
package shall not be less than the minimum expressed.


                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

60                 Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations


Caution on label      47. No person shall sell a drug—
of drug.
                              (a) that contains salicylic acid or its salts,
                                  acetylsalicylic acid or its salts, or salicylamide; and
                              (b) that is recommended for children,
                   unless both the inner and the other labels carry a cautionary
                   statement to the effect that the drug is not to be administered to
                   children under two years of age except on the advice of a physician.

Third Schedule         48. No person shall advertise to the general public for human
or a controlled
drug not to be     use a Third Schedule drug or a controlled drug.
advertised.


Prohibition.          49. The importation and sale of Thalidomide is prohibited.

Second                50. The provisions of the Second Schedule shall be read as
Schedule.
                   one with this Part.

Contravention          51. A person who contravenes a provision of this Part is
or non-
compliance with    liable on summary conviction to a penalty of three hundred
Part III.
                   dollars or to imprisonment for three months.

Date                  52. These Regulations have effect from 1st January 1965.
Regulations
became
effective.




                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                          Chap. 30:01                      61
                              Food and Drugs Regulations                                         [Subsidiary]

                               FIRST SCHEDULE                                                   Regulation 30.
                                                                                                [94/1969
                                                                                                53/1972
                    DIVISION 1—BAKING POWDER                                                    105/1974
                                                                                                111/1986
      1. Baking Powder shall be a combination of sodium bicarbonate, an                         72/1996
                                                                                                192/1999
acid-reacting material mentioned in paragraph 2, and starch or other neutral                    199/1999
material, and shall yield not less than 8 per cent of its weight of carbon dioxide              118/2003].
as determined by the official method.

      2. The acid-reacting material of baking powder shall be—
            (a) tartaric acid or its salts or both; or
            (b) acid salts of phosphoric acids.

                     DIVISION 2—FOOD COLOURS
      1. In this Division—
             (a) “pure dye” means the synthetic dye contained in a synthetic
                  food colour;
             (b) “preparation” means a preparation of one or more synthetic
                  food colours containing less than 15 per cent pure dye and
                  sold for household use in containers of two ounces net or less.

      2. (1) A carbonated beverage is adulterated if it contains—
              (a) saccharin and its salts at levels in excess of 300 parts per million either
                  as the sole sweetening agent or in combination with aspartame;
              (b) aspartame and its salts at levels in excess of 0.1 per cent either as
                  the sole sweetening agent or in combination with saccharin; or
              (c) any other synthetic sweetening agent including
                  cyclohexlysulphamic acid and its salts.
          (2) The label on any carbonated beverage containing saccharin at levels
of 300 parts per million and below shall carry statements to the effect that—
              (a) the beverage is a diet drink;
              (b) the beverage is sugar free;
              (c) the beverage is low-calorie and carbonated;
              (d) low-calorie drinks are not recommended for use by children;
              (e) use of the beverage may be hazardous to health.
          (3) The label on any carbonated beverage containing aspartame at
levels of 0.1 per cent and below shall carry statements to the effect that—
              (a) the beverage is a diet drink;
              (b) the beverage is sugar free;
              (c) the beverage is low-calorie and carbonated;
              (d) low-calorie drinks are not recommended for use by children;
              (e) the beverage contains phenylalanine and should not be taken
                  by persons who are suffering from phenylketonuria.


                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                    L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

62             Chap. 30:01                     Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

                     3. No person shall sell a carbonated beverage that contains—
                           (a) saccharin and its salts at levels in excess of 300 parts per
                               million either as the sole sweetening agent or in combination
                               with aspartame;
                           (b) aspartame and its salts at levels in excess of 0.1 per cent
                               either as the sole sweetening agent or in combination with
                               saccharin; or
                           (c) any other synthetic sweetening agent including
                               cyclohexlysulphamic acid and its salts.

                    4. No person shall sell a colour for use in or upon food that contains
               more than—
                          (a) two parts per million of arsenic, calculated as arsenic;
                          (b) ten parts per million of lead, calculated as lead, as determined
                              by the official method; or
                          (c) except in the case of iron oxide, a total of 100 parts per
                              million of iron and copper, calculated as iron and copper,
               and if other heavy metals are present, the colour shall be deemed to be adulterated.

                      5. (1) No person shall import a synthetic food colour or a mixture or
               preparation of synthetic food colours for use in or upon food unless it has been
               certified by the Minister, or by another agency acceptable to the Minister, that
               the synthetic food colour or such mixture or preparation of synthetic food
               colours meets the requirements of paragraph 4, and, if certified by an agency,
               a copy of the certificate has been submitted to and approved by the Minister.
                        (2) For the purposes of subparagraph (1), a synthetic food colour or
               a mixture or preparation of synthetic food colours meets the requirements of
               paragraph 4 if the provisions thereof will not be contravened in a sale of the
               synthetic food colour or the mixture or preparation.

                      6. For the purposes of this Division, the following synthetic food colours
               shall, subject to paragraph 7, be deemed to be approved by the Minister:
                             (a) food colours certified by the Food and Drug Directorate
                                  of Canada;
                             (b) food colours certified by the Food and Drug Administration
                                  of the United States of America;
                             (c) colours permitted for use in food in the United Kingdom;
                             (d) synthetic food dyes approved for use in food by the Food and
                                  Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations and by the
                                  World Health Organisation;
                             (e) synthetic food dyes approved for use in food by the
                                  Australian Commonwealth Food Additives Committee.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  63
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                   [Subsidiary]

     7. Notwithstanding paragraphs 2, 3 and 6, the Minister may, on the
advice of the Food Advisory Committee, withdraw, by notice published in the
Gazette, approval with respect to any food colour which is toxic or capable of
producing toxic effects; and on publication of any such notice, paragraphs 2,
3 and 6 shall cease to apply with respect to that food colour.

                  DIVISION 3—DAIRY PRODUCTS
      1. The foods referred to in this Division are included within the term
“dairy product”.

      2. Except as provided in this Division, a dairy product that contains a fat
other than milk fat is adulterated.
                                     MILK
      3. Milk or (Whole Milk) shall be the normal lacteal secretion obtained
from the mammary gland of the cow, genus Bos, and shall be free from
colostrum, and shall contain—
            (a) not less than 3.0 per cent of milk fat;
            (b) not less than 8.5 per cent of milk solids not fat; and
            (c) not more than 20 parts per million of dirt.
 By dirt is meant all matter insoluble in, and foreign to, milk as it leaves the
cow’s udder.
 The milk from animals other than bovine species shall be given a designation
appropriate to its source.

     4. Milk Products shall be products of which the components are
exclusively derived from milk, and may contain added substances necessary
for manufacture or intended to enrich the natural vitamins and salts in the
products if these added substances do not replace, either completely or partly,
any constituent whatsoever of milk.

      5. Reconstituted Milk shall be labelled as such, and shall be a milk
product resulting from the combining of milk constituents with water, and
shall contain not less than—
             (a) 3.0 per cent of milk fat; and
             (b) 8.5 per cent of milk solids not fat.

     6. Milk Fat or Butter Fat shall be the fat of cow’s milk, and shall have—
           (a) a specific gravity of not less than 0.905 at a temperature of 40°C.;
           (b) a Reichert-Meissl number not less than 24; and
           (c) a Polenske number not exceeding 10 per cent of the Reichert-Meissl
               number, and in no case shall the Polenske number exceed 3.5; and


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

64             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

               where the Polenske number exceeds 10 per cent of the Reichert-Meissl
               number, there shall be deemed to have been an addition to the milk fat of fat
               other than that of cow’s milk.

                     7. Sterilised Milk shall be milk, or a milk product, that has been heated
               to a temperature of at least 100°C. for a length of time sufficient to kill all the
               organisms present, and shall be delivered to the consumer in hermetically
               sealed containers, and shall contain not less than—
                            (a) 3 per cent of milk fat; and
                            (b) 8.5 per cent of milk solids not fat.

                    8. Flavoured Sterilised Milk shall be sterilised milk with cocoa,
               chocolate, or a flavouring preparation and shall contain not less than—
                            (a) 2.5 per cent of milk fat; and
                            (b) 8.5 per cent of milk solids not fat,
               and may contain stabiliser and sugar.

                    9. Condensed Milk or Sweetened Condensed Milk shall be milk, or a
               milk product, from which water has been evaporated and to which sugar has
               been added, and shall contain not less than—
                           (a) 28 per cent of milk solids; and
                           (b) 8 per cent of milk fat,
               and may contain added vitamin D.

                    10. Evaporated Milk or Unsweetened Condensed Milk shall be milk,
               or a milk product, from which water has been evaporated, and shall contain not
               less than—
                            (a) 25.0 per cent of milk solids;
                            (b) 7.5 per cent of milk fat;
               and may contain—
                          (c) added vitamin D;
                          (d) disodium phosphate, or sodium citrate, or both, added in a
                              total quantity of not more than 0.1 per cent of the finished
                              product.

                   11. Skim Milk (Skimmed Milk) shall be milk from which all or most of
               the milk fat has been removed.

                  12. Milk Powder, Dry Milk, Dry Whole Milk, Powdered Milk or
               Powdered Whole Milk shall be dried milk, and shall contain not less than—
                         (a) 95 per cent of milk solids; and
                         (b) 26 per cent of milk fat,
               and may contain added vitamin D.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                       www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                    Chap. 30:01                  65
                         Food and Drugs Regulations                               [Subsidiary]

     13. Skim (Skimmed) Milk Powder, Dry Skim (Skimmed) Milk or
Powdered Skim (Skimmed) Milk shall be dried skim milk and shall contain
not less than 95 per cent of milk solids, and may contain added vitamin D.

    14. Partly Skimmed Milk Powder, or Half Cream Milk Powder shall
be dried milk and shall contain not less than—
             (a) 95 per cent of milk solids; and
             (b) 13 per cent of milk fat.

    15. Quarter Cream Milk Powder shall be dried milk not being either
dry whole milk or half cream milk powder and shall contain not less than—
           (a) 95.0 per cent of milk solids; and
           (b) 8.0 per cent of milk fat.

    16. Pasteurised Milk shall be milk that has been pasteurised as in
paragraph 18 and shall be delivered to the consumer in suitable capped or
sealed containers.

    17. No milk or milk product shall be labelled “Pasteurised” unless it has
been treated in the manner described in paragraph 18.

    18. (1) For the purposes of this Division—
“pasteurisation” means the process of heating every particle of milk or milk
    products either—
             (a) to a temperature of not less than 62.8°C. (145°F.) holding it
                 at such temperature for a period of not less than 30 minutes,
                 cooling it immediately thereafter to a temperature of 10.0°C.
                 (50°F.) or lower; or
             (b) to a temperature of not less than 71.7°C. (161°F.) holding it
                 at such temperature for a period of not less than 15 seconds,
                 cooling it immediately thereafter to a temperature of 10.0°C.
                 (50°F.) or lower; and
“pasteurised” shall be construed accordingly.
        (2) Pasteurisation shall be carried out under conditions of processing
approved by the Director.

    19. Butter shall be the food, prepared by gathering the milk fat of milk
or cream into a mass that may also contain a portion of the other milk
constituents not separated in good manufacturing practice, and shall contain—
             (a) not less than 80 per cent of milk fat; and
             (b) not more than 16 per cent of moisture,
and may contain salt and food colour.


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION                            L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

66             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                   20. Cooking Butter shall be labelled as such, and shall be butter
               prepared as described in paragraph 19, and shall contain—
                            (a) not less than 80 per cent of milk fat; and
                            (b) not more than 12 per cent of salt; and
                            (c) not more than 0.25 per cent of free fatty acids expressed as
                                butyric acid, and may contain food colour.

                  21. Ghee shall contain not less than 98 per cent of milk fat, without any
               admixture of other fat.

                   22. Ice Cream shall be the frozen food made from milk or milk products
               and sweetened with sugar, and shall contain not less than—
                           (a) 8 per cent of fat;
                           (b) 36 per cent of solids;
                           (c) 7.5 per cent of milk solids not fat;
                           (d) 1.8 pounds of solids per Imperial gallon;
               and may contain—
                          (e) edible oil or fat;
                           (f) egg;
                          (g) flavouring preparation;
                          (h) cocoa or chocolate syrup;
                           (i) food colour;
                           (j) acid-reducing salts;
                          (k) fruit, nuts, confections; and
                           (l) stabilisers comprising—
                                   (i) not more than 1.0 per cent of gelatin alone; or
                                  (ii) not more than 0.5 per cent of other stabiliser; or
                                 (iii) not more than 0.75 per cent of a mixture of gelatin and
                                       other stabilisers, of which the proportion of other
                                       stabilisers may not exceed 0.25 per cent.

                   23. No person shall sell ice cream in which the complete mixture has not
               been pre-treated or pasteurised immediately before freezing in accordance
               with conditions approved by the Director.
                 For the purpose of this paragraph, “pre-treated” means that the complete
               mixture shall be brought to the boil and cooled in a covered container.

                    24. Dairy Ice Cream shall be ice cream as defined in paragraph 22
               except that all the fat therein shall be milk fat only, except such traces as may
               be introduced by the use as an ingredient of any egg, any flavouring substance
               or any emulsifying or stabilising agent.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                   67
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                  [Subsidiary]

    25. Ultra Heat Treated Milk, or U.H.T. Milk, shall be milk that has
been heated at a temperature of 132.2°C. (270°F.) for a period of not less than
one second. The following requirements shall be satisfied in its processing:
            (a) any apparatus in which the milk is to be heated to and maintained
                  at a temperature of not less than 132.2°C. (270°F.) shall be
                  provided with a device which shall automatically divert the flow
                  of any milk which is not raised to the authorised temperature;
            (b) any indicating and recording thermometers as the Director
                  shall reasonably consider necessary shall be installed in
                  suitable places in the apparatus in which the milk is treated
                  by the ultra high temperature method so as to indicate the
                  temperatures to which the milk is heated;
            (c) the records of recording thermometers shall be marked with
                  graduations of 2°F., adequately spaced to give clear readings,
                  and they shall be dated and shall be preserved for a period of
                  not less than three months;
            (d) a sample of milk taken in accordance with the official method
                  from a batch of milk after treatment by the ultra high
                  temperature method and before delivery to the consumer shall
                  satisfy the colony count test prescribed in the official method;
             (e) milk which is treated by the ultra high temperature method shall
                  immediately after the treatment be put into sterile containers in
                  which it is to be supplied to the consumer. The containers shall
                  be filled and sealed at the premises at which the treatment has
                  been carried out with such aseptic precautions as will ensure the
                  protection of the milk from risk of contamination;
             (f) every container in which milk treated by the ultra high
                  temperature method is transported, exposed or offered for sale
                  shall be so closed and securely fastened, either with a cap over-
                  lapping the lip of the container or in some other suitable
                  manner approved by the Director, that the container is airtight;
            (g) every cap closing a container of milk treated by the ultra high
                  temperature method shall be conspicuously and legibly labelled
                  and marked with the words “Ultra Heat Treated Milk” or
                  “U.H.T. Milk”, and shall also bear the name and address of the
                  person by whom the milk was put into the container, and,
                  except with the approval of the Director, the cap shall bear no
                  other words. If there is no cap on which the words and the name
                  and address of such person can suitably be marked, they shall
                  be marked within a surrounding line in a prominent position on
                  the container, and except with the approval of the Director, no
                  other words shall be placed within the surrounding line.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

68             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                            DIVISION 4—EDIBLE OILS AND FATS
                    1. Cooking Oil or Edible Oil shall be a refined product of coconut oil,
               and shall contain not more than 0.08 per cent of acid expressed as lauric acid,
               and may contain such other oil as may be approved by the Minister.

                     2. Cooking Butter Substitute or Cooking Margarine shall be labelled
               as such, and shall contain—
                            (a) not less than 80 per cent of fat; and
                            (b) not more than 12 per cent of salt; and
               may contain food colour, preservative and added vitamins.

                    3. Margarine shall be labelled as such and shall contain not less than 80
               per cent of fat, and may contain food colour, preservative, salt, and added
               vitamins.

                     4. Phalka Ghee, Ghee Substitute or Vegetable Ghee shall contain not
               less than 98 per cent of fat other than animal fat.

                    5. Olive Oil shall be the oil of the fruit of the olive tree and shall have—
                          (a) a specific gravity at 20°/20°C. of not less than 0.910 and not
                               more than 0.918;
                          (b) a refractive index at 40°C. of between 1.4605 and 1.4635;
                           (c) an Iodine value (Hanus) of not less than 78 and not more than
                               88; and
                          (d) a saponification value of not less than 185 and not more
                               than 195.

                    6. Vegetable Fats and Oils shall be obtained entirely from the botanical
               source after which they are named, and shall be prepared or processed so as to
               be dry and sweet in flavour and odour, and may contain Class IV preservative.

                     7. Animal Fats and Oils shall be obtained entirely from animals
               healthy at the time of slaughter, and shall be prepared or processed so as to be
               dry and sweet in flavour and odour, and may contain Class IV preservative.

                    8. Soya Bean Oil or Soybean Oil shall be the oil derived from soya
               beans [the seeds of Glycine max (L.) Merr.] and shall have—
                            (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                                   (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                                       than 0.919 and not more than 0.925;
                                  (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.466
                                       and 1.470;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                   69
                         Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

                  (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 120 and not
                        more than 143;
                  (iv) a saponification value of not less than 189 and not
                       more than 195 mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                   (v) a maximum of 1.5 per cent of unsaponifiable matter; and
            (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                    (i) the colour, odour, and taste shall be characteristic of
                        soyabean oil with no foreign or rancid odour or taste;
                   (ii) the maximum acid value shall be 0.6 mg. KOH per
                        gram of oil;
                  (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                        equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil.

     9. Peanut Oil, Groundnut Oil, or Arachis Oil shall be the oil derived
from groundnuts ( the seeds of Arachis hypogaea L.) and shall have—
            (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                   (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                       than 0.914 and not more than 0.917;
                  (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.460
                       and 1.465;
                  (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 80 and not more
                        than 106;
                  (iv) a saponification value of not less than 187 and not
                       more than 196 mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                   (v) a maximum of 1.0 per cent of unsaponifiable matter; and
            (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                   (i) the colour, odour, and taste shall be characteristic of
                       groundnut oil, with no foreign or rancid odour or taste;
                  (ii) the acid value shall not be greater than 4.0 mg. KOH
                       per gram of virgin groundnut oil or greater than
                       0.6 mg. KOH per gram of non-virgin groundnut oil;
                  (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                        equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil;
                  (iv) the minimum percentage of arachidic and higher fatty
                       acids shall be 4.8 per cent when determined by an
                       acceptable method.


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

70             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

                   10. Edible Cottonseed Oil shall be the oil derived from the seeds of
               various cultivated species of Gossypium and shall have—
                            (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                                    (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                                        than 0.918 and not more than 0.926;
                                   (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.458
                                        and 1.466;
                                  (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 99 and not more
                                        than 119;
                                  (iv) a saponification value of not less than 189 and not
                                        more than 198mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                                   (v) a maximum of 1.5 per cent of unsaponifiable matter;
                                  (vi) a positive Halphen test; and
                            (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                                    (i) the colour, odour, and taste shall be characteristic of
                                        edible cottonseed oil, with no foreign or rancid odour
                                        or taste;
                                   (ii) the maximum acid value shall be 0.6 mg. KOH per
                                        gram of oil;
                                  (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                                        equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil.

                   11. Edible Sunflower Seed Oil (or Sunflower Oil or Sunflowerseed
               Oil) shall be the oil derived from sunflower seeds (the seeds of Helianthus
               annuus. L.) and shall have—
                            (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                                    (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                                        than 0.918 and not more than 0.923;
                                   (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.467
                                        and 1.469;
                                  (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 110 and not
                                        more than 143;
                                  (iv) a saponification value of not less than 188 and not
                                        more than 194 mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                                   (v) a maximum of 1.5 per cent of unsaponifiable matter;
                            (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                                    (i) the colour, taste, and odour shall be characteristic of
                                        edible sunflowerseed oil, with no foreign or rancid odour
                                        or taste;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  71
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                   [Subsidiary]

                     (ii) the acid value shall not be greater than 4.0 mg. KOH
                          per gram of virgin sunflowerseed oil, or greater
                          than 0.6 mg. KOH per gram of non-virgin
                          sunflowerseed oil;
                    (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                          equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil.

    12. Rapeseed Oil (or Rape Oil, or Colza Oil, or Ravison Oil or Sarson
Oil) shall be the oil derived from the seeds of Brassica campestris L., Brassica
napus L., and Brassica tournefortii Gouan., and shall have—
              (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                       (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                           than 0.910 and not more than 0.920;
                      (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.465
                           and 1.469;
                    (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 94 and not more
                           than 120;
                     (iv) a saponification value of not less than 168 and not
                           more than 181 mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                      (v) a maximum of 2.0 per cent of unsaponifiable matter;
                     (vi) a Crismer Value of not less than 80 and not more than
                           85; and
              (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                       (i) the colour, taste, and odour shall be characteristic of
                           rapeseed oil, with no foreign or rancid odour or taste;
                      (ii) the acid value shall be not greater than 4.0 mg. KOH
                           per gram of virgin rapeseed oil, or not greater than
                           0.6 mg. KOH per gram of non-virgin rapeseed oil;
                    (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                           equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil.

     13. Maize Oil (or Corn Oil) shall be the oil derived from maize germ
(the embryos of Zea mays L.) and shall have—
            (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                    (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                        than 0.917 and not more than 0.925;
                   (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.465
                        and 1.468;
                  (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 103 and not
                        more than 128;
                  (iv) a saponification value of not less than 187 and not
                        more than 195 mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                   (v) a maximum of 2.8 per cent of unsaponifiable
                        matter; and


                                      UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

72             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

                            (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                                    (i) the colour, odour, and flavour shall be characteristic of
                                        maize oil, with no foreign or rancid odour or taste;
                                   (ii) the acid value shall be not greater than 4.0 mg. KOH
                                        per gram of virgin maize oil, or not greater than 0.6
                                        mg. KOH per gram of non-virgin maize oil;
                                  (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                                        equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil.

                   14. Sesameseed Oil (or Sesame Oil, or Benne Oil or Ben Oil, or
               Gingelly Oil, or Till Oil) shall be the oil derived from sesame seeds ( the
               seeds of Sesamum indicum L.) and shall have—
                            (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                                    (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                                        than 0.915 and not more than 0.923;
                                   (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.465
                                        and 1.469;
                                  (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 104 and not
                                        more than 120;
                                  (iv) a saponification value of not less than 187 and not
                                        more than 195 mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                                   (v) a maximum of 2.0 per cent of unsaponifiable matter;
                                  (vi) a positive Baudouin test; and
                            (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                                    (i) the colour, odour and flavour shall be characteristic of
                                        sesameseed oil, with no foreign or rancid odour or taste;
                                   (ii) the acid value shall be not greater than 4.0 mg. KOH
                                        per gram of virgin sesameseed oil, or not greater than
                                        0.6 mg. KOH per gram of non-virgin sesameseed oil;
                                  (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                                        equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil.

                    15. Safflowerseed oil (or Safflower oil, or Carthamus Oil or Kurdee
               Oil) shall be the oil derived from safflowerseeds (the seeds of Carthamus
               tinctorius L.) and shall have—
                            (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                                    (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                                        than 0.922 and not more than 0.927;
                                   (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.467
                                        and 1.470;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  73
                         Food and Drugs Regulations                                  [Subsidiary]

                  (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 135 and not
                        more than 150;
                  (iv) a saponification value of not less than 186 and not
                       more than 198 mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                   (v) a maximum of 1.5 per cent of unsaponifiable
                       matter; and
            (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                   (i) the colour, odour and flavour shall be characteristic of
                       safflowerseed oil, with no foreign or rancid odour
                       or taste;
                  (ii) the maximum acid value shall be 0.6 mg. KOH per
                       gram of safflowerseed oil;
                  (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                        equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil.

    16. Mustardseed Oil (or Mustard Oil) shall be the oil derived from the
seeds of the white mustard (Sinapis alba L. synonym Brassica hirta Moench.),
the brown mustard (Brassica juncea L. Czern. and Coss.), and of the black
mustard (Brassica nigra L. Koch.) and shall have—
            (a) the following characteristics of identity:
                   (i) a density at 20°C. relative to water at 20°C. of not less
                       than 0.910 and not more than 0.921;
                  (ii) a refractive index at 40°C. (nD40ºC.) between 1.461
                       and 1.469;
                  (iii) an iodine value (Wijs) of not less than 92 and not more
                        than 125;
                  (iv) a saponification value of not less than 170 and not
                       more than 184 mg. KOH per gram of oil;
                   (v) a maximum of 1.5 per cent of unsaponifiable matter;
                  (vi) a maximum of 0.4 per cent of allyl isothiocyanate, as
                       determined by an acceptable method; and
            (b) the following characteristics of quality:
                   (i) the colour, odour and flavour shall be characteristic of
                       mustardseed oil, with no foreign or rancid odour or taste;
                  (ii) the acid value shall be not greater than 4.0 mg. KOH
                       per gram of virgin mustardseed oil, or not greater than
                       0.6 mg. KOH per gram of non-virgin mustardseed oil;


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

74             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

                                  (iii) the maximum peroxide value shall be 10.0 milli-
                                        equivalents of oxygen per kilogram of oil.

                        DIVISION 5—FLAVOURING PREPARATIONS
                     1. A flavouring extract or essence shall be a solution in ethyl alcohol,
               glycerol, or propylene glycol, or any combination of these, of sapid or odorous
               principles, or both, and shall be derived from the plant after which the
               flavouring extract or essence is named, and may contain—
                            (a) water;
                            (b) a sweetening agent;
                            (c) food colour; and
                            (d) a Class II or Class IV preservative.

                     2. Where a flavouring extract or essence is mixed with other flavouring
               extracts or essences, the label shall carry a statement of the names of all the
               extracts or essences so mixed and each of those names shall be deemed to
               comprise the name of the extract or essence.

                     3. An artificial, imitation, substitute, or synthetic flavouring extract or
               essence shall be a flavouring extract or essence except that the flavouring
               principles shall be derived in whole, or in part, from sources other than the
               aromatic plant after which it is named.

                    DIVISION 6—POISONOUS SUBSTANCES IN FOOD
                    1. No person shall sell any food in a container that may yield to its contents
               any substance that may be injurious to the health of a consumer of the food.

                     2. Except as otherwise provided, a food named in the Table herein set
               forth, which contains in or upon it—
                            (a) any or all of the poisonous or harmful substances listed in the
                                Table in amounts not exceeding the quantities stated therein
                                in parts per million (p.p.m.) for that food, as determined by
                                an acceptable method; and either
                            (b) no other poisonous or harmful substances; or
                            (c) other poisonous or harmful substances in amounts not
                                considered by the Minister likely to be injurious to health,
               is hereby exempted from the provision of section 5(a) of the Act.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                    75
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                  [Subsidiary]


                                                           SUBSTANCE
                      FOOD
                                                  Arsenic Lead    Copper      Zinc
                                                  p.p.m. p.p.m.   p.p.m.     p.p.m.

Citric Acid …         …         …      …      …     1      10       50         50
Tartaric Acid         …         …      …      …     1      10       50         50
Cream of Tartar       …         …      …      …     2      20       50         50
Sodium Bicarbonate …            …      …      …     2       5       50         50
Baking Powder         …         …      …      …     2      10       50         50
PhosphoricAcid        …         …      …      …     4       5       30         30
Calcium Phosphate …             …      …      …     4       5       30         30
Sodium, Potassium and Ammonium Phosphates     …     4       5       30         30
Sodium and Potassium Nitrates …        …      …     1      10       50         50
Sodium Nitrite        …         …      …      …     1      20       50         50
Marine and Fresh Water Animal Products …      …     5      10      100        100
Fresh Fruits          …         …      …      …     2       7       50         50
Fresh Vegetables      …         …      …      …     1       2       50         50
Gelatin     …         …         …      …      …     2       7       30        100
Gelling agents except Gelatin   …      …      …     2      20       50        200
Dried Herbs and Spices          …      …      …     5      10       50         50
Apple Juice, Cider, Wine and Beer      …      …     0.2     0.5      2          5
Fruit Juice except Apple Juice  …      …      …     0.1     0.2      2          5
Beverages …           …         …      …      …     0.1     0.2      2          5
Tea         …         …         …      …      …     1      10      150         50


     3. Except as otherwise provided, a food not named in the Table to
paragraph 2 which contains in or upon it—
            (a) not more than—
                    (i) one part per million of arsenic;
                   (ii) two parts per million of lead;
                 (iii) twenty parts per million of copper; or
                  (iv) fifty parts per million of zinc, as determined by an
                        acceptable method and either;
            (b) no other poisonous or harmful substances; or
            (c) other poisonous or harmful substances in amounts not
                considered by the Minister likely to be injurious to health,
is hereby exempted from the provision of section 5(a) of the Act.

                   DIVISION 7—PRESERVATIVES
      1. For the purposes of this Division—
             (a) Class I preservatives comprise the following:
                    (i) ethyl alcohol;
                   (ii) ascorbic acid, iso-ascorbic acid, and their salts;
                  (iii) glucose;


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

76             Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Food and Drugs Regulations

                              (iv) potassium nitrate;
                               (v) common salt;
                              (vi) sodium nitrate;
                             (vii) sodium nitrate in preserved meat only, in an amount not
                                    exceeding 200 parts per million of the finished product;
                            (viii) spices;
                              (ix) cane sugar;
                               (x) vinegar;
                              (xi) wood smoke;
                             (xii) nisin in canned foods, provided that the cans are
                                    hermetically sealed and the foods sufficiently heat
                                    processed so as to destroy any clostridium botulinum
                                    in the foods or cans, or nisin in canned foods with a PH
                                    of less than 4.5, or in cheese clotted cream;
                        (b) Class II preservatives comprise the following:
                                (i) benzoic acid, including salts thereof;
                               (ii) sulphurous acid, including salts thereof;
                              (iii) sorbic acid, including salts thereof;
                              (iv) methyl para-hydroxybenzoate;
                               (v) propyl para-hydroxybenzoate;
                        (c) Class III preservatives comprise the following:
                                (i) propionic acid, including salts thereof;
                               (ii) sodium diacetate;
                              (iii) sorbic acid, including salts thereof;
                        (d) Class IV preservatives comprise the following, whether used
                            with or without a harmless carrier:
                                (i) gum guaiacum;
                               (ii) vegetable oils containing tocopherols;
                              (iii) lecithin;
                              (iv) citric, tartaric, or ascorbic acid;
                               (v) monoisopropyl citrate;
                              (vi) ascorbyl palmitate;
                             (vii) n-propyl gallate, or n-octyl gallate, or n-dodecyl
                                    gallate;
                            (viii) nordihydroguaiaretic acid;
                              (ix) butylated hydroxyanisole;
                               (x) butylated hydroxytoluene.


                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                  77
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                [Subsidiary]

      2. Where any Class II, Class III, or Class IV preservative is sold for use
as a preservative for food, the label shall carry adequate directions for use in
accordance with the limits prescribed for the preservative in this Division.

     3. Notwithstanding regulation 16(1)(b)—
           (a) no label declaration is required for the presence of
               sulphurous acid or its salts in or upon the following:
                   (i) sweetening agents;
                  (ii) beer and stout;
                 (iii) syrups;
                 (iv) wine;
                  (v) confectionery; and
           (b) no label declaration is required for the presence of a Class III
               preservative, in or upon the following:
                   (i) bakery products;
                  (ii) cheese.

     4. No person shall use as a preservative in or upon food, or sell as a
preservative for food, any substance other than Class I, Class II, Class III or
Class IV preservatives.

     5. No person shall sell—
           (a) benzoic acid or its salts;
           (b) sulphurous acid or its salts;
           (c) n-propyl gallate, n-octyl gallate or n-dodecyl gallate;
           (d) butylated hydroxyanisole;
           (e) nordihydroguaiaretic acid;
            (f) butylated hydroxytoluene;
           (g) methyl para-hydroxybenzoate;
           (h) propyl para-hydroxybenzoate;
            (i) nisin,
for use as a preservative for food, unless the label carries a quantitative
statement of the amounts of the preservative present.

     6. No person shall use in or upon a food more than one Class II
preservative.

     7. No person shall use in or upon a food, more than—
           (a) 1,000 parts per million of benzoic acid or its salts, calculated
               as benzoic acid;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                             L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

78             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                            (b) 1,000 parts per million of sorbic acid or its salts,
                                calculated as sorbic acid;
                            (c) 1,000 parts per million of methyl para-hydroxybenzoate; or
                            (d) 1,000 parts per million of methyl para-hydroxybenzoate.

                     8. Except as provided in this Division, no person shall use sulphurous
               acid or its salts, calculated as sulphur dioxide, in amounts greater than—
                             (a) 100 parts per million in beverages as prepared for consumption;
                             (b) 2,500 parts per million in or upon dried fruits and
                                   vegetables; or
                             (c) 500 parts per million in or upon other foods.

                    9. No person shall use in or upon a food, more than—
                          (a) 2,000 parts per million of propionic acid or its salts,
                              calculated as propionic acid;
                          (b) 3,000 parts per million of sodium diacetate; or
                          (c) 1,000 parts per million of sorbic acid or its salts, calculated
                              as sorbic acid.

                    10. No person shall use in or upon a food, Class IV preservatives, singly
               or in combination, including the carrier, in an amount greater than 0.2 per cent
               of the finished product.

                   11. No person shall use in or upon a food more than—
                          (a) 0.01 per cent of n-propyl gallate, n-octyl gallate, or n-dodecyl
                              gallate;
                          (b) 0.01 per cent of nordihydroguaiaretic acid;
                          (c) 0.02 per cent of butylated hydroxyanisole;
                          (d) 0.02 per cent of butylated hydroxytoluene; or
                          (e) 0.02 per cent of a combination of not more than three of the
                              Class IV preservatives listed in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c)
                              and (d).

                   12. No person shall use in or upon a food a combination of
               nordihydroguaiaretic acid and n-propyl gallate or n-octyl gallate or
               n-dodecyl gallate.

                  DIVISION 8—VINEGAR AND DILUTE ACETIC ACID
                                 (FOOD GRADE)
                     1. Vinegar shall be the liquid obtained by the acetous fermentation of
               an alcoholic liquid, and subject to paragraph 7, shall contain not less than 4.0
               per cent nor more than 12.0 per cent of acetic acid.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  79
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

     2. Wine Vinegar shall be vinegar made from wine, and may contain caramel.

       3. Spirit Vinegar or Alcohol Vinegar, Distilled Molasses Vinegar,
White Vinegar or Grain Vinegar shall be vinegar made from diluted
distilled alcohol.

       4. Malt Vinegar shall be vinegar made from an infusion of malt undistilled
prior to acetous fermentation, and may contain other cereals and caramel.

      5. Cider Vinegar or Apple Vinegar shall be vinegar made from the
liquid expressed from apples, and may contain caramel.

      6. If any reference is made to the strength of a vinegar by any statement,
mark, or device on the label of or in any advertisement of a vinegar, the label
shall carry a statement of the strength of the vinegar declared in per cent, and
the strength of the vinegar shall be calculated in terms of acetic acid.

      7. The maximum limit for the acetic acid content of vinegar does
not apply to vinegar sold for manufacturing use only, if the vinegar is so
identified by the use of the words, “For Manufacturing Use Only” on the label
of the package.

      8. Solutions of acetic acid prepared by diluting concentrated or glacial
acetic acid with water, with or without the addition of food colour or other
material, shall not be sold in any package bearing on the label the word
“Vinegar” or the words “Salad Dressing” or any other word or words which
may lead the purchaser to believe that the contents consist either wholly or in
part of vinegar as defined in paragraph 1.

      9. Solutions of acetic acid prepared as described in paragraph 8 shall,
subject to paragraph 10, be labelled “Dilute Acetic Acid (Food Grade)”
and shall contain not less than 4.0 per cent, nor more than 12.0 per cent of
acetic acid.

    10. Paragraph 9 does not apply to the preparation and sale in registered
pharmacies of acetic acid solutions for medicinal purposes.

                    DIVISION 9—FRUIT JUICES
     1. Canned Fruit Juice shall be the unfermented liquid expressed from
sound, ripe, fresh fruit, and may contain—
             (a) sweetening agent; and
             (b) a Class II preservative,
and shall be packed in hermetically sealed metal containers.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

80             Chap. 30:01                   Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                    2. Canned Grapefruit Juice shall be the fruit juice obtained from
               grapefruit, and shall contain, in 100 millilitres measured at a temperature
               of 20ºC.—
                            (a) not less than 9.5 grams of soluble solids before addition of
                                any sweetening agent;
                            (b) not less than 0.3 grams of ash; and
                            (c) not less than 1.0 gram and not more than 2.2 grams of acid
                                calculated as anhydrous citric acid,
               and shall be packed in hermetically sealed metal containers.

                    3. Canned Orange Juice shall be the fruit juice obtained from oranges,
               and shall contain in 100 millilitres measured at a temperature of 20°C.—
                            (a) not less than 10 grams of soluble solids before addition of
                                any sweetening agent;
                            (b) not less than 0.4 grams of ash; and
                            (c) not less than 0.5 grams and not more than 1.9 grams of acid
                                calculated as anhydrous citric acid,
               and shall be packed in hermetically sealed metal containers.

                    4. The label of canned fruit juice shall carry a declaration by name of
               any added sweetening agent.

                                       DIVISION 10—COFFEE
                    1. Green Coffee, Raw Coffee or Unroasted Coffee shall be the seed of
               Coffea arabica L., C. liberica Hiern., or C. robusta chev., freed from all but a
               small portion of its spermoderm.

                     2. Coffee (Roasted Coffee) shall be roasted green coffee, and
               shall contain—
                            (a) no other added or extraneous matter, except added sugar to
                                the extent of not more than 10 per cent;
                            (b) not more than 6 per cent of total ash;
                            (c) not more than 25 per cent of water-soluble extract before
                                addition of any sugar, as determined by an acceptable method.

                     3. Instant Coffee shall be a dried, aqueous extract of pure coffee, and
               may contain such added carbohydrate material as may be found necessary or
               desirable for good manufacturing practice.

                     4. Notwithstanding regulation 17, no person shall sell any coffee
               containing added sugar in a package unless the package is distinctly labelled
               with the words “contains added sugar”.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  81
                         Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

          DIVISION 11—SYNTHETIC SWEETENERS
      1. For the purpose of this Division, “synthetic sweetener” means a low
calorie non-nutritive sweetener which provides little or no energy while
having a high intensity sweetening purpose.

    2. Subject to paragraph 3, the following synthetic sweeteners shall be
deemed to be approved by the Minister:
           (a) synthetic sweeteners certified by the Food and Drug
                Directorate of Canada;
           (b) synthetic sweeteners certified by the Food and Drug
                Administration of the United States of America;
            (c) synthetic sweeteners certified for use by the European Union;
           (d) synthetic sweeteners approved for use in food by the Food
                and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations and by
                the World Health Organisation; and
            (e) synthetic sweeteners approved by the Codex Alimentaries
                Commission.

     3. (1) The Minister may on his own or on the advice of the Food and
Advisory Committee withdraw the approval with respect to any synthetic
sweetener which may be hazardous to health.
        (2) A withdrawal under subregulation (1) shall be by Notice
published in the Gazette.
        (3) Where a Notice has been published with respect to a synthetic
sweetener under these Regulations, an approval with respect to that synthetic
sweetener shall cease.
        (4) The Minister may, on the advice of the Food Advisory
Committee stipulate the proportions and conditions for any synthetic
sweetener for use in any food.
         (5) For the purpose of this Division “carbonated beverage” means a
non-alcoholic beverage that is impregnated with carbon dioxide under
pressure and is package for sale in hermetically sealed containers.
        (6) A carbonated beverage is adulterated if it contains—
            (a) saccharin and salts at levels in excess of 300 parts per million
                either as a sole sweetener or in combination with any other
                synthetic sweetener(s);
            (b) aspartame at levels in excess of 1000 parts per million either
                as a sole sweetener or in combination with any other
                synthetic sweetener(s);


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

82             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                            (c) acesulfame potassium at levels in excess of 350 parts per
                                million either as a sole sweetener or in combination with any
                                other synthetic sweetener(s);
                            (d) sucralose at levels in excess of 250 parts per million either as
                                a sole sweetener or in combination with any other synthetic
                                sweetener(s); or
                            (e) any other synthetic sweetener or any combination of
                                synthetic sweetener(s) not approved by the Minister.

                      4. (1) The label on any carbonated beverage containing saccharin and
               its salts at levels of 300 parts per million and below either as a sole sweetener
               or in combination with any other synthetic sweetener(s) shall carry statements
               to the effect that—
                              (a) the beverage is a diet drink;
                              (b) the beverage is sugar free; and
                              (c) the beverage is low-calorie and carbonated.
                        (2) The label on any carbonated beverage containing aspartame—
                            (a) at levels of 1000 parts per million and below either as a sole
                                sweetener or in combination with any other synthetic
                                sweetener(s) shall carry statements to the effect that—
                                    (i) the beverage is a diet drink;
                                   (ii) the beverage is sugar free; and
                                  (iii) the beverage is low-calorie and carbonated;
                            (b) shall carry a statement to the effect that the beverage contains
                                phenylalanine and should not be taken by persons who are
                                suffering from phenylketonuria.
                         (3) The label on any carbonated beverage containing acesulfame
               potassium at levels 350 parts per million and below either as a sole sweetener
               or in combination with any other synthetic sweetener(s) shall carry statements
               to the effect that—
                             (a) the beverage is a diet drink;
                             (b) the beverage is sugar free; and
                             (c) the beverage is low-calorie and carbonated.
                        (4) The label on any carbonated beverage containing sucralose at levels
               250 parts per million and below either as a sole sweetener or in combination with
               any other synthetic sweetener(s) shall carry statements to the effect that—
                            (a) the beverage is a diet drink;
                            (b) the beverage is sugar free; and
                             (c) the beverage is low-calorie and carbonated low-calorie
                                 drinks are not recommended for use by children.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                  83
                         Food and Drugs Regulations                                [Subsidiary]

     5. No person shall set a carbonated beverage that contains—
           (a) saccharin and its salts at levels in excess of 300 parts per
               million either as a sole synthetic sweetener or in combination
               with any other synthetic sweetener(s);
           (b) apartame at levels in excess of 1000 parts per million as the
               sole sweetening agent or in combination with any other
               synthetic sweetener(s);
           (c) acesulfame potassium at levels in excess of 350 parts per
               million either as a sole synthetic sweetener or in combination
               with any other synthetic sweetener(s);
           (d) sucralose at levels in excess of 250 parts per million either as
               the sole sweetening agent or in combination with any other
               synthetic sweetener(s); or
           (e) any other synthetics sweetener or any combination of
               synthetic sweetener(s) not approved by the Minister.

     DIVISION 12—GRAIN AND BAKERY PRODUCTS
  Flour (White Flour)—
          (a) shall be the food prepared by the grinding and bolting
               through cloth having openings not larger than those of woven
               wire cloth designation “149 microns (No. 100)”, of cleaned
               milling grades of wheat;
          (b) shall be free from bran coat and germ to such extent that the
               percentage of ash therein, calculated on a moisture-free
               basis, does not exceed 1.20 per cent;
          (c) shall have a moisture content of not more than 15 per cent; and
          (d) may contain—
                   (i) malted wheat flour;
                  (ii) malted barley flour in an amount not exceeding 0.50
                       per cent of the weight of the flour;
                 (iii) such other harmless additives as are approved by the
                       Director;
          (e) shall contain in a harmless carrier in one pound of flour—
                   (i) not less than 2.0 mg., and not more than 2.5 mg., of
                       thiamine;
                  (ii) not less than 1.2 mg., and not more than 1.5 mg., of
                       riboflavin;
                 (iii) not less than 13.0 mg., and not more than 16.5 mg., of
                       iron; and
                 (iv) not less than 500 mg., and not more than 650 mg.,
                       of calcium;
           (f) and shall be free from the additive Potassium Bromate.


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION                             L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

84             Chap. 30:01                     Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

                       DIVISION 13—MEAT AND PROCESSED MEAT
                     1. In this Division—
               “accepted method” means any commonly accepted practice used by the
                   various ethnic and religious groups in Trinidad and Tobago or any
                   officially recognised practice for killing animals for the purpose of food;
               “animal” means any animal used as food, but does not include marine or fresh
                   water animals;
               “filler” means—
                            (a) flour or meal prepared from grain, or from other farinaceous
                                edible vegetable (excluding legumes);
                            (b) bread, biscuits, or bakery products, excluding those made
                                with legumes;
                            (c) milk powder, skim milk powder, butter milk powder, or
                                whey powder;
               “type” means the common name denoting the animals from which the food
                   was derived, such as beef, veal, pork, lamb, mutton, goat, poultry and
                   other common names.

                      2. Meat shall be the edible part of the skeletal muscle of an animal
               which was healthy at the time of slaughter, or muscle that is found in the
               tongue, heart or oesophagus, with or without the accompanying and overlying
               fat, together with the portions of bone, skin, sinew, nerve and blood vessels
               that normally accompany the muscle tissue and are not separated from it in the
               lips, snout, scalp or ears.

                     3. Meat By-product shall be any edible part of an animal, other than
               meat, that has been derived from one or more animals, which were healthy at
               the time of slaughter.

                    4. Prepared Meat, or Prepared Meat By-Product shall be meat or
               meat by-product respectively whether comminuted or not, to which has been
               added any other ingredient permitted by these Regulations, or which has been
               preserved, canned or cooked.

                     5. Meat, meat by-product or preparations thereof, are adulterated if any
               of the following substances or class of substance is present therein, or has been
               added thereto:
                            (a) mucous membranes, any organ or portion of the genital system,
                                 black gut, spleens, udders, lungs, or any other organs or portions
                                 of an animal that are not commonly sold as an article of food;
                            (b) preservatives, other than Class I preservatives;
                            (c) colour other than caramel.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                       www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                    Chap. 30:01                  85
                         Food and Drugs Regulations                               [Subsidiary]

     6. A food that consists wholly or in part of a meat by-product or a
prepared meat by-product shall be labelled with—
           (a) the words “meat by-product”; and
           (b) the name of the meat by-product.

      7. The carcass or any part thereof of an animal used for food shall be
obtained from an animal killed by an accepted method.

      8. No animal shall be used for food which was affected with disease at
the time it was killed.

      9. No person shall sell as food the carcass of an animal or any part
thereof that was not killed by an accepted method, or of an animal that was
affected with disease at the time it was killed.

    10. No person shall sell as food, meat, meat by-products, preparations
containing meat and meat derivatives obtained, prepared, or manufactured
from the carcass of an animal that was not killed by an accepted method, or
from an animal that was affected with disease at the time it was killed.

    11. Where meat, meat by-product, or preparations thereof are derived
from an animal killed by an accepted method associated with a religious or
ethnic group, the food shall be labelled appropriately—
            (a) “Halal”, for animals killed by the method accepted by the
                 religion of Islam;
            (b) “Kosher”, for animals killed by the method accepted by the
                 Jewish religion.

    12. Minced (naming the type) Meat or Ground (naming the type)
Meat shall be a comminuted (naming the type) meat preparation, and shall
contain not more than 30 per cent of fat, which shall be comprised of fat
normally adherent to the meat used, and when the preparation is represented
as being lean, it shall contain less than 18 per cent of fat.

    13. The preparation known in Trinidad and Tobago as “saw-dust” shall
not be sold as minced or ground meat.

    14. Sausage or Sausage Meat shall be comminuted meat, either fresh or
preserved, with added salt and spices, and may contain—
            (a) animal fat, filler, beef, tripe, liver and fresh animal blood;
            (b) carbohydrate sweetener;
            (c) other seasonings (except tomato);
            (d) harmless lactobacilli cultures;
            (e) lactic acid starter culture (Pediococcus cerevisiae);
             (f) blood plasma,


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION                            L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

86             Chap. 30:01                   Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

               and may be enclosed in a casing, with or without subsequent dipping in
               vinegar, smoking or cooking.

                   15. Pre-packaged sausages and sausage meats shall be labelled with the
               type or types of meat that have been used in their manufacture.

                   16. No person shall sell sausages or sausage meats which contain—
                          (a) less than 75 per cent of meat, as determined by the official
                              method;
                          (b) more than 25 per cent of the meat content in the form of fat,
                              as determined by the official method;
                          (c) a total viable bacterial count of 500,000 micro-organisms per
                              gram, as determined by an acceptable method; or        .
                          (d) any pathogenic micro-organisms.

                   17. Notwithstanding paragraphs 15, 16(a) and 16(b), Low Meat (naming
               the type) Sausages that contain—
                           (a) less than 75 per cent meat, but not less than 40 per cent
                               meat; and
                           (b) proteinaceous substances such as skim milk powder, butter
                               milk powder, whey powder, soya bean flour, fish protein
                               concentrate, and other proteins approved by the Minister on
                               the advice of the Food Advisory Committee;
               may be sold if—
                           (c) the total protein content of the sausage as determined by the
                               official method, is equal to that corresponding to 75 per cent
                               meat, of the type named;
                           (d) the percentage of fat is not greater than 18 per cent as
                               determined by the official method; and
                           (e) the sausages are labelled “Low Meat (naming the type)
                               Sausage with added Protein” and the type of protein added
                               is named on the label.

                   18. Notwithstanding paragraphs 16(a), 16(b) and 17, Sausages Canned in
               Broth, Brine or a Liquid Medium shall contain—
                           (a) not less than 55 per cent of meat, as determined by the
                                official method;
                           (b) not more than 18 per cent of the meat content in the form of
                                fat, as determined by the official method; and
                            (c) not less than 10 per cent of digestible protein, as determined
                                by the official method.


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  87
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                  [Subsidiary]

    DIVISION 14—JAMS, JELLIES AND MARMALADES
     1. In this Division
“acid ingredient” means citric acid, malic acid, fumaric acid, L-tartaric acid,
    vinegar, lime juice or lemon juice;
“fruit” means all fruits commonly recognised as human food, and includes
     ginger, melon, tomato, and rhubarb, but does not include cucumber,
     chestnut, pumpkin or squash;
“fruit content” means the percentage by weight of the final product which is
     represented by the total weight of the prepared fruit used for processing;
“prepared fruit” means—
             (a) in relation to jams and marmalades—
                    (i) fruit, sound, fresh, freed from stems, calices and seeds
                         (where seeds are not customarily included in the jam
                         or marmalade); or
                   (ii) the prepared fruit used in making any fruit pulp or
                         puree used in processing to jam or marmalade; and
             (b) in relation to jellies, the strained fruit juice or nectar used in
                 processing jellies.

      2. (Naming the Fruit)—Jam shall be the food prepared by processing
the edible parts of the fruit named, the pulp of the fruit named, or the preserved
named fruit, by boiling with water and sugar to a suitable consistency and shall
contain not less than 66 per cent of water-soluble solids as estimated by the
refractometer at 20°C. and may contain—
             (a) that amount of added pectin and acid ingredient that
                  reasonably compensates for any deficiency in the natural
                  pectin content or natural acidity of the named fruit; and
             (b) Class II preservatives.

      3. (Naming the Citrus Fruit)—Marmalade shall be the food of jelly-
like consistency prepared by boiling together the peel, juice or pulp of the
named citrus fruit with sugar and water, and shall contain not less than 65 per
cent of water-soluble solids as estimated by the refractometer at 20°C., and
may contain—
             (a) the amount of pectin or acid ingredient which reasonably
                 compensates for any deficiency of the natural acidity or
                 natural pectin content of the named citrus fruit; and
             (b) Class II preservatives.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

88             Chap. 30:01                     Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

                     4. (Naming the Fruit)—Jelly shall be the gelatinous food, free of seeds
               and pulp, prepared from the named fruit, the juice of the named fruit, a concentrate
               of the juice of the named fruit, or canned or frozen juice, which has been boiled
               with water and sugar, and shall contain not less than 65 per cent of water-soluble
               solids as estimated by the refractometer at 20°C., and may contain—
                             (a) that amount of added pectin and acid ingredient that
                                  reasonably compensates for any deficiency in the natural
                                  pectin content or natural acidity of the named fruit; and
                             (b) Class II preservatives.

                     5. No jam, jelly or marmalade shall contain artificial flavour, or any
               gelling agents other than pectin.

                    6. Synthetic food colours may only be used as additives in jams, jellies
               and marmalades made from pineapples, apples or limes.

                     7. Prepared fruit for preparing jams and marmalades may be used in the
               form of fruit-pulp or puree which has been canned, frozen, pasteurised, dried,
               freeze-dried, or preserved with sulphur dioxide.

                   8. (1) Subject to subparagraph (2), the fruit content of jams, jellies and
               marmalades shall be stated on the label of every container thereof.
                        (2) Where the fruit content of jams, jellies or marmalades is greater
               than or equal to the following standard values for the named fruit products, the
               word “Standard”, instead of the fruit content thereof, may be used on the label
               of the container—
                  Apple jelly …          …        …       … 45 per cent fruit content
                  Apricot jam …          …        …       … 40 per cent fruit content
                  Guava jam …            …        …       … 45 per cent fruit content
                  Guava jelly …          …        …       … 45 per cent fruit content
                  Lime marmalade         …        …       … 30 per cent fruit content
                  Mixed orange and grapefruit marmalade… 30 per cent fruit content
                  Mixed raspberry and strawberry jam … 40 per cent fruit content
                  Orange jelly…          …        …       … 30 per cent fruit content
                  Orange marmalade …              …       … 30 per cent fruit content
                  Pineapple jam…         …        …       … 45 per cent fruit content
                  Pineapple jelly…       …        …       … 45 per cent fruit content
                  Raspberry jam…         …        …       … 45 per cent fruit content
                  Strawberry jam         …        …       … 35 per cent fruit content


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                  89
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                [Subsidiary]

     9. Jams, jellies and marmalades may contain the following optional
ingredients:
             (a) herbs, spices;
             (b) essential oils;
             (c) alcoholic beverages;
             (d) butter, margarine, or edible vegetable oils added as anti-
                 foaming agents during preparation; or
             (e) caramel.

     10. In preparing jams, jellies and marmalades, dextrose, invert sugar,
glucose syrup, dried glucose syrup, or honey may be used in addition to sugar
in accordance with good manufacturing practices.

     11. Food additives used in preparing jams, jellies and marmalades,
including—
         anti-foaming agents;
         essential oils;
         firming agents;
         natural fruit flavouring preparations;
         pH adjusting agents;
         synthetic food colours,
shall be approved by the Director, shall meet specifications accepted or
recommended by the Director, and shall be used in such proportions as are
recognised as being in conformity with good manufacturing practice, or as
indicated by the Director.

     12. Jams and jellies manufactured from tropical fruits (other than citrus
fruits) and intended for export to countries other than the Caribbean Islands or
Guyana shall conform—
              (a) to the standards of the importing country; or where no such
                  standards exist;
              (b) to any standard adopted by the Codex Alimentarius
                  Commission for jams or jellies which is not lower than the
                  appropriate standard specified in paragraph 8(2).

     13. The provisions of this Division do not apply to cranberry jelly, fruit
curd, mincemeat, mint jelly, or to jams, jellies and marmalades containing
synthetic sweetening agents, which are labelled with a statement that they are
intended for use by diabetics, or with the word “Diabetic”.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                             L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

90             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                            DIVISION 15—SWEETENING AGENTS
                     1. Honey is the sweet substance produced by honey bees (Apis
               mellifica) mainly from the nectars of flowers and blossoms, other sweet
               exudations from living plants, and other wholesome sweet substances which
               the bee might naturally collect in the course of its foraging, and shall contain—
                           (a) not more than 23 per cent of moisture;
                           (b) not more than 8 per cent of sucrose;
                            (c) not more than 0.25 per cent of ash.

Ch. 67:53.           2. Notwithstanding regulations 58(a) and 64 of the Beekeeping and
Sub. Leg.      Bee Products Regulations, the net contents of tin or glass containers of less
               than ten pounds capacity containing honey shall be marked as required by
               these Regulations.

                     3. The registered number of the apiary shall be declared in accordance
               with the Beekeeping and Bee Products Regulations on the main panel of
               the label.

                 DIVISION 16—LABELLING OF FOOD TO BE USED IN
                               MARKETING TESTS
                     1. The Director may issue a letter of authorisation, authorising the sale
               of a quantity of food for the purpose of test marketing within a specified area
               and for a specified period stated in the letter of authorisation if—
                            (a) the manufacturer or distributor of the food has supplied to the
                                 Director the following information:
                                     (i) the purpose for which test marketing of the food is
                                         required;
                                    (ii) a description of any proposed variation from the
                                         standard of composition and labelling requirements;
                                   (iii) a description of the food including a sample and label;
                                   (iv) adequate data to show that the use of the food will not
                                         be detrimental to the health of the purchaser or user;
                                    (v) the quantity of the food to be distributed;
                                   (vi) the period of time required for the distribution;
                                  (vii) the areas designated for the distribution; and
                                 (viii) such other data as the Director may require; and
                            (b) the manufacturer or distributor of the food has agreed—
                                     (i) to describe the food on a label or in an advertisement
                                         in a manner that is not false, misleading or deceptive;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  91
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

                    (ii) to use such marks or statements on the label as the
                         Director may require;
                   (iii) to submit to the Director the results of the test
                         marketing, if requested to do so by the Director;
                   (iv) to withdraw the food from sale, if notified that in the
                         opinion of the Director, it is in the public interest to
                         do so.

     2. The Director shall, in any letter of authorisation issued pursuant to
paragraph 1, state—
            (a) the common name of the food to be sold or freely distributed;
            (b) the name and address of the manufacturer or distributor who
                 intends to distribute the food;
             (c) the quantity of the food to be distributed;
            (d) the period of time permitted for the distribution; and
             (e) the area designated for the distribution.

      3. A manufacturer or distributor named in a letter of authorisation
issued pursuant to paragraph 1, may within the period of time permitted for the
distribution sell or freely distribute a quantity of a food named and described
in that letter that does not exceed the quantity specified therein.

      4. A sale of a food made in accordance with paragraph 3 is exempt from
the provisions of the Act and of these Regulations relating to labelling, except
in so far as the Director may require under paragraph 1(b)(ii).

                       DIVISION 17—KETCHUP

      1. Tomato Ketchup, Tomato Catsup, Tomato Catchup or a food, the
common name of which is a variant of the word “catsup”, (hereinafter referred
to as “tomato ketchup”) shall—
             (a) be prepared from juice, paste or puree derived from clean,
                 sound, ripe tomatoes of a red or reddish variety, from which
                 the skins and seeds have been removed;
             (b) be processed by heat; and
             (c) contain—
                     (i) vinegar;
                    (ii) food grade salt;
                   (iii) seasonings and spices; and
                   (iv) sweetening agents.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

92             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                    2. (1) A grade may be declared for tomato ketchup.
                      (2) Where the grade is declared, tomato ketchup shall be labelled
               “Premium Grade” or “Standard Grade”, as the case may be.
                        (3) Tomato ketchup labelled “Premium Grade” shall have—
                            (a) tomatoes in solid form which amount to not less than 12 per
                                cent by weight;
                            (b) a total of solids which amounts to not less than 33 per cent by
                                weight; and
                            (c) a pH value not exceeding 4.0.
                        (4) Tomato ketchup labelled “Standard Grade” shall have—
                            (a) tomatoes in solid form which amount to not less than 6 per
                                cent but less than 12 per cent by weight;
                            (b) a total of solids which amounts to not less than 25 per cent
                                but less than 33 per cent by weight; and
                            (c) a pH value not exceeding 4.0.
                       (5) A Class II preservative and thickening agents may be used in
               tomato ketchup labelled “Standard Grade”.
                       (6) Whether or not a grade is declared, tomato ketchup shall be of a
               grade which is not less than that specified for “Standard Grade” in
               subparagraph (4).

                     3. Tomato Ketchup shall have no natural or artificial colour, except for
               the colour imparted by tomatoes.

                      4. (1) (Naming the Vegetable or Fruit) Ketchup, Catsup, Catchup or a
               food, the common name of which is a variant of the word “catsup”, [hereinafter
               referred to as “(Naming the Vegetable or Fruit) ketchup”] shall—
                              (a) be prepared from a vegetable, fruit or both;
                              (b) be processed by heat;
                              (c) contain—
                                     (i) vinegar;
                                    (ii) food grade salt;
                                   (iii) seasonings and spices; and
                                   (iv) sweetening agents; and
                              (d) have—
                                     (i) a total of solids which amounts to not less than 25 per
                                         cent by weight; and
                                    (ii) a pH value not exceeding 4.0.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  93
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

         (2) (Naming the Vegetable or Fruit) ketchup may contain—
             (a) food colour;
             (b) a Class II preservative;
             (c) thickening agents; and
             (d) tomatoes or tomato products as one of its secondary
                 ingredients.

      5. (1) The mould count for ketchup shall not exceed 40 per cent
positive microscope fields as determined by the Howard Method.
         (2) Yeast cells present in ketchup shall be non-viable.

       6. Ketchup shall be free from fly eggs and maggots, except for Drosophila
fly, in the case of which, there shall not be more than twenty eggs and one larva
or ten eggs and two larvae of Drosophila fly, per 100 grams of ketchup.

                DIVISION 18—IRRADIATED FOOD
     1. Irradiated food shall be food which—
            (a) has been subjected to safe levels of ionising and non-ionising
                 radiation; or
            (b) contains an ingredient which has been subjected to safe
                 levels of ionising and non-ionising radiation.

     2. Sources of irradiation for food shall include—
           (a) X-rays from sources operated at energy levels of up to 5MeV;
           (b) gamma rays from the radionuclides 60Co and 137Cs only,
               operated at energy levels of up to 5MeV;
           (c) electrons from sources operated at energy levels of up to
               10MeV; and
           (d) ultra violet radiation operated between the wavelengths 220
               and 300 nm, where 90 per cent of the radiation consists of the
               wavelength 254 nm.

     3. The average dose absorbed by a food or ingredient which has been
subjected to irradiation shall not exceed—
             (a) 45 kGy, for sterile foods;
             (b) 10 kGy, for dried herbs and spices;
             (c) 3 kGy, for fresh poultry and poultry products;
             (d) 7 kGy, for frozen poultry and poultry products;
             (e) 4.5 kGy, for fresh red meats;
              (f) 7 kGy, for frozen red meats;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

94             Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                            (g) 3 kGy, for seafoods;
                            (h) 2 kGy, for fresh fruits and vegetables;
                             (i) 1 kGy, for bulbs and tubers; and
                             (j) 1 kGy, for cereals and grains,
               where measured by an acceptable method.

                    4. Where re-irradiation of food or an ingredient is necessary, the total
               average dose absorbed shall not exceed the levels set out in paragraph 3.

                    5. A package of irradiated food shall carry the international irradiation
               symbol, the radura and a statement such as “Food Irradiated”, “Irradiated”,
               “Treated with Irradiation” or “Treated by Irradiation” in close proximity to
               the symbol.

                     6. (1) Shipping documents in respect of irradiated food, including a bill
               of lading and an invoice, shall state the location and date of the treatment, the
               average dose absorbed and a lot number.
                        (2) The importer, manufacturer or distributor of irradiated food shall
               retain the shipping documents for a minimum period of one year from the
               expiry date of the food.

                    7. A package used for holding food during irradiation shall be—
                           (a) cellophane, coated with nitrocellulose or with vinylidene
                                chloride copolymer;
                           (b) glassine paper;
                           (c) paperboard coated with wax;
                           (d) uncoated polyolefin films;
                           (e) polyolefin films with a coating consisting of acrylonitrile,
                                acrylic acid, taconic acid, methyl acrylate and methyl
                                methacrylate and not less than 85 per cent vinylidene chloride;
                            (f) kraft paper derived from unbleached sulphate pulp;
                           (g) polyethylene terephthalate film;
                           (h) polystyrene film;
                            (i) rubber hydrochloride film;
                            (j) vinylidene chloride-vinyl chloride basic copolymers,
                                consisting of not less than 70 per cent vinylidene chloride;
                           (k) nylon 11;
                            (l) nylon 6; or
                          (m) ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers.

                    8. This Division shall not apply to treatments by microwave.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                            Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                 95
                        Food and Drugs Regulations                               [Subsidiary]

             DIVISION 19—FOOD GRADE SALT
    1. This Division shall apply to salt to be used as food.

    2. Food Grade salt shall—
          (a) be white, crystalline, sodium chloride prepared from rock
              salt, seawater or natural brine;
          (b) contain not less than 97 per cent sodium chloride, calculated
              on a dry weight basis, exclusive of food additives;
          (c) contain not less than 99 per cent sodium chloride calculated
              on a dry weight basis, when sold as pure vacuum salt; and
          (d) have a loss on drying, of not more than 0.5 per cent by weight.

    3. (1) Food grade salt may contain the food additives specified below—
           (a) anticaking agents, that is—
                   (i) any of the following coating agents:
                       (A) calcium carbonate;
                       (B) magnesium carbonate;
                       (C) tri-calcium phosphate;
                       (D) amorphous silicon dioxide;
                        (E) calcium alumino-silicate;
                        (F) magnesium alumino-silicate;
                       (G) sodium alumino-silicate;
                       (H) sodium calcium alumino-silicate; or
                         (I) magnesium oxide;
                  (ii) any of the following hydrophobic agents:
                       (A) aluminium salts of myristic acid, palmitic acid or
                             stearic acid;
                       (B) calcium salts of myristic acid, palmitic acid or
                             stearic acid;
                       (C) magnesium salts of myristic acid, palmitic acid
                             or stearic acid;
                       (D) potassium salts of myristic acid, palmitic acid or
                             stearic acid; or
                        (E) sodium salts of myristic acid, palmitic acid or
                             stearic acid; or
                 (iii) any of the following crystal modifiers:
                       (A) calcium ferrocyanide;
                       (B) potassium ferrocyanide; or
                       (C) sodium ferrocyanide,
               in an amount not exceeding 0.0010 per cent by weight,
               calculated as ferrocyanide.


                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                            L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

96             Chap. 30:01                   Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                            (b) nutrients, that is—
                                   (i) sodium fluoride in an amount not less than 0.015 per
                                       cent by weight and not more than 0.02 per cent by
                                       weight; and
                                  (ii) potassium iodide in an amount not less than 0.006 per
                                       cent by weight and not more than 0.01 per cent by
                                       weight;
                            (c) propylene glycol in an amount not exceeding 0.03 per cent by
                                weight;
                            (d) ferric ammonium citrate in an amount not exceeding 0.0025
                                per cent by weight;
                            (e) polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan mono-oleate in an amount not
                                exceeding 0.0010 per cent by weight, for the production of
                                coarse crystal salt only;
                            (f) sodium alginate in an amount not exceeding 0.0015 per cent
                                by weight, for the production of coarse crystal salt only;
                            (g) dimethyl polysiloxane in an amount not exceeding 0.0010
                                per cent by weight;
                            (h) polysorbate 80; and
                            (i) any other additives approved by the Director.
                       (2) Where coating agents and hydrophobic agents are used singly or
               in combination, the total amount used shall not exceed 2 per cent by weight.
                         (3) Notwithstanding subparagraph (1)(a)(iii), where ferrocyanide is
               used in the production of dendritic salt, the amount shall not exceed 0.0020 per
               cent by weight, calculated as ferrocyanide.

                    4. Naturally occurring contaminants of food grade salt shall not exceed—
                            (a) 0.5 parts per million of arsenic, calculated as arsenic;
                            (b) 0.5 parts per million of cadmium, calculated as cadmium;
                            (c) 2 parts per million of copper, calculated as copper;
                            (d) 16 parts per million of iron, calculated as iron;
                            (e) 2 parts per million of lead, calculated as lead;
                            (f) 0.1 parts per million of mercury, calculated as mercury;
                            (g) 2 per cent of total calcium and magnesium, calculated as
                                calcium; and
                            (h) 0.3 per cent extraneous matter by weight.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  97
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

     5. (1) Rock salt shall be crude rock salt or halite obtained from the
mining of salt.
         (2) Solar salt shall be salt prepared by the solar evaporation of sea
water or natural brine.
         (3) Granulated salt shall be salt prepared by the vacuum
evaporation of purified brine.
         (4) Table salt shall be fine, crystalline salt which may contain
anticaking agents, crystal modifiers, iodine and fluorine.
        (5) Coarse crystal salt shall be salt to which food additives have
been added to produce coarse crystals of sodium chloride.
         (6) Dendritic salt shall be salt which has had its crystal habit altered
by incorporating sodium ferrocyanide in the brine during vacuum evaporation.
         (7) Flake salt shall be salt produced by the Grainer process in which
the crystals are modified without the use of chemical additives.

     6. The label on a package of food grade salt shall carry the statement—
           (a) “Food grade salt” or “Table salt”;
           (b) “Iodized”, where it contains potassium iodide with or
                without dextrose, sodium bicarbonate or sodium
                thiosulphate, at the levels set out in paragraph 4(1)(b);
           (c) “Fluoridated”, where it contains levels of sodium fluoride set
                out in paragraph 4(1)(b); and
           (d) “Free flowing”, where anticaking agents are used.

              DIVISION 20—BREWERY PRODUCTS

     1. In this Division—
“hop” means the ripened cones of the female hop plant, humulus lupulus and
    includes hop extract, hop pellets and pre-isomerised hop extract;
“hop extract” means an extract prepared from the female hop plant in
    accordance with paragraph 11(1);
“hop pellets” means pellets produced from the female hop plant in accordance
    with paragraph 11(2) and (3);
“pre-isomerised hop extract” or “pre-isomerised hop pellets” means an extract
    or hop pellets, as the case may be, prepared from the female hop plant in
    accordance with paragraph 11(4);
“sugar” means any saccharine substance, saccharine extract or saccharine syrup;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                       www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

98             Chap. 30:01                  Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                            Food and Drugs Regulations

               “wort” means any extract or solution convertible into beer;
               “yeast” means saccharomyces cerevisiae or saccharomyces carlsbergensis.

                    2. Ale shall be a beverage produced by the fermentation by yeast, of a
               wort, to which other ingredients may have been added and which has been
               brewed in such a manner as to have the aroma, flavour and other
               characteristics that are commonly recognised in ale.

                    3. Beer shall be a beverage produced by the fermentation by yeast, of a
               wort, to which other ingredients may have been added and which has been
               brewed in such a manner as to have the aroma, flavour and other
               characteristics that are commonly recognised in beer.

                     4. Lager or Lager beer shall be a beverage produced by the
               fermentation by yeast, of a wort, which has been stored at cold temperatures
               during clarification and maturation and brewed in such a manner as to have the
               aroma, flavour and other characteristics that are commonly recognised in lager
               or lager beer.

                    5. Malta shall be a beverage produced by combining wort, sugar, hops
               and carbon dioxide, to which yeast flavour or other flavour may have been
               added, which has the aroma, flavour and other characteristics that are
               commonly recognised in malta but which has no alcoholic content by volume
               when measured by an acceptable method.

                     6. Malt liquor shall be a beverage produced by the fermentation by
               yeast, of a wort, to which other ingredients may have been added and which
               has been brewed in such a manner as to have the aroma, flavour and other
               characteristics that are commonly recognised in malt liquor.

                    7. Milk stout shall be a stout to which lactose has been added.

                    8. Porter shall be a beverage produced by the fermentation by yeast, of
               a wort, to which other ingredients may have been added and which has been
               brewed in such a manner as to have the aroma, flavour and other
               characteristics that are commonly recognised in porter.

                    9. (1) Shandy shall be a beverage containing bright beer, shandy
               concentrate, sugar, carbon dioxide and water.
                        (2) Shandy shall not contain more than 1.2 per cent alcoholic
               content by volume.


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                Food and Drugs                       Chap. 30:01                  99
                            Food and Drugs Regulations                                   [Subsidiary]

    10. Stout shall be a beverage produced by the fermentation by yeast, of
a wort, to which other ingredients may have been added and which has been
brewed in such a manner as to have the aroma, flavour and other
characteristics that are commonly recognised in stout.

     11. (1) Hop extract to be used in a brewery product shall be produced by—
             (a) a process in which carbon dioxide or ethanol is used as a
                   solvent in accordance with good manufacturing practice; or
             (b) any other method approved by the Director.
         (2) Hop pellets to be used in a brewery product shall be produced by
hammering or milling hops to a fine powder, running the powder through a high
pressure pelletising disc and cooling and vaccum-packing the resulting pellets.
         (3) No additives shall be used in producing hop pellets.
         (4) Pre-isomerised hop extract or pre-isomerised hop pellets to be used
in a brewery product shall be produced by using carbon dioxide or ethanol from
which the alpha-acids have been isolated and isomerised with dilute acid and heat.

     12. (1) Near beer, non-alcoholic beer, non-alcoholic ale, non-alcoholic
stout or non-alcoholic porter, as the case may be, shall be a brewery product
which has an alcoholic content by volume of 0.5 per cent or less.
          (2) Low alcohol beer, low alcohol ale, low alcohol stout or low alcohol
porter, as the case may be, shall be a brewery product which has an alcoholic content
by volume of more than 0.5 per cent but not more than 1.2 per cent.
          (3) Extra light beer, extra light ale, extra light stout or extra light
porter, as the case may be, shall be a brewery product which has an alcoholic
content by volume of more than 1.2 per cent but not more than 2.5 per cent.
          (4) Light beer, light ale, light stout or light porter, as the case may
be, shall be a brewery product which has an alcoholic content by volume of
more than 2.5 per cent but not more than 4.0 per cent.
          (5) Ale, beer, stout or porter, as the case may be, shall be a brewery
product which has an alcoholic content by volume of more than 4.0 per cent but
not more than 5.5 per cent.
          (6) Strong beer, strong ale, strong stout, strong porter or malt
liquor, as the case may be, shall be a brewery product which has an alcoholic
content by volume of more than 5.5 per cent but not more than 8.5 per cent.
          (7) Extra strong beer, extra strong ale, extra strong stout, extra strong
porter or extra strong malt liquor, as the case may be, shall be a brewery product
which has an alcoholic content by volume of more than 8.5 per cent.




                                      UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

100            Chap. 30:01                   Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations


Regulation.                             SECOND SCHEDULE
[130/1964
94/1969                   DIVISION 1—THIRD SCHEDULE DRUGS
49/1987].
                    1. No person shall sell a Third Schedule drug unless he has received a
               prescription therefor; and the prescription shall show—
                            (a) the name and address of the person for whom the drug may
                                 be dispensed;
                            (b) the name and quantity of the drug specified therein;
                            (c) the directions for use given therewith;
                            (d) the date of the prescription; and
                            (e) the signature of the practitioner, who issued the prescription,
               and where the signature is not known to the dispenser of the prescription, the
               signature shall be first verified by him.

                     2. A record of every prescription for a Third Schedule drug shall be
               retained by the dispenser thereof for a period of at least two years, and
               shall show—
                           (a) the name and address of the person named in the prescription;
                           (b) the name and quantity of the drug specified therein;
                           (c) the name of the practitioner who issued the prescription;
                           (d) the date and number of the prescription;
                           (e) the directions for use given therewith.

                    3. No person shall refill a prescription for a Third Schedule drug unless
               the practitioner so directs on the prescription, and specifies the number of
               times that the same may be refilled.

                    4. No person other than—
                          (a) a practitioner;
                          (b) a drug manufacturer;
                          (c) an importer, wholesaler, jobber, or agent, dealing in drugs;
                          (d) a pharmacist; or
                          (e) a resident of a foreign country while a visitor in Trinidad and
                              Tobago shall import a Third Schedule drug.

                    5. The provisions of paragraph 1 do not apply to the sale of a Third
               Schedule drug to—
                           (a) a drug manufacturer;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                       www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                    Chap. 30:01                101
                         Food and Drugs Regulations                               [Subsidiary]

            (b) a practitioner;
            (c) an importer, wholesaler, jobber, or agent, dealing in drugs;
            (d) a pharmacist;
            (e) a hospital; or
             (f) any Department of the Government upon an order signed by
                 the Minister thereof or his duly authorised representative.

      6. The provisions of paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4, do not apply to a drug Third Schedule.
listed or described in Part II of the Third Schedule to the Act, if—             Part II.

              (a) the drug is in a form not suitable for human use; or
              (b) the main panel of both the inner and the outer labels carries,
                  immediately preceding or following the proprietary, brand,
                  proper, or common name of the drug, the words “ Agricultural
                  Use Only”, or “Veterinary Drug”, or “Veterinary Use Only”,
                  or “Not for Human Use”, or some other form of words
                  indicating that the drug is not to be used in treating humans.

     7. The Minister may, on the advice of the Drug Advisory Committee,
add any new drug to the Third Schedule.

      8. The Minister may, on the advice of the Drug Advisory Committee,
add any drug to the Third Schedule where experience of its use has revealed Third Schedule.
that there may be a danger to the public health, if the use of that drug without
medical advice is allowed to continue.

     9. The addition of a drug to the Third Schedule shall be published by
Notice in the Gazette, and the addition shall be effective from the date of
publication of the Notice.

                  DIVISION 2—CONTROLLED DRUGS
     1. In this Division—
“controlled drug” means any of the drugs classified as such in paragraph 2 and
    includes a preparation;
“licence” means a licence issued under paragraph 5;
“licensed dealer” means a medical practitioner, pharmacist or the holder of a
     licence;
“permit” means a permit issued under paragraph 5;
“preparation” means a drug—
            (a) that contains more than 5 per cent of barbituric acid or any
                derivative thereof or any salt thereof; or


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION                            L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

102            Chap. 30:01                  Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                            Food and Drugs Regulations

                           (b) that contains a controlled drug and one or more other drugs,
               in a recognised therapeutic form;
               “written order” means an order given in writing, and dated and signed by a
                   person to whom a licensed dealer is permitted to sell or supply a
                   controlled drug pursuant to a written order.

                     2. For the purposes of this Division the following substances and their
               salts are classified as controlled drugs:
                              (a) Amphetamine
                              (b) Dexamphetamine
                              (c) Mecloqualone
                              (d) Methamphetamine
                              (e) Methaqualone
                               (f) Methylphenidate
                              (g) Phencyclidine
                              (h) Phenmetrazine
                               (i) Amobarbital
                               (j) Cyclobarbital
                              (k) Glutethimide
                               (l) Pentazocine
                             (m) Pentobarbital
                              (n) Secobarbital
                              (o) Alprazolam
                              (p) Amfepramone
                              (q) Barbital
                              (r) Benzphetamine
                              (s) Bromazepam
                               (t) Camazepam
                              (u) Chlordiazepoxide
                              (v) Clobazam
                             (w) Clonazepam
                              (x) Clorazepate
                              (y) Clotiazepam
                              (z) Cloxazolam
                            (aa) Delorazepam
                            (bb) Diazepam
                            (cc) Estazolam
                            (dd) Ethchlorvynol


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                            Food and Drugs                   Chap. 30:01               103
                        Food and Drugs Regulations                             [Subsidiary]

           (ee) Ethinamate
             (ff) Ethyl loflazepate
           (gg) Fludiazepam
           (hh) Flunitrazepam
             (ii) Flurazepam
             (jj) Halazepam
           (kk) Haloxazolam
             (ll) Ketazolam
         (mm) Lefetamine
           (nn) Loprazolam
           (oo) Lorazepam
           (pp) Lormetazepam
           (qq) Mazindol
            (rr) Medazepam
            (ss) Meprobamate
             (tt) Methylphenobarbital
           (uu) Methyprylon
           (vv) Nimetazepam
         (ww) Nitrazepam
           (xx) Nordazepam
           (yy) Oxazepam
            (zz) Oxazolam
         (aaa) Phendimetrazine
         (bbb) Phenobarbital
          (ccc) Phentermine
         (ddd) Pinazepam
          (eee) Pipradrol
            (fff) Prazepam
         (ggg) Temazepam
         (hhh) Tetrazepam
            (iii) Triazolam.

     3. Subject to this division no person shall manufacture or sell a
controlled drug unless he is a licensed dealer.

      4. No person shall import or export a controlled drug unless he is a
licensed dealer and has first obtained a permit to do so from the Director.


                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                          L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

104            Chap. 30:01                      Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Food and Drugs Regulations

                     5. (1) The Director may, on application therefor—
                            (a) issue a licence to any fit and proper person, to sell controlled
                                drugs; or
                            (b) issue a permit to any licensed dealer to import or export a
                                controlled drug.
                         (2) The provisions of subparagraph (1)(a) do not apply to a
               practitioner or pharmacist.

                       6. A licence or permit is subject to the condition that the person to whom
               it is issued, will comply with the provisions of this Division.

                     7. The Minister may revoke or suspend a licence or a permit issued
               under this Division if in his opinion the person to whom it is issued, or any
               person in his employ, has violated or failed to comply with any term or
               condition thereof or any provision of this Division except that a licence shall
               not be revoked where the violation is by an employee unless that violation is
               in connection with controlled drugs in the possession, or under the control, of
               the licensed dealer.

                     8. A licence unless it is sooner revoked expires on 31st December next
               following the day of which it was issued; and where a licence is suspended it
               has no validity during the period of suspension.

                    9. A permit is valid only for the importation or exportation in respect of
               which it is issued.

                   10. Subject to the terms of his licence and to the provisions of this
               Division, a licensed dealer may only sell or supply a controlled drug to—
                             (a) another licensed dealer;
                             (b) a hospital.

                    11. No licensed dealer shall sell or supply a controlled drug to any other
               licensed dealer unless—
                            (a) he has received a written order therefor from such other
                                licensed dealer; and          .
                            (b) he has first verified the signature of that other licensed dealer
                                if the signature is unknown to him.

                   12. No licensed dealer shall sell or supply a controlled drug to a
               hospital unless—
                            (a) he has first received a written order therefor from the pharmacist in
                                charge of the hospital dispensary or from a physician or dentist
                                authorised by the hospital to sign the order; and


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                       Chap. 30:01                  105
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                    [Subsidiary]

             (b) he has first verified the signature of that person if the
                 signature is unknown to him.

    13. A licensed dealer carrying on the business of a pharmacy, or any
pharmacist employed by him for the purposes of that business, may sell a
controlled drug to any person if—
             (a) the drug forms part of the stock in trade of the pharmacy;
             (b) he has first received a prescription in writing authorising the
                 dispensing of the drug;
             (c) the prescription has been dated and signed by the practitioner
                 who issued it; and
             (d) the signature of the practitioner is first verified if the signature
                 is unknown to him.

    14. Every licensed dealer, who is a manufacturer, wholesaler, or importer shall
keep a separate book or register in which he shall enter or cause to be entered—
             (a) the name, quantity and form of any controlled drug received
                 by him, the name and address of the person who supplied it
                 and the date on which it was received;
             (b) the name, quantity and form of any controlled drug sold or
                 supplied, the name and address of the person to whom it was
                 sold or supplied, and the date on which it was sold or supplied;
             (c) the name and quantity of any controlled drug used in
                 manufacturing, the name and quantity of any controlled drug
                 manufactured, and the date any manufactured controlled
                 drug was placed in stock;
             (d) the name, quantity and form of any controlled drug he had in
                 stock at the end of each month,
and every required entry shall be made within forty-eight hours of the receipt
or disposition of the controlled drug.

    15. Every practitioner, and every pharmacist in control of a place of
business for the purposes of section 26 of the Pharmacy Board Act, shall keep— Ch. 29:52.
             (a) bills and invoices of all purchases or consignments of all
                 controlled drugs received by him;
             (b) a record of the name, quantity and form of any controlled
                 drug sold or supplied, the name and address of the person to
                 whom it was sold or supplied (or if supplied pursuant to a


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                 L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

106            Chap. 30:01                     Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

                                prescription, the name of the person for whom it was
                                dispensed and the name of the practitioner who issued the
                                prescription), and the date on which it was sold or supplied;
                            (c) a record of the name and quantity of any controlled drug used
                                in manufacturing, the name and quantity of any controlled
                                drug manufactured, and the date any manufactured controlled
                                drug was placed in stock;
                            (d) all controlled drugs under his charge in locked cupboards;
                                and every required entry shall be made within forty-eight
                                hours of the receipt or disposal of the controlled drug.

                   16. A licensed dealer who carries on the business of a wholesaler dealing
               in drugs and the business of a pharmacy shall keep separate registers, as
               required by paragraph 14, in respect of each such business.

                   17. No pharmacist or practitioner shall refill a prescription for a controlled
               drug unless the practitioner so directs in the prescription and specifies the
               number of times it may be refilled and the dates on which it may be refilled.

                   18. Every pharmacist who dispenses a controlled drug shall initial the
               prescription therefor; and the pharmacist in control of a pharmacy for the
Ch. 29:52.     purposes of section 26 of the Pharmacy Board Act, shall maintain a special
               prescription file in which he shall file or cause to be filed in sequence as to date
               and number, all written orders and prescriptions for controlled drugs dispensed,
               sold, or supplied, and such orders and prescriptions shall be kept in the file for
               a period of at least two years from the date on which they were filled.

                   19. Every practitioner who dispenses a controlled drug pursuant to a
               prescription written by himself or another practitioner shall keep a special
               prescription file in which he shall file in order as to date all written orders and
               prescriptions for controlled drugs sold, supplied or dispensed by him.

                   20. Every licensed dealer (including a practitioner, or pharmacist) shall
               keep on his premises for a period of at least two years all records that are
               required to be kept by these Regulations, and the records shall be kept in a
               manner which will enable an audit thereof to be made at any time.

                    21. Every licensed dealer shall take all necessary steps to protect
               controlled drugs in his possession or under his control against loss or theft and
               shall report to the Director any such loss or theft of a controlled drug within
               ten days of the discovery thereof.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                107
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

     22. Nothing in this Division prohibits the sale to the Government by a
licensed dealer of controlled drugs for its medical supplies but every officer in
charge of Government medical supplies shall keep a separate register in which
he shall enter or cause to be entered—
             (a) the name, quantity and form of any controlled drug received
                  by him;
             (b) the name, quantity and form of any drug distributed or
                  supplied by him to any authorised person or institution.
In this paragraph “authorised person or institution” means any person or
institution to whom the officer is authorised by the Chief Medical Officer to
distribute the drugs.

                     DIVISION 3—NEW DRUGS
     1. In this Division—
“appointed day” means the day on which the Act came into operation;
“new drug” means—
           (a) a drug that contains or consists of a substance whether as an
               active or inactive ingredient, carrier, coating, excipient,
               menstruum or other component that has not been imported
               into Trinidad and Tobago for use as a drug prior to the
               appointed day;
           (b) a drug that is a combination of two or more drugs with or
               without other ingredients, and that has not been imported
               into Trinidad and Tobago prior to the appointed day in that
               combination or in the proportion in which those drugs are
               combined; or
           (c) a drug, with respect to which the manufacturer prescribes,
               recommends, proposes or claims a use as a drug, or a
               condition of use as a drug, including dosage, demonstration
               or duration of action, and that has not been imported into
               Trinidad and Tobago prior to the appointed day for that use
               or condition of use;
“notice of approval” means notice of approval in respect of a new drug given
    by the Minister pursuant to paragraph 7.

     2. (1) No person shall import, sell or advertise for sale a new drug
unless—
            (a) the manufacturer or importer has filed with the Minister in
                duplicate, a new drug submission in Form C in the Third Third Schedule.
                Schedule in respect of that drug, and paid to the Comptroller Form C.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

108               Chap. 30:01                   Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Food and Drugs Regulations

                                   of Accounts the non-refundable registration fee specified in
Third Schedule.                    Form E in the Third Schedule for the registration of the new
Form E.                            drug; and
                               (b) the Minister has issued to the manufacturer or importer, a
                                   notice of approval in respect of the new drug, and the
                                   approval has not been withdrawn.
                          (2) Every new drug submission filed by a manufacturer or importer
                  with the Minister, shall have attached to it the receipt issued by the
                  Comptroller of Accounts in respect of payment of the registration fee.
                          (3) This regulation shall not apply to a person who has been granted
                  permission by the Minister in accordance with paragraph 12 of this Division.

                       3. Subject to paragraph 4, a new drug submission in respect of a drug to
                  be imported shall contain—
                              (a) a description of the new drug (including the manufacturer
                                   thereof), and a declaration of the proper name, if any, and the
                                   name under which it is proposed to be sold;
                              (b) a statement of all the ingredients, the route of administration,
                                   the proposed dosage, the claims to be made for the new drug,
                                   and the contra-indications and side-effects of the new drug if
                                   known, and a description of the pharmaceutical form under
                                   which the new drug is to be sold;
                              (c) details of the tests applied to control the potency, purity and
                                   safety of the new drug;
                               (d) a draft of every label proposed to be used in connection with
                                    the drug;
                               (e) samples of the new drug in the finished pharmaceutical form
                                    in which it is to be sold; and
                                (f) such samples of the components of the new drug as the Director
                                    may require, and shall include one or more of the following:
                                       (i) a certified copy of a notice of compliance issued to the
                                           manufacturer by the Department of National Health
                                           and Welfare in Canada;
                                      (ii) a certificate from the Food and Drugs Administration
                                           of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare of
                                           the United States of America certifying that the new
                                           drug is approved for use in the United States of
                                           America under the conditions of use recommended


                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                 109
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

                         and giving the conditions under which it may be sold
                         in the United States of America;
                   (iii) a certificate from the Ministry of Health of the United
                         Kingdom certifying that the new drug is approved for
                         use in the United Kingdom under the conditions of use
                         recommended and giving the conditions under which
                         it may be sold in the United Kingdom;
                   (iv) a certificate from the Department of Health of
                         Australia certifying that the drug is approved for use
                         in Australia and giving the conditions under which it
                         may be sold in Australia; or
                    (v) a certificate in the English language, respecting the
                         safety of the new drug for conditions of use
                         recommended and giving the conditions under which
                         it may be sold, issued by an official body or
                         Government Department having authority to issue the
                         certificate, such official body or Government
                         Department having experience and facilities for
                         testing the safety of new drugs that are considered by
                         the Minister as adequate to ensure the safety of the
                         new drug under the conditions of use recommended,
but the Minister may accept a submission made in accordance with
paragraph 4.

     4. The Minister may in his discretion accept a new drug submission that
contains information specified in paragraph 3(a) to (f), and that includes—
             (a) detailed reports of the tests made to establish the safety of the
                 new drug for the purpose and under the conditions of use for
                 which it is recommended; and
             (b) such other information and material as the Minister may in
                 any particular case require.

      5. (1) Notwithstanding paragraph 2 but subject to paragraph 12, no
person shall import, sell or advertise for sale a new drug in respect of which
notice of approval has been given if any material change has been made in—
             (a) the conditions of use of the drug including the indications for
                 use and the route of administration;
             (b) its labels;
             (c) its packaging;


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

110            Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                            (d) the pharmaceutical form in which it is sold;
                            (e) its dosage; or
                             (f) its strength, purity or quality,
                which is significantly different from the information contained in the new drug
                submission filed in respect thereof unless—
                             (a) the manufacturer or importer has filed with the Minister in
                                  duplicate a supplement to the new drug submission in Form D
Third Schedule.                   in the Third Schedule in respect of a variation of formula, a
Form D.
                                  new claim to that drug, or a new packaging and paid to the
                                  Comptroller of Accounts the non-refundable registration fee
Third Schedule.                   specified in Form E in the Third Schedule for the registration
Form E.                           thereof; and
                             (b) the Minister has issued to the manufacturer or importer a
                                  notice of approval in respect of a variation of formula or a
                                  new claim to that drug or a new packaging and the approval
                                  has not been withdrawn.
                         (2) Every supplement to a new drug submission filed by a
               manufacturer or importer with the Minister shall have attached to it the receipt
               issued by the Comptroller of Accounts in respect of the payment of the
               registration fee.

                     6. Where notice of approval in respect of a new drug has been issued to
               a manufacturer or importer, another manufacturer or importer of the same new
               drug may provide the Minister with a submission that satisfies the provisions
               of paragraph 4.

                    7. The Minister on the recommendation of the Drug Advisory
               Committee shall, within one hundred and twenty days after the filing of a new
               drug submission or supplement thereto—
                          (a) notify the person filing the same whether the data and
                               information submitted satisfied the requirements of
                               paragraph 3, 4 or 5; and
                          (b) if those requirements are satisfied and it appears to the
                               Minister after consultation with the Drug Advisory
                               Committee, that the new drug is safe for use as a drug, by
                               Notification signify his approval in respect of that new drug.

                  8. The Minister may, after consultation with the Drug Advisory
               Committee, by Notification withdraw approval in respect of a new drug by


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                 111
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                  [Subsidiary]

sending notice to the manufacturer or importer of that new drug and the
withdrawal may be made where—
            (a) evidence obtained from clinical or other experience, or from
                tests by new methods or by methods not used before the
                approval was given, reveals that the new drug is not shown
                to be safe for the use represented in the submissions in
                respect of the new drug which were filed with the Minister
                and on which the approval was based;
            (b) the submissions in respect of the new drug which were filed
                with the Minister and on which approval was based, contain
                any untrue statement of material fact; or
            (c) the withdrawal is necessary in the interests of public health.
 Notice of withdrawal of approval in respect of a new drug shall be published
in the Gazette and at least one newspaper having daily circulation in Trinidad
and Tobago.

      9. Where any manufacturer or importer receives any report of any
unexpected side effects, injury, toxicity or sensitivity reaction associated with
the clinical uses, studies, investigations and tests respecting a new drug, he
shall inform the Minister as soon as possible of the side effects, injury, toxicity
or sensitivity reaction.

     10. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Division, a new drug
may be imported for the use of investigators qualified to use the drug for the
sole purpose of obtaining clinical and scientific data with respect to its safety,
stability, dosage, or efficacy, if—
              (a) before the importation, the Minister is informed of the
                   identifying name or mark by which the drug may be recognised;
              (b) both the inner and outer labels on any package of the new
                   drug carry the statement “To Be Used By Qualified
                   Investigators Only”;
              (c) before the sale, the importer ensures that any person to whom
                   the new drug is to be sold is a qualified investigator and has
                   the facilities for the investigation to be conducted by him,
                   and obtains in writing from that person an undertaking that
                   the new drug will be used solely by that person or under
                   his direction;
              (d) the investigators have written authority from the Minister to
                   carry out the investigation of the new drug and have the
                   facilities for so doing.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

112            Chap. 30:01                   Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Food and Drugs Regulations

                   11. A person who imports a new drug for the purposes of sale to qualified
               investigators shall keep accurate records of the sales, and make these records
               available for inspection on the request of the Minister.

                   12. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Division, the
               Minister may grant permission in writing to any person to import any specified
               quantity of a new drug, for the purpose of enabling that person to make a new
               drug submission or to file a supplement thereto.

                                DIVISION 4—OFFICIAL DRUGS
                 An official drug labelled as required by regulation 34 shall satisfy the
               standard mentioned on the label.

                                   DIVISION 5—ANTIBIOTICS
                 An antibiotic which is imported, exported, manufactured, dispensed or sold,
Ch. 30:02.     in accordance with the Antibiotics Act and any Regulations made thereunder
               is exempted from the provisions of these Regulations.

                               DIVISION 6—NARCOTIC DRUGS
                A narcotic drug which is sold, dispensed, imported, exported, or
27 of 1961.    manufactured, in accordance with the Narcotic Control Ordinance and any
               Regulations made thereunder, is exempted from the provisions of these
               Regulations except regulation 38.

                               DIVISION 7—POISONOUS DRUGS
                 A poisonous drug which is sold by wholesale or retail, or dispensed in
Ch. 29:52.     accordance with the Pharmacy Board Act and any Regulations made
               thereunder is exempt from the provisions of these Regulations.

                       DIVISION 8—CONDITIONS, FACILITIES AND
                         CONTROLS FOR DRUG MANUFACTURE
                    1. For the purposes of this Division—
               “drug manufacturer” means any person or firm which manufactures,
                   compounds, or packages a drug for wholesale in the pharmaceutical form
                   in which it is sold by retail to the general public, but does not include a
                   pharmacist or pharmacy manufacturing, or compounding or packaging
                   drugs on the premises where the drugs are sold by retail;
               “manufacture” includes mixing, compounding, preparation, and similar
                  physical processes, synthesis or any similar chemical processes and
                  packaging for wholesale, but does not include dividing, sub-dividing, and
                  re-packaging for sale by wholesale or retail.


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                  113
                          Food and Drugs Regulations                                   [Subsidiary]

      2. No drug manufacturer shall sell a drug in the finished pharmaceutical
form in which it is sold to the general public unless the drug has been
manufactured, preserved, stored, labelled and tested under suitable conditions
as provided in this Division, and a Certificate to this effect has been issued by
the Director, on the advice of the Drug Advisory Committee.

     3. For the purposes of paragraph 2, suitable conditions in respect of a
drug requires—
             (a) that the construction, fittings, and furnishings of the area in a
                 building where the drug is manufactured shall be of such
                 material and finish as—
                    (i) will permit the efficient cleaning of all surfaces;
                    (ii) will prevent the introduction of extraneous materials
                         into drugs during their manufacture and testing;
                   (iii) will prevent the migration of dust and its
                         accumulation;
             (b) that adequate lighting, ventilation, and drainage facilities be
                 provided in the manufacturing area;
             (c) that all processing and packaging equipment be cleaned
                 following the manufacture of each batch or lot of the drug;
             (d) in the event parenteral drugs are processed, that all fillings
                 and aseptic processes shall be carried out in a separate and
                 enclosed area designed for the processing and filling of the
                 drugs and operated in a manner that will prevent
                 contamination of the drug compounded and filled;
             (e) that qualified personnel shall be employed as supervisors in
                 the formulation, processing, testing, packaging and labelling
                 of the drug, and the personnel shall have such technical
                 training as the Director on the advice of the Drug Advisory
                 Committee may deem necessary, having regard to the nature
                 of the duties and the responsibilities involved;
             (f) that qualified personnel shall be responsible for the
                 maintenance of machinery, equipment and sanitation;
             (g) that each lot or batch of raw material or bulk material used in
                 manufacturing the drug shall be tested to ensure identity and
                 purity of the raw material or bulk material using tests of
                 pharmacopoeial or equivalent status;


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

114            Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Food and Drugs Regulations

                            (h) that each lot or batch of the drug in finished pharmaceutical
                                 form shall be tested to ensure identity, potency and purity,
                                 using tests of pharmacopoeial or equivalent status;
                             (i) that each stage of the manufacture be supervised by
                                 appropriately qualified personnel;
                             (j) that a system of control shall be used permitting a complete
                                 and rapid recall of any batch of the drug from the market;
                            (k) that records shall be kept in form, manner and content
                                 satisfactory to the Director showing—
                                    (i) for each batch or lot of the drug—
                                         (aa) the tests on the raw or bulk materials used in
                                               manufacturing;
                                         (bb) the tests on the drug in finished pharmaceutical
                                               form;
                                         (cc) the name or initials of the qualified personnel
                                               supervising each stage of the manufacturing
                                               process, and responsible for the tests carried
                                               out; and
                                         (dd) the lot or batch number assigned to that lot or
                                               batch of the drug and the date of manufacture; and
                                   (ii) details of the manufacturing process, tests, procedures,
                                        and known hazards and stability of the drug;
                             (l) that adequate protection be given to the personnel engaged in
                                 manufacturing or packaging the drug against any hazard
                                 arising from contact with the drug or any raw material or
                                 processing equipment during the manufacturing or packaging
                                 process; and
Ch. 29:52.                 (m) that the provisions of the Pharmacy Board Act, the Factories
Ch. 30 No. 2                     Ordinance and the Public Health Ordinance are complied with.
(1950 Ed.).
Ch. 12 No. 4
(1950 Ed.).          4. The records required by paragraph 3(k) shall be kept for a period of
               five years from the date of testing of the drug, or until the expiry date of the
               drug, whichever first occurs, and the records shall be made available for
               inspection by an inspector, and copies shall be made for the information and
               use of the Director at his request.

                     5. A sufficient sample of each batch or lot of the drug in finished
               pharmaceutical form shall be kept by the drug manufacturer under suitable
               conditions of storage for a period of five years from the date of testing of the
               drug, or until the expiry date of the drug, whichever first occurs, and the sample
               shall be submitted to the Director for analysis and examination on his request.


                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                               Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                 115
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                 [Subsidiary]

      6. A drug manufacturer may be permitted by the Director to dispense
with tests, controls, records and samples mentioned in paragraph 3(g), (h), (j)
and (k), and paragraph 5, where the nature of the drug is such that these tests,
controls, records and samples are, in the opinion of the Director, not necessary.

     7. A drug manufacturer in a country other than Trinidad and Tobago shall
be deemed to have complied with paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 5, if the manufacturer
or importer of a drug or drugs has produced to the Director a certificate
concerning the sale, safety, or manufacture of the drug or drugs issued by—
            (a) the Department of National Health and Welfare of Canada;
            (b) the Department of Health, Education and Welfare of the
                 United States, or a State or City authority in the United States
                 concerned with health or pharmacy;
             (c) the Ministry of Health of the United Kingdom;
            (d) the Department of Health of Australia;
             (e) any Government Department or official body in other
                 countries issuing such certificates as comply with regulation
                 10 or paragraph 3(f)(v) of Division 3 of this Schedule, which Schedule.
                 are considered by the Director to show that adequate
                 standards for conditions of drug manufacture are enforced in
                 those countries, in respect of that drug manufacturer.

      8. A drug manufacturer in Trinidad and Tobago, may, if he does not employ
qualified personnel to carry out the tests required by paragraph 3(f)(i) and (ii)—
              (a) import batches or lots of raw or bulk material accompanied
                  by certificates of identity and purity issued by an agency
                  approved by the Director;
              (b) submit a sample of each batch or lot of the drug in finished
                  pharmaceutical form for testing to the Director, or to an
                  agency or laboratory designated by the Director,
and shall not use any batch or lot of the raw material imported without such
certificates nor sell any lot or batch of any drug in finished pharmaceutical
form until the results of the tests for that lot or batch have been accepted by
the Director.

      9. No person shall sell or advertise a new drug manufactured in Trinidad
and Tobago that was not manufactured in Trinidad and Tobago before
1st February 1969, unless—
            (a) the drug manufacturer has filed with the Director in duplicate
                a New Drug Submission relating to the drug in accordance
                with paragraphs 10 and 11; and


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

116            Chap. 30:01                     Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Food and Drugs Regulations

                            (b) the Minister has issued a Notice of Approval in respect of the
                                drug, and the approval has not been withdrawn.

                   10. Where a drug manufacturer in Trinidad and Tobago wishes to
               manufacture for sale a drug that he has not manufactured before 1st February
               1969, he shall file with the Director a New Drug Submission in respect of the
               drug containing—
                           (a) a description of the drug, a declaration of its proper name, if
                                 any, the name under which it is proposed to be sold, and the
                                 name of the manufacturer;
                           (b) a statement of all the ingredients, the route of administration,
                                 the proposed dosage, the claims to be made for the drug, and
                                 the contra-indications and side effects of the drug if known,
                                 and a description of the pharmaceutical form under which the
                                 drug is to be sold;
                            (c) details of the tests applied to control the potency, purity and
                                 safety of the drug and of the raw or bulk materials;
                           (d) details of the manufacturing process to be used;
                            (e) a draft of every label proposed to be used in connection with
                                 the drug;
                            (f) such samples of the components of the drug as the Director
                                 may require;
                           (g) samples of the drug in the finished pharmaceutical form in
                                 which it is to be sold;
                           (h) either—
                                     (i) a compilation of published reports of tests made on
                                         similar drugs to establish their safety for the purpose
                                         and under the conditions of use recommended; or
                                    (ii) detailed reports of tests made to establish the safety of
                                         the drug for the purpose and under the conditions of
                                         use for which it is recommended; or
                                   (iii) copies of opinions and reports taken from
                                         authoritative sources of information concerning the
                                         action, hazards, side effects, stability, and safety of the
                                         drug or similar drugs made by other manufacturers;
                            (i) such other information and material as the Director in any
                                 particular case may require.

                   11. Paragraphs 10(b) and 10(h) shall not apply to the manufacture in
               Trinidad and Tobago of a drug which is included in any of the official
Second         publications mentioned in the Second Schedule to the Act if the drug
Schedule.      manufacturer complies with the other requirements of paragraph 10.


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                 117
                           Food and Drugs Regulations                                   [Subsidiary]

   12. The Minister shall, on the recommendation of the Drug Advisory
Committee, within one hundred and twenty days after the filing of the New
Drug Submission in respect of a drug manufactured in Trinidad and Tobago—
           (a) notify the person filing the same whether the data and
               information submitted satisfies the requirements of
               paragraph 10;
           (b) if these requirements are satisfied and it appears to the
               Minister after consultation with the Drug Advisory
               Committee, that the drug is safe for use as a drug, issue a
               Notice of Approval in respect of that drug.

    13. The Minister may, after consultation with the Drug Advisory
Committee, withdraw approval in respect of any drug manufactured in
Trinidad and Tobago by sending a notice to the manufacturer of the drug and
the withdrawal may be made where—
            (a) evidence obtained from clinical or other experience, or from
                tests by new methods or by methods not used before the
                approval was given, reveals that the drug is shown not to be
                safe for the use represented in the submissions in respect of
                the drug which were filed with the Minister and on which the
                approval was based; or
            (b) the submissions in respect of the drug which were filed with
                the Minister and on which approval was based, contain any
                untrue statement of material fact; or
            (c) the withdrawal is necessary in the interest of public health.
  Notice of withdrawal of approval in respect of a drug shall be published in
the Gazette and at least one newspaper having daily circulation in Trinidad
and Tobago.

     14. Where the Minister issues a notice of withdrawal in respect of a drug
manufactured in Trinidad and Tobago, the drug manufacturer shall immediately
withdraw from the market in Trinidad and Tobago, all batches or lots of that drug
at his own expense, and deliver all the lots or batches to the Director.

     15. Where any manufacturer receives any report of any unexpected side
effects, injury, toxicity or sensitivity reaction associated with the clinical uses,
studies, investigations and tests respecting a drug manufactured in Trinidad
and Tobago he shall inform the Director as soon as possible of the side effects,
injury, toxicity or sensitivity reaction.



                                      UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

118         Chap. 30:01                    Food and Drugs


                 16. Notwithstanding paragraph 10, a drug manufacturer may make a
            small number of batches of a drug that was not manufactured in Trinidad and
            Tobago before 1st February 1969 for the sole purpose of obtaining scientific
            data regarding the process of manufacture, or clinical data on the safety,
            stability, dosage, or efficacy of the drug, provided that—
                          (a) before manufacture the Director is informed of the
                               proposed manufacture, and approves the disposal or use of
                               the drug; and
                          (b) where the drug is to be used in clinical investigation—
                                   (i) before sale or distribution, the Director is informed of
                                       the identifying name or mark by which the drug may
                                       be recognised;
                                  (ii) both the inner and outer labels on any package of the
                                       drug carry the statement “To Be Used By Qualified
                                       Investigators Only”;
                                 (iii) before sale or distribution, the drug manufacturer
                                       ensures that any person to whom the drug is to be sold
                                       or distributed is a qualified investigator and has the
                                       facilities for the investigation to be conducted by him,
                                       and obtains in writing from that person an undertaking
                                       that the drug will be used solely by that person or
                                       under his direction;
                                 (iv) the investigators have written authority from the
                                       Minister on the advice of the Drug Advisory
                                       Committee to carry out the investigation of the drug
                                       and have the facilities for so doing;
                          (c) the drug manufacturer keeps accurate records of sales and
                               distribution of batches of drugs made for experimental purposes
                               which are sold or distributed to qualified investigators.




                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                                                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                                      Food and Drugs                                              Chap. 30:01                              119
                                              Food and Drugs Regulations                                                                          [Subsidiary]

                                               THIRD SCHEDULE                                                                                   Regulations 6
                                                                                                                                                and 13.
                                                                                                                                                [49/1987].
                                                            FORM A                                                                              (Regulation 6).

        CERTIFICATE OF APPOINTMENT OF INSPECTOR
                                      (Section 20 of the Food and Drugs Act)

This is to certify that                                                                         Official Stamp

Mr. ...........................................................
has been appointed as an Inspector under
section 20 of the Food and Drugs Act.

.........................................................                   ...............................................................
            Signature of Inspector                                                          Minister of Health



                                                            FORM B                                                                              (Regulation 13).

Laboratory No. .........................................


                                   CERTIFICATE OF ANALYSIS
                              (Under section 30(1) of the Food and Drugs Act)

  I, ..............................................................................................................., being a
person duly appointed as an analyst under section 20 of the Food and Drugs Act, do
hereby certify—
   (1) that on the ............................... day of ....................................................... 20..........,
I received from ................................................................................................. a sealed
package, which said package was unopened and the seals thereon unbroken;

   (2) that I broke the seals and opened the said package and removed therefrom a
sample, submitted as a sample of .......................................................................................
taken from ...........................................................................................................................
....................................................................... of ................................................................;

  (3) that I duly analysed or examined the said sample for the purpose of determining if
same conformed to the requirements of the Food and Drugs Act and the Regulations
thereunder, and I obtained the following results:

   As witness my hand this ................... day of ..................................................., 20......


                                                                     ........................................................................
                                                                                              Analyst


                                                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                                               L.R.O.

                                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

120               Chap. 30:01                                           Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                                     Food and Drugs Regulations

(Regulation 2).                                                                 FORM C

                                                         NEW DRUG SUBMISSION

                  To:       Chief Chemist/Director of Food and Drugs,
                            Chemistry/Food and Drugs Division,
                            115, Frederick Street,
                            Port-of-Spain,
                            Trinidad.

                      1. I/We* .........................................................................................................................
                                    (State Name of Importer/Manufacturer/Agent in Trinidad and Tobago)*
                  of .........................................................................................................................................
                                                                                (State Address)
                  hereby make a New Drug Submission for .........................................................................
                  .............................................................................................................................................
                                                                   (State Name of New Drug)
                  having its proper name and trade name .............................................................................
                  .............................................................................................................................................
                                                   (State Proper Name and Trade Name of Drug)

                  *Delete as applicable

                  and with the following ingredients:

                    Chemical Name of                       Quantity Weight                    Chemical Name of                       Quantity Weight
                       Ingredient                            or per cent                         Ingredient                            or per cent
                    1. ...........................        ..........................        11. ...........................         .........................
                    2. ...........................        ..........................       12. ...........................          .........................
                    3. ...........................        ..........................       13. ...........................          .........................
                    4. ...........................        ..........................       14. ...........................          .........................
                    5. ...........................        ..........................       15. ...........................          .........................
                    6. ...........................        ..........................       16. ...........................          .........................
                    7. ...........................        ..........................       17. ...........................          .........................
                    8. ...........................        ..........................       18. ...........................          .........................
                    9. ...........................        ..........................       19. ...........................          .........................
                  10. ...........................         ..........................       20. ...........................          .........................

                     2. I/We* undertake to inform you of any subsequent material changes made in the
                  conditions of use, labelling, packaging, pharmaceutical form, dosage or strength, purity
                  or quality of the New Drug.



                                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                  121
                             Food and Drugs Regulations                                       [Subsidiary]

  3. I/We* undertake to inform you of any report of unexpected side effects, injury,
toxicity, sensitivity or other adverse reactions in any way associated with the clinical
uses, studies, investigations and tests in respect of the New Drug.

  4. I/We* attach in DUPLICATE the information contained in the Note hereunder—


*Delete as applicable



                                         NOTE

  (a) A description of the New Drug (including the manufacturer thereof) and a
      declaration of the proper name if any and the trade name. r

  (b) A statement of all ingredients, route of administration, dosage, claims to be made
      for the new drug and the contra-indications and side effects of the drug (if
      known), and a description of the pharmaceutical form in which it is to be sold. r

  (c) Details of tests applied to control potency, purity and safety of the new drug. r

  (d) Labels and samples of the new drug in its finished pharmaceutical form [Samples
      for submission may be imported, provided a permit is issued by the Director. If a
      submission is not made within one hundred and twenty (120) days of import, the
      samples shall be surrendered to the Director]. r

  (e) Samples of the components of the new drug if required by the Director. [Samples
      for submission may be imported provided a permit is issued by the Director. If a
      submission is not made within one hundred and twenty (120) days of import, the
      samples shall be surrendered to the Director]. r

  (f) Certificates as specified in paragraph 3(f) (i)–(v) of Division 3 of the Second
      Schedule of the Regulations.

          CANADA r            UNITED KINGDOM r                F.D.A. U.S.A. r

         AUSTRALIA r
  (g) Certificates from State or City authorities in the United States respecting the sale
      and conditions of sale in the United States.

  (h) Certificates in the English Language from authorities recognised as having
      adequate experience and facilities for assessing the safety of new drugs by the
      Ministries of Health in—
         BELGIUM r           NETHERLANDS r                  SWITZERLAND r

          FRANCE r            SWEDEN r                        DENMARK r



                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                  L.R.O.

                                UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                           LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

122            Chap. 30:01                                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                                Food and Drugs Regulations

                                                                FORM C—Continued



                  (i) Certificates (with English translation) from other authorities in ............................

                        ..................................................................................................................................

                  (j) Detailed reports of animal tests r
                             and/or

                        Clinical trials to establish the safety of the new drug.
                        [Detailed reports may be required by the Drug Advisory Committee if certificates
                        are not available from countries named in paragraphs (f), (g) and (h) of this Note].

                                                                                                     ....................................................
                                                                                                     Importer/Manufacturer/Agent in
                                                                                                             Trinidad and Tobago*


               Date ................................................ 20......



               *Delete as applicable.




                                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                    UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                                                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                                            Food and Drugs                                                        Chap. 30:01                                123
                                                    Food and Drugs Regulations                                                                                     [Subsidiary]

                                                                     FORM D

                 SUPPLEMENT TO NEW DRUG SUBMISSION                                                                                                                (Regulation 5).

           VARIATION OF FORMULA/NEW CLAIM/NEW PACKAGING*
To:         Chief Chemist/Director of Food and Drugs,
            Chemistry/Food and Drugs Division,
            115, Frederick Street,
            Port-of-Spain.
  I/We* .................................................................................................................................................
                             (State Name of Importer/Manufacturer/Agent in Trinidad and Tobago)*
of ..........................................................................................................................................................
                                                                      (State Address)
hereby make a supplementary New Drug Submission in DUPLICATE for the drug
...............................................................................................................................................................
                                                          (State Name of New Drug)
in support of the changes indicated below:                                                             -
            (a) Name/Mark                  r                                            (f)   Route of administration                             r
            (b) Formulation                r                                           (g)    Packaging                                           r
            (c) Conditions of Use          r                                           (h)    Label                                               r
            (d) Indications for Use        r                                            (i)   Pharmaceutical form                                 r
            (e) Dosage                     r                                            (j)   Any other change                                    r
  Description of other changes which made the drug different from that in the original New Drug
Submission: ..........................................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................................
    The following information is attached in support of the changes indicated:
                    (a) Samples of the drug with the changes indicated above in the finished
                            pharmaceutical form in which it is to be sold. r
                    (b) Samples of components of the new drug as the Director may require. r
                    (c) Certificate of compliance issued to the manufacturer by the authorised
                            Government Agency in the country of origin. r
                    (d) Technical literature, describing the changes made to the new drug including tests
                            and results of tests supporting that the quality, potency, efficacy and safety of the
                            new drug are not affected. r
                    (e) Any other information that may be required by the Director. r
   I/We* undertake to inform you of any report of unexpected side effects, toxicity, sensitivity or
other adverse reactions associated with the clinical uses, studies, investigations and tests in respect
of the new drug or resulting from the material changes made.
Date ..................................................                            ............................................................................
                                                                                              Importer/Manufacturer/Agent in
                                                                                                      Trinidad and Tobago*
*Delete as applicable.


                                                                     FORM E

                                                  REGISTRATION FEES                                                                                               (Regulations 2
                                                                                                                                                                  and 5).
New Drug .......................................................................................................................... $750.00

Variation of Formula, New Claim or New Packaging ..................................................... $100.00




                                                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                                                        L.R.O.

                                                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

124            Chap. 30:01             Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]

54/1972.                OFFICIAL METHOD NOTIFICATION
                  issued under regulation 3 of the Food and Drugs Regulations
                  The following method of analysis or examination of Ultra Heat
               Treated Milk or U.H.T. for Colony Count has been designated by
               the Minister as the official method:

                 OFFICIAL METHOD OF ANALYSIS OR EXAMINATION OF
                  ULTRA HEAT TREATED MILK OR U. H. T. MILK FOR
                                 COLONY COUNT
                   1. Apparatus: The following apparatus shall be used:
                         (a) McCartney bottles of 1 fluid ounce capacity;
                         (b) test tubes plugged with cotton wool or covered
                              with closely fitting aluminium caps or stored in
                              such a way as to prevent contamination;
                         (c) a standard iridium-platinum loop of 4 mm. internal
                              diameter made from wire conforming to British
                              Standard Wire Gauge 19 and containing 10 per
                              cent iridium. The loop, when used as directed,
                              should transfer about 0.01 ml. of milk to the
                              molten medium in a tube or a McCartney bottle;
                         (d) an incubator capable of operating at a preselected
                              temperature within the range 30°C. to 37°C. and of
                              maintaining the preselected temperature within 1°C.;
                         (e) a water bath capable of maintaining the water at
                              a temperature of not less than 45°C. and not
                              more than 50°C.; and
                          (f) a refrigerator fitted with a reliable automatic
                              thermo-regulator capable of maintaining a
                              temperature of between 3°C. and 5°C.

                    2. Culture Medium: A culture medium prepared as
               follows should be used:
                           (a) Yeastrel  3g.
                               peptone   5g.
                               agar     15g.
               (If New Zealand agar is used 12g. is normally sufficient).
                              Fresh whole milk                      10 ml.
                              Distilled water                   1,000 ml.


                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01               125
                     Official Method Notification                        [Subsidiary]


            (b) the Yeastrel and peptone shall be dissolved in the
                distilled water in a steamer and the reaction at
                room temperature adjusted to pH 7.4, using
                phenol red as an indicator or using a pH meter.
                When phenol red is used, a brightness screen
                must be employed with Lovibond phenol red
                disc 2/IJ. The agar and the milk shall then be
                added to the broth and autoclaved at 121°C. for
                25 minutes. If shredded agar is used, it shall be
                wrapped in muslin and washed in running water
                for 15 minutes, the excess water being squeezed
                out before the agar is added to the broth. To
                ensure thorough mixing and that heat treatment
                of the bulk at this stage is equivalent to the final
                sterilisation of the tubed medium, quantities of
                not more than 2 litres shall be autoclaved in 3-
                litre conical flasks. The hot medium shall then be
                filtered through paper pulp in a Buchner funnel;
            (c) the pulp shall be prepared by mashing up small
                pieces of filter paper in water and boiling. The
                funnel shall be inserted into an Erlenmeyer flask
                fitted with a side piece and a single layer of filter
                paper laid on the top of the Buchner funnel to
                prevent the pulp being sucked through. The hot
                pulp shall then be poured on to the filter paper
                and a filter pump applied to suck through the
                excess water, which shall then be poured away.
                The pulp should be firmly packed down just
                before the last of the water is sucked through. At
                this stage a layer of filter paper shall be laid on
                the filter bed, so that the hot medium can
                subsequently be poured on to it without
                disturbing the pulp. The filter when ready for
                use should have a total depth of about 1.5 mm.
                (A pulp layer of suitable depth and
                approximately the same depth for any size of
                funnel is obtained by pulping an area of filter
                paper equal to four times the square of the
                diameter of the funnel. With ordinary grade
                filter paper 1 g. of the dry paper will be required
                for every 20 sq. cm. of filtering area);


                               UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                       UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

126            Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                          Official Method Notification


                             (d) the flask and funnel shall be thoroughly hot
                                  before filtering commences and these and the
                                  medium shall be kept hot during filtering. The
                                  medium shall be taken direct from the
                                  autoclave, poured on to the pulp where the filter
                                  paper is laid and the vacuum pump connected;
                             (e) the reaction of the filtrate shall be tested at
                                  50°C. and adjusted if necessary to pH 7.0.
                                  Adjustment at this stage should not normally be
                                  necessary, and if it is needed at all frequently,
                                  the method of preparation should be checked;
                              (f) the medium shall be distributed in 5 ml.
                                  quantities in 6 x 5/8 in. test-tubes or in 1 ounce
                                  McCartney bottles and autoclaved at 12l°C. for
                                  15 minutes; and
                             (g) the final reaction of the medium at room
                                  temperature shall be pH 7.2.

                    3. Alternative Medium: A dehydrated medium may be
               used provided that on reconstitution with distilled water and fresh
               milk it has the same composition as that given in paragraph 2(a)
               and has been shown to give similar results.

                    4. Sampling: A sample consisting of at least one aseptically
               sealed container shall be taken from each batch of U.H.T. Milk
               and delivered unopened to the testing laboratory.

                   5. Incubation of sample: On arrival at the laboratory the
               sample shall be placed unopened in the incubator at a
               temperature of between 30°C. and 37°C. and retained at that
               temperature for twenty-four hours.

                    6. Mixing of sample prior to examination: At the end of
               the twenty-four hour incubation period, the sample shall be
               removed from the incubator and shall be mixed thoroughly by
               inverting the container and shaking it.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                        Food and Drugs               Chap. 30:01             127
                    Official Method Notification                     [Subsidiary]


    7. Method of carrying out the test:
          (a) After the sample has been thoroughly mixed as
              described in paragraph 6, it shall be opened with
              aseptic precautions as follows:
                 (i) if the sample is contained in a carton, one
                     of the corners or edges of the carton shall
                     be thoroughly swabbed with alcohol and
                     the excess burnt off. The carton shall then
                     be opened by cutting off this corner or
                     edge using a pair of sterile scissors;
                (ii) if the sample is contained in a bottle, the
                     closure and neck of the bottle shall be
                     thoroughly swabbed with alcohol and the
                     excess burnt off. The closure shall then be
                     removed by means of a sterile opener;
               (iii) if the sample is a container other than a
                     carton or bottle a suitable surface of the
                     container shall be thoroughly swabbed
                     with alcohol and the excess burnt off. A
                     hole in that sterile surface shall then be
                     punched using a sterile tool.
          (b) Immediately after opening the sample container,
              the cap from a sterile McCartney bottle shall be
              removed and approximately 10 ml. of the sample
              transferred by means of a sterile pipette to the
              bottle, the cap replaced and the McCartney bottle
              put in the refrigerator. A further 10 ml.
              (approximately) of the sample shall be
              transferred to a sterile test-tube after removing
              the plug. The plug shall then be replaced.
          (c) With as little delay as possible, a loopful of milk
              from the test-tube sample shall be transferred to
              a sterile test-tube or a 1 ounce McCartney bottle
              containing about 5 ml. of melted yeastrel milk
              agar medium at 45°C. to 50°C. The loop, after
              being flame-sterilised and cooled, shall be
              lowered into the milk about 1 inch below the

                              UNOFFICIAL VERSION                    L.R.O.

                      UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

128            Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                          Official Method Notification


                                 surface and a loopful of milk withdrawn and
                                 transferred to the molten medium in the tube or
                                 McCartney bottle. The contents of the tube or
                                 bottle shall then be carefully mixed, the tube or
                                 bottle placed in a sloping position and the
                                 medium allowed to set. The tube or bottle shall
                                 then be incubated in a sloping position at a
                                 temperature of between 30°C. and 37°C. for
                                 forty-eight hours and at the end of that time it
                                 shall be examined for the presence of colonies.

                    8. Counting of colonies: Colonies shall be counted within
               four hours of the expiry of the incubation period.

                    9. Interpretation: The test shall be deemed to be satisfied by
               a sample if the number of colonies is found to be less than 10. If
               there is any doubt about the result, the test should be repeated using
               the sample in the McCartney bottle placed in the refrigerator.




                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                      Food and Drugs                     Chap. 30:01                  129
                                                                                             [Subsidiary]


      *APPROVAL OF NEW DRUGS NOTIFICATION
    issued under paragraph 7 of Division 3 of the Second Schedule
                 of the Food and Drugs Regulations

  The Minister acting on the advice of the Drug Advisory
Committee has signified his approval of the following new drugs:
Trade Name and Form                                 Manufacturer            Conditions
                                                                             of Sale
Parazolidine …            …           …   Geigy, Ltd.                    Third Schedule    83/1965.
Anodesyn        …         …           …   Boots Pure Drug Co., Ltd.      Freely
Indocid         …         …           …   Merck, Sharp & Dohme Ltd.      Third Schedule
Mintezol        …         …           …    do.                            do.
Contac C Nasal Mist       …           …   Menley & James                 Freely
Contac C Capsules         …           …    do.                            do.
Cadol           …         …           …   Ayerst, McKenna & Harrions      do.
Nitrong         …         …           …   U.S. Ethicals                  Third Schedule
Histabs         …         …           …    do.                           Freely
Supervim M …              …           …    do.                            do.
Perideca        …         …           …   Merck, Sharp & Dohme Ltd.      Third Schedule
Apisate         …         …           …   John Wyeth & Brother Ltd.       do.
Natalac         …         …           …   U.S. Ethicals                  Freely
Ferbetrin       …         …           …    do.                            do.
Eclabron        …         …           …    do.                            do.
Neodex AD …               …           …    do.                            do.
Enterodon       …         …           …    do.                           Controlled Drug
Hepaferron …              …           …    do.                           Freely
Osteofer        …         …           …   Anca Laboratories               do.
Gynovlar 21 …             …           …   Schering A.G.                   do.
Tuss-Ornade …             …           …   Smith, Kline & French          Third Schedule
Docabolin       …         …           …   Organon Laboratories            do.
Beogex          …         …           …   Lloyd Pharmaceuticals          Freely
Preveral        …         …           …   Wyeth Laboratories Ltd.        Third Schedule
Vacuetts        …         …           …   Anca Laboratories              Freely
Locorten        …         …           …   CIBA Ltd.                      Third Schedule
Rhinaspray …              …           …   C. H. Boehringer Sohn          Freely
Valium 10       …         …           …   Roche Products Ltd.            Third Schedule
Doburil         …         …           …   C. H. Boehringer Sohn           do.              98/1965.
Rapenton        …         …           …    do.                            do.
Phospholine Iodine        …           …   Ayerst Laboratories             do.
Demasorb        …         …           …   E. R. Squibb & Sons Ltd.        do.
Nefrolan        …         …           …   May and Baker Ltd.              do.
Neulactil       …         …           …    do.                            do.
Serepax         …         …           …   Wyeth Laboratories Inc.         do.
Alzinox (magma and tablets)           …   Smith, Miller & Patch Inc.     Freely
Alzinox Compound          …           …    do.                           Third Schedule
Measles vaccine (live, attenuated)    …   Philips Roxane Inc.             do.
Rapidental …              …           …   Walter Ritter                  Freely
Bilevac tablets           …           …   Weddell Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    do.              60/1967.
Bilostat tablets          …           …    do.                            do.
Delcee solution           …           …   Consolidated Chemicals Ltd.     do.
Dryptal tablets           …           …   West-Silten Pharmaceuticals     do.
                                           Ltd.
Extrinemin capsules      …            …   Weddell Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    do.


*See Note on page 2.


                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                                     UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

130            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                               Manufacturer               Conditions
                                                                                               of Sale
               Posalfilin ointment     …          …     Camden Chemical Co. Ltd.         Freely
               Pruvagol cream          …          …      do.                              do.
               Salaphene jelly         …          …     Priory Laboratories Ltd.           do.
               Unicap Therapeutic tablets         …     Upjohn Company                    do.
               Uniplex tablets         …          …     Weddell Pharmaceuticals Ltd.      do.
               Uval lotion …           …          …     Dome Laboratories                 do.
               Vinlax tablets …        …          …     Vincent Chemical Co. Pty.         do.
                                                         Ltd.
               Viro-tec aerosol spray …            …    Davis & Geck                      do.
               Camcolit tablets        …           …    Camden Chemical Co. Ltd.         Third Schedule
               Cardiacap capsules      …           …    Consolidated Chemicals Ltd.       do.
               Catapres tablets        …           …    C. H. Boehringer                  do.
               Delcecal injection      …           …    Consolidated Chemicals Ltd.       do.
               Follexol injection      …           …     do.                              do.
               Haemaccel 3.5% solution             …    Behringwerke A. G.                do.
               Hepacon B12 injection, 100, 500,         Consolidated Chemicals Ltd.       do.
                1000 megm/cc
               Maxolon injection, syrup, and tablets    Beecham Research                  do.
                                                          Laboratories Ltd.
               Mebinol tablets           …         …    Carlo Erba                        do.
               Pruvagol pessaries        …         …    Camden Chemical Co. Ltd.          do.
               Sosegon injection         …         …    Winthrop Products                 do.
               Tampovagan pessaries with ichthyol …     Camden Chemical Co. Ltd.          do.
               Tampovagan pessaries with lactic acid      do.                             do.
               Tampovagan pessaries with stilboestrol     do.                             do.
               Ultraproct suppositories and ointment    Schering A. G.                    do.
               Videol solution           …         …    Consolidated Chemicals Ltd.       do.
               Baby Pain elixir          …         …    Cupal Ltd.                       Freely
11/1969.       Burn Aid Cream            …         …      do.                             do.
               Clearasil cream           …         …    Richardson-Merrell                do.
               Diamond foot powder …               …    Cupal Ltd.                        do.
               Dusk insect repellent cream         …      do.                             do.
               Epitone syrup …           …         …    Boots Pure Drug Co. Ltd.          do.
               Fernico tablets           …         …    Cupal Ltd.                        do.
               Glutisal ointment         …         …    Ravensberg GMBH                   do.
               Kolantyl-NV tablets       …         …    Merrell National Laboratories     do.
                                                          Ltd.
               Meltus Junior linctus   …          …     Cupal Ltd.                        do.
               Meltus Adult linctus    …          …       do.                             do.
               Merocet lozenges        …          …     Merrell National Laboratories     do.
                                                          Ltd.
               Merocet solution         …         …       do.                             do.
               Nilzan suspension (vet.) …         …     I.C.I. Ltd.                       do.
               Norinyl-2 tablets        …         …     Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.       do.
               Ovanon tablets           …         …     N V Organon                       do.
               *Quiet World tablets     …         …     Whitehall Laboratories Inc.       do.
               Reg-u-letts tablets      …         …     Cupal Ltd.                        do.
               Rumex cough syrup        …         …     Franca Laboratories               do.
               Salvizol cream           …         …     Ravensberg GMBH                   do.
               Salvizol lozenges        …         …       do.                             do.
               Salvizol solution        …         …       do.                             do.
               Sanatogen selected multi-vitamin         Fisons Pharmaceuticals Ltd.       do.
                tablets
               Sanatogen tonic elixir …           …      do.                              do.
               *See GN 49/1969.


                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                      Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                  131
                               Approval of New Drugs Notification                             [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                                 Manufacturer              Conditions
                                                                                of Sale
Tedral Elixir …           …           …    William R. Warner & Co. Ltd.   Freely
Transpulmin syrup         …           …    Chemiewerk Homburg               do
Tusana cough syrup        …           …    Boots Pure Drug Co. Ltd.         do.
Akrinor tablets           …           …    Chemiewerk Homburg             Third Schedule
Akrinor ampoules 2 ml. …              …     do.                             do.
Aldoril-15 tablets        …           …    Merck, Sharp & Dohme             do.
Andantol ampoules 1 ml …              …    Chemiewerk Homburg               do.
Aptin injection           …           …    Astra A.B.                       do.
Lovely Curves cream       …           …    Pharmaceutical Exports Ltd.      do.
Perphyllon ampoules 2 ml              …    Chemiewerk Homburg               do.
Perphyllon adult suppositories        …     do.                             do.
Perphyllon children’s suppositories   …     do.                             do.
Perphyllon tablets        …           …     do.                             do.
Vaginex cream             …           …    Pharmaceutical Exports Ltd.      do.
Bellaravil dragees        …           …    Ravensberg GMBH                Controlled Drug
Clima-Sed tablets         …           …    Gedeon Richter (G.B.) Ltd.       do.
Absorbine athlete’s foot powder       …    W. F. Young Inc.               Freely            50/1969.
Absorbine lotion          …           …     do.                             do.
Absorbine medicated soap              …     do.                             do.
Bisolvon elixir           …           …    C. H. Boehringer Sohn            do.
Bisolvon solution         …           …     do.                             do.
Blulo liquid (vet.)       …           …    Burns Pharmaceuticals            do.
Cornuflex liquid (vet.) …             …     do.                             do.
Coryban-D capsules        …           …    J. B. Roerig                     do.
Coryban-D syrup           …           …     do.                             do.
E. & W. spray aerosol (vet.)          …    Burns Pharmaceuticals            do.
Kaogel suspension         …           …    Parke, Davis & Co.               do.
Kruschen capsules         …           …    Ashe Laboratories Ltd.           do.
Lubafax lubricant         …           …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                            (Canada) Ltd.
Prontopyrin tablets      …            …    Heinrich Mack Nachf.             do.
Sudafed syrup            …            …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                            (Canada) Ltd.
Sudafed tablets, 30 and 60 mgm        …     do.                             do.
Trypzyme aerosol (vet.) …             …    Burns Pharmaceuticals            do.
Zincofax Cream           …            …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                            (Canada) Ltd.
Albaton tablets            …          …    Winthrop Products Inc.         Third Schedule
Albaton compound caplets              …     do.                             do.
Anectine injection 10 c.c.            …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                            (Canada) Ltd.
Betnovate rectal ointment             …    Glaxo-Allenburys (Export)        do.
                                            Ltd.
Bisolvon ampoules        …            …    C. H. Boehringer Sohn            do.
Brufen tablets           …            …    Boots Pure Drug Co. Ltd.         do.
Bu-Biomin injection (vet.)            …    Burns Pharmaceuticals            do.
Butocin injection (vet.) …            …     do.                             do.
Cardilate 10 tablets     …            …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                              (Canada) Ltd.
Cardilate 15 tablets     …            …       do.                           do.
Colpan capsules          …            …    Heinrich Mack Nachf.             do.
Cortrosyn Depot injection             …    N. V. Organon                    do.
Dap-test reagent         …            …    Denver Chemical                  do.
                                            Manufacturing Co.
Dilantin injection        …           …    Parke, Davis & Co.               do.
Esbaloid tablets, 10 and 25 mgm       …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                            (Canada) Ltd.
Ismelin 5% eye drops     …            …    CIBA Laboratories Ltd.           do.



                                            UNOFFICIAL VERSION                              L.R.O.

                                    UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

132            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                               Manufacturer              Conditions
                                                                                            of Sale
               Lidocaton injection 2% …            …    Pharmaton Ltd.                  Third Schedule
               Lidocaton injection 2% with                do.                            do.
                epinephrine
               Megral tablets          …           …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                                          (Canada) Ltd.
               Mip-test reagent         …          …    Denver Chemical                  do.
                                                          Manufacturing Co.
               Nitro-Mack Retard capsules          …    Heinrich Mack Nachf.             do.
               Propaderm-L ointment …              …    Allen and Hanburys Ltd.          do.
               Propaderm-L suppositories           …        do.                          do.
               Sintisone drops, 5 ml. and 10 ml.        Carlo Erba s.p.a.                do.
               Sulphetrone tablets       …         …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                                          (India) Private Ltd.
               Synalar Anal Ointment …             …    I.C.I. Ltd.                      do.
               Synalar Anal Suppositories          …        do.                          do.
               Synocrine injection      …          …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.
                                                            (Canada) Ltd.
               Vasoxyl injection 1 c.c. …         …         do.                          do.
               Cardilate P tablets        …       …         do.                         Controlled Drug
               Seda Nitro-Mack Retard capsules …        Heinrich Mack Nachf.             do.
106/1969.      Antiphlogistine rub        …       …     Denver Laboratories Ltd.        Freely
               Caladryl aerosol           …       …     Parke Davis Ltd.                 do.
               Caladryl lotion            …       …         do.                          do.
               Campoferren solution       …       …     Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.        do.
               Carisoma compound tablets          …     Wallace Laboratories Ltd.        do.
               Cresvite drops             …       …     Instituto Luso-Farmaco           do.
               Digestenzimas tablets      …       …         do.                          do.
               Eugynon ED tablets         …       …     Shering A.G.                     do.
               Perazil cream …            …       …     Burroughs Wellcome & Co. Ltd.    do.
               Perazil tablets            …       …         do.                          do.
               Sleep-Eze tablets          …       …     Whitehall Laboratories           do.
               Slow-Fe tablets            …       …     Ciba Laboratories Ltd.           do.
               Univol suspension          …       …     Frank W. Horner & Co.            do.
               Univol tablets             …       …         do.                          do.
               Vanpar suspension          …       …     Parke Davies de Mexico SA        do.
               Vicks Formula 44 cough disks       …     Richardson-Merrell Inc.          do.
               Improved Vicks cough syrup         …         do.                          do.
               Vigorvil syrup             …       …     Instituto Luso-Farmaco           do.
               Anti-Sacer compositum tablets      …     Dr. A. Wander                   Third Schedule
               Bactrim Roche dragees …            …     Roche Products Ltd.              do.
               Bactrim Roche suspension           …         do.                          do.
               Campovit injection         …       …     Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.        do.
               Citanest jelly 2%          …       …     Astra AB                         do.
               Dinocebril tablets         …       …     Instituto Luso-Farmaco           do.
               Ebisthesin special injection       …     Ebidenta                         do.
               Epontol i.v. injection     …       …     Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.        do.
               Flindix tablets            …       …     Instituto Luso-Farmaco           do.
               Heminevrin capsules        …       …     Astra AB                         do.
               Heminevrin injection and infusion            do.                          do.
               Heminevrin tablets         …       …         do.                          do.
               Iso-Benzacyl tablets       …       …     Dr. A. Wander                    do.
               Iso-Benzacyl forte plus pyridoxine           do.                          do.
                tablets
               Limbitrol 5 capsules       …       …     Roche Products Ltd.              do.



                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                 Food and Drugs                       Chap. 30:01                   133
                         Approval of New Drugs Notification                               [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                           Manufacturer               Conditions
                                                                          of Sale
Limbitrol 10 capsules      …      …   Roche Products Ltd.             Third Schedule
Medihaler-Duo Inhaler …           …   Riker Laboratories Ltd.           do.
Metoxidon tablets          …      …   Instituto Luso-Farmaco            do.
Neo-Cortodina 5 mg. injection     …      do.                            do.
Neo-Cortodina 10 mg. injection    …      do.                            do.
Neo-Cortodina depositum injection …      do.                            do.
Neo-Testis E. ampoules …          …      do.                            do.
Neo-Testis E. capsules …          …      do.                            do.
Pantozyme capsules         …      …   Dr. A. Wander                     do.
Pantozyme tablets          …      …      do.                            do.
Pavulon injection          …      …   Organon Laboratories              do.
Perivar tablets            …      …   Walter Ritter                     do.
Primostat injection        …      …   Schering A.G.                     do.
Septrin Compound tablets          …   Burroughs Wellcome & Co. Ltd.     do.
Septrin Paediatric suspension     …      do.                            do.
Septrin Paediatric tablets        …      do.                            do.
Spasmo-Canulase tablets           …   Dr. A. Wander                     do.
Trasylol i.v. injection    …      …   Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.         do.
Ventolin aerosol inhaler …        …   Allen & Hanburys Ltd.             do.
Vitamin B12 injection …           …   Walter Ritter                     do.
Anugesic ointment          …      …   W. R. Warner & Co. Ltd.         Freely            112/1969.
Anugesic suppositories …          …      do.                            do.
Anusol ointment            …      …      do.                            do.
Anusol suppositories       …      …      do.                            do.
Boric acid powder          …      …   G. Lockhart & Co.                 do.
Calamine lotion            …      …      do.                            do.
Chlorodine syrup           …      …      do.                            do.
Dicalets improved tablets         …   Abbott Laboratories               do.
Ear-ache drops             …      …   G. Lockhart & Co.                 do.
Eatongel liquid            …      …   Eaton Laboratories                do.
Eatongel tablets           …      …      do.                            do.
En-Zy-Mex tablets          …      …   Nutri-time Ltd.                   do.
Fer-Folic 500 tablets      …      …   Abbott Laboratories               do.
Gets-It salve              …      …   Plough, Inc.                      do.
Hydrogen Peroxide (20 vol.)       …   G. Lockhart & Co,                 do.
Ketrax tablets             …      …   Burroughs, Wellcome               do.
Lergoban tablets           …      …   Riker Laboratories Ltd.           do.
Liquid paraffin            …      …   G. Lockhart & Co.                 do.
Mercurochrome solution …          …      do.                            do.
Normenon tablets           …      …   Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.       do.
St. Joseph Liquid A solution      …   Plough Inc.                       do.
Silk-Lax tablets           …      …   Nutri-Time Ltd.                   do.
Sinutab tablets …          …      …   W. R. Warner & Co. Ltd.           do.
Sodium Bicarbonate         …      …   G. Lockhart & Co.                 do.
Sorbifer P tablets         …      …   Astra A. B.                       do.
Tincture of Iodine         …      …   G. Lockhart & Co.                 do.
Urolucosil suspension …           …   W. R. Warner & Co. Ltd.           do.
Anusol HC ointment         …      …      do.                          Third Schedule
Anusol HC suppositories …         …      do.                            do.
Arcored injection          …      …   Arco Ltd.                         do.
Brinerdin tablets          …      …   Sandoz Ltd.                       do.
Butazolidin Alka tablets …        …   Geigy (U.K.) Ltd.                 do.
Cor-Tar-Quin 1/4% cream           …   Dome Laboratories Ltd.            do.
Cor-Tan-Quin 1/2% cream           …      do.                            do.
Diademil tablets           …      …   E. R. Squibb & Sons Ltd.          do.



                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

134            Chap. 30:01                        Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                              Manufacturer                Conditions
                                                                                             of Sale
               Gynaecological tablets …           …   Walter Ritter                      Third Schedule
               Melsed capsules           …        …   Boots Pure Drug Co. Ltd.             do.
               Modecate injection (0.5, l0ml)     …   E. R. Squibb & Sons Ltd.             do.
               Penthrane liquid          …        …   Abbott Laboratories                  do.
               Prodiol forte tablets     …        …   Walter Ritter                        do.
               Prodiol forte ampoules …           …      do.                               do.
               Ultralan Oval tablets     …        …   Schering A. G.                       do.
144/1969.      Asilone suspension        …        …   Berk Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          Freely
               Bactino Skin Cream        …        …   Miles Laboratories Inc.              do.
               Cafenol tablets (new formula)      …   Sterling Drug International Ltd.     do.
               Duramatex liquid (vet.) …          …   Harkers Veterinary                   do.
                                                         Remedies Ltd.
               Feather Rot Cream (vet.) …         …      do.                               do.
               Haemorex Suppositories …           …   Cupal Ltd.                           do.
               Lancebroc cough syrup (adults)     …   Lancet Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          do.
               Lancebroc cough syrup (children)   …      do.                               do.
               Lancecolax paediatric drops        …      do.                               do.
               Lancecolax suppositories …         …      do.                               do.
               Lancecolax tablets (children)      …      do.                               do.
               Lancecolax tablets (adults)        …      do.                               do.
               Lanceotic eardrops        …        …      do.                               do.
               Lancepol suspension       …        …      do.                               do.
               Lancepol tablets          …        …      do.                               do.
               Lanceprin tablets         …        …      do.                               do.
               Mansonil powder (vet.) …           …   Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.            do.
               Optrex (new formula)      …        …      do.                               do.
               Pipergran granules        …        …   Ayrton Saunders                      do.
               Piriton spandets tablets …         …   Allen and Hanburys                   do.
               Squibb B Complex tablets           …   E. R. Squibb & Sons Ltd.             do.
               Ultin tablets …           …        …   Dr. Rentshler                        do.
               Ultin c Belladonna tablets         …      do.                               do.
               Berkfurin tablets, 50, 100 mgm     …   Berk Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          Third Schedule
               Coccisol Solution (vet.) …         …   Harkers Veterinary                   do.
                                                         Remedies Ltd.
               Detanol Compositum Injection (vet.)…   Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.            do.
               Furadantin MC Capsules …           …   Eaton Laboratories                   do.
               Lancehelmin tablets (children)     …   Lancet Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          do.
               Lancehelmin tablets (adults)       …      do.                               do.
               Lancephylline ampoules …           …      do.                               do.
               Lancephylline paediatric elixir    …      do.                               do.
               Lancephylline suppositories        …      do.                               do.
               Lancephylline tablets     …        …      do.                               do.
               Lancetropin ampoules …             …      do.                               do.
               Lancetropin tablets       …        …      do.                               do.
               Neguvon injectable (vet.)          …   Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.            do.
               Ponderax tablets          …        …   Selpharm Laboratories Ltd.           do.
               Proviron tablets 25 mgm …          …   Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.            do.
               Rautol dragees            …        …   Dr. Rentschler                       do.
               Seranaces capsules        …        …   G. D. Searle                         do.
               Supronal Solution (vet.) …         …   Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.            do.
               Supronal pessaries (vet.) …        …      do.                               do.
               Testifix cream            …        …   Patentex GMBH                        do.
               Vertebran ampoules        …        …   Dr. Rentschler                       do.
               Vertebran dragees         …        …      do.                               do.
               Vertebran drops           …        …      do.                               do.
               Vertebran suppositories …          …      do.                               do.



                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                     Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                    135
                           Approval of New Drugs Notification                                    [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                         Manufacturer           Country of    Conditions
                                                                     origin       of Sale
Alka-2 Tablets …             …    Miles Laboratories Inc.        U.S.A.         Free Sale      165/1969.
Aimax Methallibure Pre-Mix        I.C.I.                         U.K.             do.
  1% for veterinary use
Dynastan Powder …            …    Lloyds Pharmaceuticals Ltd.      do.            do.
Dynastan Cream …             …      do.                            do.            do.
Eustidil Powder for veterinary    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.         do.            do.
  use
Flavoured Phillips Milk of        Sterling Drugs International   Trinidad and     do.
  Magnesia Powder (Sachets)         Ltd.                           Tobago
Mansonil for veterinary use       Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.      W. Germany       do.
Neguvon for veterinary use          do.                            do.            do.
Seven Seas Start Right Cod        British Cod Liver Oils         U.K.             do.
  Liver Oil                         (Hull and Grimsby) Ltd.
Supervim 28 tablets          …    U.S. Ethicals Inc.             U.S.A.           do.
Thera-Blem Cream             …    Noxell Corporation               do.            do.
Celestamine-F Syrup          …    Schering Corporation           Panama         Third
                                                                                  Schedule
Deanase injection (1 million      Consolidated Chemicals Ltd.    U.K.             do.
  units)
Deanase injection (1/4 million      do.                            do.            do.
  units)
Detanol-E Compositum for          Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.      W. Germany       do.
  veterinary use
Geristone Capsules            …   U.S. Ethicals Inc.             U.S.A.           do.
Ludobal Quinuronium               Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.      W. Germany       do.
  Sulphate for veterinary use
Persumbrax Tablets            …   C. H. Boehringer Sohn            do.            do.
Progynova 1 mg. Tablets       …   Schering A.G.                    do.            do.
Prosalve Diabetabs Tablets …      Walter Ritter                    do.            do.
Sinequan Capsules 10 mgs. …       Pfizer Ltd.                    U.K.             do.
Sinequan Capsules 25 mgs. …         do.                            do.            do.
Stelazine Syrup …             …   Smith Kline & French             do.            do.
                                    Laboratories Ltd.
Supronal pessaries for            Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.      W. Germany       do.
  veterinary use
Synalar Gel       …           …   I.C.I.                         U.K.             do.
Supronal Solution 20% for         Farbenfabriken Bayer A.G.      W. Germany       do.
 veterinary use
Ulcinal Tablets …             …   U.S. Ethicals Inc.             U.S.A.           do.
Sodeca Capsules …             …   Etablissements Sopar           Belgium        Free Sale      9/1970.
Betnovate Compound                Glaxo Laboratories             England        Third
  Suppositories                                                                   Schedule
Gonaplex (injectable)         …   Carter Wallace S.A.            Mexico           do.
Haflutan Tablets …            …   Walter Ritter                  W. Germany       do.
Ipharon Compound Tablets …          do.                            do.            do.
Pasaden Tablets …             …   Laboratories Perfecta S.A.     Belgium          do.
Sohydrone 1% Eye Drops …          Etablissements Sopar             do.            do.
Sohydrone 1% Eye Ointment           do.                            do.            do.
Sohydrone Forte Eye Drops           do.                            do.            do.
Sohydrone Forte Eye                 do.                            do.            do.
  Ointment
Triavil Tablets   …           …   Merck Sharp & Dohme            Canada           do.
Vasopred Ophthalmic               Smith Miller & Path. Inc.      U.S.A.           do.
  Suspension
Winavit Tablets …             …   Sydney Ross Co. S.A.           Mexico           do.
Alka-Seltzer Plus cold tablets    Miles Laboratories Inc.        U.S.A.         Free Sale      37/1970.



                                            UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                 L.R.O.

                                   UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

136            Chap. 30:01                       Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                                Manufacturer                Conditions
                                                                                               of Sale

51/1970.       Depronal SA capsules …            …    W. R. Warner & Co. Ltd.            Freely
               Dillex gripe mixture      …       …    Optrex (Overseas) Ltd.               do.
               Prolact cream             …       …    Gothic Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          do.
               Pro-Plus He-Vite elixir …         …    Ashe Laboratories Ltd.               do.
               Slow-Fe Folic tablets     …       …    Giba Laboratories Ltd.               do.
               Vi’dorado tablets         …       …    Gothic Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          do.
               Acne-Cort-Dome cream, acid pH     …    Dome Laboratories                  Third Schedule
               Anapolon 5 mgm. tablets           …    Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          do.
               Anapolon 10 mgm. tablets          …      do.                                do.
               Gevramet elixir           …       …    Lederle Laboratories                 do.
               Gravibinan i.m. injection         …    Schering A.G.                        do.
               HMS Medrysone ophthalmic susp.    …    Allergan Pharmaceuticals             do.
               Konakion 10 tablets       …       …    Roche Products Ltd.                  do.
               Mogadon capsules, 5 mgm.          …    Roche Products Ltd.                  do.
               Propaderm Forte cream …           …    Allen & Hanbury Ltd.                 do.
               Prosymasul suspension …           …    Lederle Laboratories                 do.
               Tantum tablets            …       …    N.V. Organon                         do.
               Ultradil cream            …       …    Schering A.G.                        do.
               Ultradil Ointment         …       …      do.                                do.


                 The following Drugs are re-approved for the reasons mentioned:
               Beminal with Iron elixir—new active ingredients …          …      …       Freely
               Cortosyn, Cortrosyn Depot injections—new warning re use …         …       Third Schedule
               Ferrapoyan elexir—previously called “Campoferron elixir” …        …       Freely
               Proviron tablets—changed in inactive ingredients …         …      …       Third Schedule
               Serenace capsules—change in proportion of inactive ingredients    …         do.
               Sosegon compound tablets—previously called Albaton Compound tablets         do.

53/1970.       C-A-R solution (vet.)     …        …   Masti-Kure Products Co.            Freely
               C-A-R concentrate (vet.) …         …     do.                                do.
               Oletron tablets …         …        …   Farbenfabriken Bayer AG              do.
               Stress-Aide injection (vet.)       …   Masti-Kure Products Co.              do.
               Zev liquid        …       …        …   W. Buckley                           do.
               Flu-vet DMSO (vet.)       …        …   Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.        Third Schedule
               Flu-vet tab. (vet.)       …        …     do.                                do.
               Flu-vet inj. (vet.)       …        …     do.                                do.
               Intal powder              …        …   Fisons Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          do.
               Nitro-Uterokure bolus (vet.)       …   Masti-Kure Products Co.              do.
               Nitro-Uterokure Liquid (vet.)      …     do.                                do.
               Prednisolone Acetate (vet.) 1% and       do.                                do.
                2% injection

               Trade Name and Form                    Manufacturer               Country of     Conditions
                                                                                   origin        of Sale

108/1970.      Afrodor Tablets …          … Klostermann GMBH                 W. Germany        Freely
               *Intestopan Suspension     … Sandoz Ltd.                      Switzerland         do.
               Kolanticon Gel …           … Richardson Merrel Ltd.           U.K.                do.
                                              (Merrel Division)
               *Mi-Cebrin Tablets         … Eli Lilly & Co.                  U.S.A.              do.
               Micolax Enema …            … Pharmacia                        Sweden              do.
               Norwich Liquid Saccharin   … Norwich Pharmacal Co.            U.S.A.              do.
               Tums Tablets      …        … Lewis/Howe Co.                     do.               do.
               Akineton Injection         … Knoll AG Chem. Works             W. Germany        Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               *Change in formula.


                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                           Chap. 30:01                       137
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                      [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                      Manufacturer               Country of       Conditions
                                                                      origin          of Sale
Akineton Tablets …          … Knoll AG Chem. Works               W. Germany          Third
                                                                                       Schedule
Colprone Tablets …        …     Ayerst Lab. Ltd.                 Canada                do.
Eldopaque Cream           …     Paul E. Elder Co.                U.S.A.                do.
*Intra-Cebrin Tablets     …     Eli Lilly & Co.                    do.                 do.
Isodril Sublingal Tablets …     Ayerst Lab. Ltd.                 Canada                do.
Mafylon Acetate Cream     …     Winthrop Products Inc.           U.S.A.                do.
Neogynon Coated Tablets …       Schering AG                      W. Germany            do.
Neogynon ED Coated Tablets        do.                              do.                 do.
Nordiol-21 Tablets        …     Wyeth Pharmaceuticals            Australia             do.
Ovulen 50 Tablets         …     G. D. Searle & Co.               U.K.                  do.
Tonovan Tablets …         …     Schering A.G                     W. Germany            do.
Vagestrol Vaginal               Eaton Laboratories               U.S.A.                do.
   Suppositories
Calcibronat syrup …       …     Sandoz Ltd.                      Switzerland         Freely       109/1970.
Becotin-T tablets …       …     E. Lilly & Co.                   U.S.A.                do.
Cosaldon Retard Dragees   …     Chemische Werk Albert            W. Germany          Third
                                                                                       Schedule
Asilone Suspension         …    Berk Pharmaceuticals Ltd.        U.K.                  do.
Chocks Tablets …           …    Miles Laboratories               U.S.A.              Freely
Depo-Provera 150 i.m.           Upjohn S.A.                      Belgium             Third
  injection                                                                            Schedule
Vascunicol Tablets         …    C. H. Boehringer Sohn            W. Germany            do.
Unicap M. Tablets          …    Upjohn Company                   U.S.A.              Freely
Maltsupex liquid …         …    Abbott Laboratories                do.                 do.
Maltsupex powder           …       do.                             do.                 do.
Forapin Liniment …         …    Heinrich Mack                    W. Germany            do.        158/1970.
Psorex Cream      …        …    Jeffrey Martin Inc.              U.S.A.                do.
Psorex Shampoo …           …       do.                             do.                 do.
Woodward’s Diarrhoea            W. Woodward Ltd.                 U.K.                  do.
  Mixture
*Biligrafin Forte Amps 50%      Schering A.G.                    W. Germany          Third
                                                                                       Schedule
Compoz Tablets …         …      Jeffrey Martin Inc.              U.S.A.                do.
Dextopic Cream …         …      M.V. Organon                     Holland               do.
Duraphat Varnish …       …      M. Woelm                         W. Germany            do.
Isopto Epinal Eye Drops 1%      Alcon Laboratories               U.S.A.                do.
Tofranil Syrup …         …      Geigy                            U.K.                  do.
Trasicor Tablets 40 mgm. …      CIBA                               do.                 do.
Ubretid Ampoules         …      Berk Pharmaceuticals Ltd.          do.                 do.
Ubretid Tablets …        …         do.                             do.                 do.
*Urografin Amps 76%      …      Schering A.G.                      do.                 do.
Ventolin Tablets …       …      Allen and Hanburys                 do.                 do.

Trade Name and Form                               Manufacturer                   Conditions
                                                                                  of Sale
A-Compleat Capsulettes …           …    Healthcrafts Division of           Freely                 18/1971.
                                          Alfonal Ltd.
Andantol Jelly          …          …    Laboratorios Vargas S.A.,              do.
                                          Venezuela
Andantol Syrup          …          …      do.                                  do.
Andantol Tablets        …          …      do.                                  do.
Andantol F. Tablets     …          …      do.                                  do.
Anti-Sat Capsules       …          …    Healthcrafts Division of               do.
                                          Alfonal Ltd.
Balm of Gilhead Cough Mixture      …    Heath and Heather Ltd.                 do.
B-Compleat Tablets    …            …    Healthcrafts Division of               do.
                                          Alfonal Ltd.
*Change in formula.

                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                      L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

138            Chap. 30:01                       Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                               Manufacturer                Conditions
                                                                                              of Sale
               Bio-Flora Tablets      …          …    Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. Freely
               Bio-Flavons Tablets    …          …      do.                                 do.
               Calcium Plus Tablets   …          …      do.                                 do.
               Captagon Tablets       …          …    Laboratorios Vargas S.A.,             do.
                                                        Venezuela
               Catarrh Pastilles        …         …   Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               Catarrh Tablets          …         …     do.                                 do.
               Cash Nerve and Blood Tonic Tablet …    A. W. Chase Corporation Ltd.          do.
               Corn and Wart Ointment …           …   Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               Desogen Lozenges         …         …   Geigy (U.K.) Ltd.                     do.
               Diuretic Tablets         …         …   Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               E-Compleat Capsulettes …           …   Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
               Eczema Ointment          …         …   Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               Enzygest Tablets         …         …   Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
               Florus Granules          …         …     do.                                 do.
               Gev-E-Tabs.              …         …     do.                                 do.
               Golden Health Catarrh Tablets      …   Trent Laboratories                    do.
               Golden Health Herbal Laxative      …     do.                                 do.
               Golden Health Indigestion Tabs.    …     do.                                 do.
               Golden Health Nerve Tablets        …     do.                                 do.
               Golden Health Sleeping Tablets     …     do.                                 do.
               Golden Health Strength Tablets     …     do.                                 do.
               Golden Seal Tablets      …         …   Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
               Healing Antiseptic Ointment        …   Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               Heatherlax Constipation Tabs.      …     do.                                 do.
               Hemapoyan B-12           …         …   Bayer Ltd.                            do.
               Indigestion and Flatulence Tablets     Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               Kidney Tablets           …         …     do.                                 do.
               Listerine Breath Spray …           …   Warner Lambert                        do.
                                                        Pharmaceutical U.S.A.
               Listerine Cold Tablets …          …      do.                                 do.
               Liver Plus Tablets      …         …    Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
               Nerve Tablets           …         …    Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               Oval Colic Drops        …         …    Frank W. Horner Ltd.                  do.
               Pile Ointment           …         …    Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               Rheumatic Balm          …         …      do.                                 do.
               Rheumatism Tablets      …         …      do.                                 do.
               Sexopronto Dragees      …         …    A. Fabricus                           do.
               Sleep Compleat Capsulettes        …    Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
               Spartan Elixir          …         …    Trent Laboratories                    do.
               Stomach and Liver Tablets         …    Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
               Super B-1 Capsules      …         …    Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
               Super B-2 Capsules      …         …      do.                                 do.
               Super B-6 Capsules      …         …      do.                                 do.
               Super Brewer’s Yeast Tablets      …      do.                                 do.
               Super C Capsules        …         …      do.                                 do.
               Super E Capsules        …         …      do.                                 do.
               Super Kelp Tablets      …         …      do.                                 do.
               Super Lecithin Capsules …         …      do.                                 do.
               Super Rose Hips Tablets …         …      do.                                 do.
               Super Wheat Germ Oil Capsules     …      do.                                 do.



                                      UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                    Food and Drugs                               Chap. 30:01                       139
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                            [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                                 Manufacturer                   Conditions
                                                                                    of Sale
Tavegyl Tablets         …          …     Sandoz Ltd.                         Freely
Test Sixty Tablets      …          …     Ashe Laboratories Ltd.                do.
Unicap Capsules         …          …     The Upjohn Co.                        do.
Veg-E-Tabs. …           …          …     Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
Ver-O-Rheum             …          …     Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
Ver-O-Vine …            …          …        do.                                do.
Ver-O-Zest …            …          …        do.                                do.
Vigorton 2 Elixir       …          …     Federated Pharmaceutical Ltd.         do.
Vit-Amino Tablets       …          …     Healthcrafts Division of              do.
                                            Alfonal Ltd.
Vi-Tablets Vitality      …         …     Heath and Heather Ltd.                do.
Vita-Mines Tablets       …         …     Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
VM Tabsules              …         …        do.                                do.
Celestamine Tablets      …         …     Schering Co.                        Third Schedule
Daonil Tablets           …         …     Ferbwerke Hoescht                     do.
Dipar Retard Dragees     …         …        do.                                do.
Infrocin Capsules        …         …     Charles E. Frosst                     do.
Ketalar Injection 10 mgm./ml.      …     Parke Davis & Co. Ltd.                do.
Ketalar Injection 50 mgm./ml.      …        do.                                do.
Lamprene Capsules        …         …     Geigy (U.K.) Ltd.                     do.
 Minidon Tablets         …         …     E. R. Squibb                          do.
Restovar Tablets         …         …     M.V. Organon                          do.
Solu Medrol Injection 40 mgm.      …     The Upjohn Co.                        do.
Solu Medrol Injection 125 mgm.     …        do.                                do.
Super A. Capsules        …         …     Healthcrafts Division of Alfonal Ltd. do.
Talodex Injectable       …         …     Diamond Laboratories                  do.
Zumba with Hormone Tablets         …     Schmidt and Co. Ltd.                  do.
Itridal Tablets          …         …     Laboratorios Vargas S.A.            Controlled Drug

  The following Drugs are re-approved for the reasons mentioned:
Calcium Sandoz with vitamin C—Removal of Sodium Cyclamate                    Freely
     formula
Periactin Syrup—Additional claim “appetite stimulant”      …           …          do.
Periactin Tablets—Additional claim “appetite stimulant”    …           …          do.

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer               Country of          Conditions
                                                                       origin             of Sale
Arcogen-12        …          …   Arco Ltd.                         Switzerland          Freely          22/1971.
Benylin DM Cough Syrup       …   Parke, Davis & Co. Ltd.           Canada                 do.
Hybin Tablets     …          …   Leo Laboratories Ltd.             Ireland                do.
In-Vite Powder …             …     do.                                do.                 do.
Oraldene Liquid …            …   William R. Warner & Co. Ltd.      U.K.                   do.
Rotersept Spray …            …   Pharmaceutische Fabriek Roter     Holland                do.
Sanatogen Junior Vitamins    …   Fisons Ltd.                       U.K.                   do.
Scanbecomplex Capsules       …   Scandrug                          Denmark                do.
Scandrops         …          …     do.                                do.                 do.
Scandex Capsules             …     do.                                do.                 do.
Scaniplex Syrup …            …     do.                                do.                 do.
Scanlax Capsules             …     do.                                do.                 do.
Scanminplex Capsules         …     do.                                do.                 do.
Scanoscapine Syrup           …     do.                                do.                 do.
Scanplast Elastic Plaster    …     do.                                do.                 do.
Scanplast P.V.C. Plaster     …     do.                                do.                 do.
Ultravite Tablets …          …   Leo Laboratories                  Ireland                do.



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                            L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

140            Chap. 30:01                        Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                      Manufacturer           Country of        Conditions
                                                                                 origin           of Sale
               *Vi-Daylin-M Syrup       … Abbott Laboratories                 U.S.A.            Freely
               Wake Ups Tablets …       … Adrem Ltd.                          Canada              do.
               Aldomet Tablets 125 mgm. … Merck, Sharp & Dohme                U.S.A.            Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Aldomet Tablets 500 mgm. …        do.                             do.              do.
               Celaton CH3 Tablets         …   Biocosmetics (London) Ltd.     U.K.                do.
               Centyl Tablets 2.5 mgm.     …   Leo Laboratories Ltd.          Ireland             do.
               Centyl Tablets 5.0 mgm.     …     do.                             do.              do.
               Centyl K Tablets …          …     do.                             do.              do.
               Diphebuzol Tablets 100 mgm.       do.                             do.              do.
               Diphebuzol Tablets 200 mgm.       do.                             do.              do.
               Drixoral Chronosules        …   Schering Corporation           U.S.A.              do.
               Eraldin Injection 10 mgm. …     Imperial Chemical Industries   U.K.                do.
               Larodopa Tablets 500 mgm. …     Roche Products Ltd.               do.              do.
               Eraldin Tablets 100 mgm     …   Imperial Chemical Industries      do.              do.
               Leo K 600 mgm. Capsitabs …      Leo Laboratories Ltd.          Ireland             do.
               Scandantin Capsules 100 mgm.    Scandrug                       Denmark             do.
               Scanal Compound Capsules …        do                              do.              do.
               Scandopa Capsules 250 mgm.        do.                             do.              do.
               Scaniplex Capsules          …     do.                             do.              do.
               Sedicin Tablets …           …   Adrem Ltd.                     Canada              do.
               Tacitin Tablets 10 mgm.     …   Ciba Laboratories Ltd.         U.K.                do.
               Topilar Ointment            …   Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.       do.              do.
               Tosanyl Tablets …           …   Leo Laboratories Ltd.          Ireland             do.
56/1971.       Collomack          …        …   Heinrich Mack                  W. Germany        Freely
               Niferex Elixir     …        …   Laboratorios Vargas SA         Venezuela           do.
               Benzyl Benzoate 50 per cent     Burroughs Wellcome & Co.       Canada              do.
                Emulsion
               Niferex Tablets …           …   Laboratorios Vargas SA .       Venezuela           do.
               Nipe Capsules …             …     do.                            do.               do.
               Settlers Tablets …          …   Sigma Co., Ltd                 Australia           do.
               Seven Seas Formula 70       …   British Cod Liver Oils         U.K.                do.
                                                 (Hull and Grimsby) Ltd.
               Silbephylline Syrup       …     Berk Pharmaceuticals Ltd.        do.               do.
               Tabiomin Capsules         …     Laboratorios Vargas SA         Venezuela           do.
               Tabiomin Complex Capsules …       do.                            do.               do.
               Afrodex Capsules          …     Bentex Pharmaceutical Co.      U.S.A.            Third
                                                                                                  Schedule
               Arcodexan Tablets        … Arco Ltd.                           Switzerland         do.
               Arconeurine Injection 2cc…    do.                                do.               do.
               Arconeurine Injection 3cc…    do.                                do.               do.
               Bactrim Adult Suspension … Roche Products Ltd.                 U.K.                do.
               Begrivac Injection       … Behringwerke                        W. Germany          do.
                                             Aktiengesellschaft
               Binomil Tablets …        … Biohorm                             Spain               do.
               Ketrax Syrup      …      … Imperial Chemical Industries        U.K.                do.
                                             Ltd.
               Metaflorine       …      … Heinrich Mack                       W. Germany          do.
               Plasil Drops      …      … Le Petit                            Italy               do.
               Plasil Ampoules …        …    do.                                 do.              do.
               Plasil Syrup      …      …    do.                                 do.              do.
               Plasil Tablets    …      …    do.                                 do.              do.
               Prednacyl Tablets        … M.V. Organon                        Holland             do.
               Rautrax Modified 25 mgm. … E. R. Squibb & Sons Ltd.            U.K.                do.
               Rautrax Modified 50 mgm. …    do.                                 do.              do.
               Tranquo-Alupent Tablets  … C. H. Boehringer Sohn               W. Germany          do.
               *Change in formula.


                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                    Food and Drugs                             Chap. 30:01                   141
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                     [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer            Country of      Conditions
                                                                    origin         of Sale
Zolyse           …           … Alcon Laboratories Inc.          Canada            Third
                                                                                    Schedule
Actifs Capsules …            …   M.C.M. Kloster frav            W. Germany        Freely         120/1971.
Budoform Tablets             …   Dolder Ltd.                    Switzerland         do.
Coryztime Capsules           …   Paul B. Elder Co.              U.S.A.              do.
Daribiol Capsules …          …   Dolder Ltd.                    Switzerland         do.
D.D.D. Balm       …          …   D.D.D. Co., Ltd.               U.K.                do.
D.D.D. Prescription Extra          do.                            do.               do.
 Strength
Energin Tablets …        … Biosante Chemical                    U.S.A.              do.
                              International
Fuca Excellent …         … M.D.M. Klosterfrau                   W. Germany          do.
Heptuna Plus Capsules    … J. B. Roerig Div. of Pfizer          U.S.A.              do.
Nilverm Pig Wormer       … I.C.I.                               U.K.                do.
Reoribec Tablets …       … J. B. Roerig Div. of Pfizer            do.               do.
Sine-Off Tablets …       … Menley & James Laboratories          U.S.A.              do.
Testiviton Tablets       … Pharmatech Laboratories                do.               do.
Wate-On Tonic …          … Wate-On Laboratories                 Jamaica             do.
Brocadopa Capsules 500 mgm. Brocades Ltd.                       U.K.              Third
                                                                                    Schedule
Brocadopa Capsules 250 mgm.        do.                             do.              do.
Brocadopa Capsules 125 mgm.        do.                             do.              do.
Graded Sequential Tablets …      Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.       do.              do.
Hiprex Tablets …            …    Riker Laboratories                do.              do.
Levodopa Capsules 500 mgm.       Arco Ltd.                       Switzerland        do.
Levodopa Capsules 250 mgm.         do.                             do.              do.
Lyndiol Tablets …           …    M.V. Organon                    Holland            do.
Marek’s Disease Vaccine     …    Merck, Sharp & Dohme            U.S.A.             do.
Mutabon-M Tablets           …    Schering Corporation .            do.              do.
Opovitam Tablets …          …    Biosante Chemical International   do.              do.
Septrin Adult Suspension    …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.        U.K.               do.
Topilar Cream …             …    Syntex Pharmaceutical Ltd.        do.              do.
Arthricol Tablets …         …    Octo Laboratories               Canada           Freely         264/1971.
Activarol Oral Suspension …        do.                             do.              do.
Activarol 500 Elixir        …      do.                             do.              do.
Anacin Arthritis Pain Formula    Whitehall Laboratories Inc.     U.S.A.             do.
 Tablets
*Autrin Capsules …          …    Cyanamid International           do.               do.
Aradolene Cream …           …    Radial Chemicals Ltd.          U.K.                do.
Aspellin Spirit Liniment    …      do.                            do.               do.
Ami-proteine Tablets        …    A. B. Cernelle                 Sweden              do.
Antiasthmaticae Tablets     …    Cephar S.A.                    Switzerland         do.
Antianem B 12 2000 Elixir …        do.                            do.               do.
Anti-germ Healing Ointment       Pritchards Ltd.                  U.K.              do.
Arco C 500 Pellets          …    Arco Ltd.                      Switzerland         do.
A.P.C. Tablets     …        …    John Bell, Hills & Lucas       U.K.                do.
Bropene Lotion …            …    Octo Laboratories              Canada              do.
Bonzine Travel Sickness Tabs.    Cupal Ltd.                     U.K.                do.
Bronal Cough and Catarrh           do.                            do.               do.
 Elixir
*B. N. Liniment …           …    Minnesota 3M Lab. Ltd.         U.S.A.              do.
Beltux Coated Tablets       …    A. B. Cernelle                 Sweden              do.
Bantex Capsules …           …    Texcan Pharmaceutical Ltd.     Canada              do.
Beneuran Compositum              Leonard & Co.                  Austria             do.
 Tablets
*Change in formula.


                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                     L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

142            Chap. 30:01                           Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                          Manufacturer         Country of    Conditions
                                                                                   origin       of Sale
               C-Vita Syrup       …           …   Octo Laboratories             Canada        Freely
               Child’s Pain and Fever Elixir      Cupal Ltd.                    U.K.            do.
               Cernilton Tablets …            …   A. B. Cernelle                Sweden          do.
               Cernitin Wound Ointment …            do.                           do.           do.
               Cernifex Tablets …             …     do.                           do.           do.
               Cervati Tablets …              …     do.                           do.           do.
               Cernident Tablets …            …     do.                           do.           do.
               Colepar Granules …             …   Copar S. A.                   Switzerland     do.
               Cromatax           …           …   Texcan Pharmaceuticals Ltd.   Canada          do.
               Diarrhoea Mixture Adults …         Cupal Ltd.                    U.K.            do.
               Diarrhoea Mixture Children’s         do.                           do.           do.
               Ducon              …           …   Smith, Kline & French Lab.    U.S.A.          do.
               Dr. Lynn’s Diarrhoea &             Pritchards Ltd.               U.K.            do.
                 Dysentery Mixture
               Fetabs …           …           …    Octo Laboratories            Canada          do.
               Ferrofume Adult Tablets        …      do.                          do.           do.
               Ferrofume Children Tablets            do.                          do.           do.
               Femme Aid Pills …              …   Cupal Ltd.                    U.K.            do.
               Fempain Tablets …              …   S.S.S. Company                U.S.A.          do.
               Globifer Elixir …              …   Orto Laboratories             Canada          do.
               Geriatrio Pharmaton            …   Pharmaton Ltd.                Switzerland     do.
               Hofel’s Formula “S”            …   Hofel’s Pure Food Ltd.        England         do.
               Jetsan …           …           …   Cophar S. A.                  Switzerland     do.
               Keraderm Ointment              …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
               Kalforte           …           …   Texcan Pharmaceuticals Ltd.     do.           do.
               Mel Syrup          …           …   Octo Laboratories               do.           do.
               Minima Tablets …               …   A. B. Cernelle                Sweden          do.
               Norbitone Elixir …             …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
               Novarubin          …           …   Cophar S. A.                  Switzerland     do.
               Octeinol Syrup …               …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
               Ornex Capsules …               …   Smith, Kline & French Lab.    U.S.A.          do.
               Pyramenso Elixir …             …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
               Peplex Tablets …               …   Cupal Ltd.                    U.K.            do.
               Pirisol Junior Aspirin Tablets        do.                          do.           do.
               Polson’s Cough Syrup               P. A. Benjamin Mfg. Co.       Canada          do.
               Expectorant
               Prity Baby Gripe Mixture …         Pritchards Ltd.               U.K.            do.
               Pritchards Chesto Cough Syrup        do.                           do.           do.
               Pritchards Children’s Cherry         do.                           do.           do.
                Syrup
               Pritchards Iron Tonic Tablets        do.                           do.           do.
               Pritchards Junior Ipec.              do.                           do.           do.
                Cough Mixture
               Puraseptic         …           …     do.                            do.          do.
               Pollitabs Tablets …            …   A. B. Cernelle                Sweden          do.
               Rio Plus           …           …   Ayerst Laboratories           Canada          do.
               Regenex Pills      …           …   Arco Ltd.                     Switzerland     do.
               Sedine Syrup       …           …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
               Senema Adult Suppository …           do.                            do.          do.
               Senema Forte Suppository …           do.                            do.          do.
               Senema Infant Suppository …          do.                            do.          do.
               Stark Protein Tablets          …   A. B. Cernelle                Sweden          do.
               Solulip Syrup      …           …   Cophar S.A.                   Switzerland     do.
               Theocyne Elixir …              …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
               Tussin Syrup       …           …     do.                            do.          do.
               Totavit D. R. Capsules         …   Cupal Ltd.                    U.K.            do.
               Tavegyl Syrup …                …   Sandoz Ltd.                   Switzerland     do.
               Ulcelac Sachets …              …   Sigurta Farmaceutici          Italy           do.



                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                       Chap. 30:01                   143
                         Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                      Manufacturer          Country of   Conditions
                                                                 origin      of Sale
Ulcelac Tablets …         …     Sigurta Farmaceutici          Italy         Freely
Wormex Orange Flavour     …     E. C. De Witt & Co. Ltd.      U.K.            do.
Wormex Peppermint Flavour …        do.                           do.          do.
Yobinol Tablets …         …     Coates & Cooper Ltd.             do.          do.
Acetone Test    …         …     Denver Laboratories           Canada        Third
                                                                              Schedule
Acton-x Injection           …   Octo Laboratories               do.           do.
Alupent Syrup …             …   C. H. Boehringer Sohn         W. Germany      do.
Aldactide Tablets           …   G. D. Searle & Co. Ltd.       U.K.            do.
Arcobutina Forte Pills      …   Arco Ltd.                     Switzerland     do.
Anafranil Ampoules          …   Geigy (U.K.) Ltd.             U.K.            do.
Anafranil Capsules          …     do.                           do.           do.
Anafranil Syrup …           …     do.                           do.           do.
Buffazone Tablets           …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
Buscopan Compositum Drops       C. H. Boehringer Sohn         W. Germany      do.
Beneuran Compositum             Leonard & Co.                 Austria         do.
Ampoules
Cornatal Suppository Adult …    Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
Cortiment Suppository       …     do.                           do.           do.
Cortiment Forte Suppository …     do.                           do.           do.
Cortiment Junior Suppository      do.                           do.           do.
Cystalgine Tablets          …     do.                           do.           do.
Coba-12 Injection …         …     do.                           do.           do.
Cortiment Dermal Topical          do.                           do.           do.
 Solution
Combantrin Chewable Tablets     Pfizer Corporation            Belgium         do.
 250 mgm.
Combantrin Suspension       …     do.                           do.           do.
Cantharone        …         …     do.                         Canada          do.
Denco Pregnancy Test        …   Denver Laboratories             do.           do.
Dopalin Tablets 250 mgm. …      Charles E. Frosst & Co.         do.           do.
Fluazine “2” Tablets        …   Octo Laboratories               do.           do.
Fluazine “5” Tablets        …     do.                           do.           do.
Fluazine “10” Tablets       …     do.                           do.           do.
*Folbesyn Parenteral        …   Cyanamid International        U.S.A.          do.
Femagest Tablets            …   Paul Lappe Laboratories       W. Germany      do.
Fasigyn Tablets …           …   Pfizer Corporation            Belgium         do.
Glytet Bitab 595 …          …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
Glynacort Suppository       …     do.                           do.           do.
Hepacon B12 Injection       …   Consolidated Chemicals Ltd.   U.K.            do.
Hepacon Plex Injection      …     do.                           do.           do.
Immune Serum Globulin           Lederle Laboratories          U.S.A.          do.
 (Human)
Jonit Capsules 50 mgm .     …   Fabwerke Hoechst              W. Germany      do.
K.U.B. Tablets …            …   Octo Laboratories             Canada          do.
K.U.B. Minus Tablets        …     do.                           do.           do.
Meprobex Tablets            …     do.                           do.           do.
Mesco Tablets     …         …     do.                           do.           do.
Monotest          …         …   Denver Laboratories             do.           do.
Motival Tablets …           …   E.R. Squibb & Sons Ltd.       U.K.            do.
Moduretic Tablets           …   Merck, Sharp & Dohme Ltd.       do.           do.
Meltex Cream      …         …   Texcan Pharmaceuticals Ltd.   Canada          do.
Manticor Q Cream 0.5%       …     do.                           do.           do.
Manticor Q Cream 1.0%       …     do.                           do.           do.
Nack “5” Capsule …          …   Octo Laboratories               do.           do.
Nack “10” Capsule           …     do.                           do.           do.
Nack “15” Capsule           …     do.                           do.           do.

*Change in formula.


                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                                UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

144            Chap. 30:01                       Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                    Manufacturer         Country of          Conditions
                                                                             origin             of Sale
               Nolestrin Fe 1 mgm. Tablet … Parke Davis & Co.             U.S.A.              Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Nobrium Capsules 5 mgm.   … Roche Products Ltd.            U.K.                  do.

               *Orisulf Suspension            Ciba Laboratories             do.                 do.
               *Orisulf Tablets …         …     do.                         do.                 do.
               Norbium Capsules 10 mgm. … Roche Products Ltd.               do.                 do.
               Ponstan Suppositories 125 mgm. Parke Davis & Co.           U.S.A.                do.
               Ponstan Suppositories 500 mgm. do.                           do.                 do.
               R3 Screen Test …           … Denver Laboratories           Canada                do.
               Rheumaton        …         …     do.                         do.                 do.
               Rinosan Tablets …          … Walter Ritter                 W. Germany            do.
               Streptozyme      …         … Denver Laboratories           Canada                do.
               Salozapyrin Suppositories … Pharmacis A. B.                Sweden                do.
               Surmontil Capsules         … May & Baker Ltd.              U.K.                  do.
               Supral Capsules …          … Arco Ltd.                     Switzerland           do.
               Sowelip Tablets …          … Cophar S.A.                     do.                 do.
               Sowell Tablets …           …     do.                         do.                 do.
               Tavegyl Ampoules           … Sandoz Ltd.                     do.                 do.
               U.C.G. Test      …         … Denver Laboratories           Canada                do.
               Urispas Tablets …          … Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.   U.K                   do.
               Verbicol Tablets …         … Octo Laboratories             Canada                do.
               Vibricmune-M …             … B.D.H. Pharmaceutical Ltd.    U.K.                  do.
               Venosan Tablets …          … Heinrich Mack & Co.           W. Germany            do.
               Ventolin Syrup …           … Allen & Hanburys Ltd.         U.K.                  do.
               Cardiomatic Dragees        … Apomedica Graz                Austria             Controlled
                                                                                                Drug
               Lunar Bitab 607 …          … Octo Laboratories             Canada                do.
               Nervostal Tablets …        … Cophar S.A.                   Switzerland           do.
               Neo-Nervostal Tablets      …      do.                        do.                 do.
65/1972.       Aspirin Compound Tablets B.P.C. Booker B.D.H.              Jamaica             Freely
               Bionet Drops      …        … Wallace Pharmaceuticals         do.                 do.
                                                 International
               Bynin Amara       …        … Booker B.D.H.                 Guyana                do.
               Bunty Baby Cough Syrup … Lakeside Laboratories             U.K.                  do.
               Camalox Suspension         … William H. Rorer Inc.         U.S.A.                do.
               Cymex Cream …              … E. C. De Witt & Co. Ltd.      U.K.                  do.
               Camalox Tablets …          … William H. Rorer Inc.         U.S.A.                do.
               Children’s Whizz Tablets   … Booker B.D.H.                 Guyana                do.
               Diovol Suspension          … Wallace Pharmaceuticals       Jamaica               do.
                                                 International
               Dr. Lake’s Quick Action         Lakeside Laboratories      U.K.                  do.
                Fever Mixture
               *Famel Honey and Lemon Optrex Overseas Ltd.                    do.               do.
                Cough Syrup
               Folic Acid Tablets 5 mgm … Booker B.D.H.                   Jamaica               do.
               Haliborange       …        …      do.                      Guyana                do.
               Hetrogen K Soluble         … Heterochemical Corporation    U.S.A.                do.
               Heet Spray        …        … Whitehall Laboratories Inc.     do.                 do.

               *Change in formula.


                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                       www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                     Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                    145
                              Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer            Country of    Conditions
                                                                     origin       of Sale
Infantol Liquid   …           … Wallace Pharmaceuticals       Jamaica           Freely
                                  International
Infrarub Analgesic Balm       … Whitehall Laboratories Inc.   U.S.A.              do.
Maltlevol-12      …           … Wallace Pharmaceuticals       Jamaica             do.
                                  International
Magnesium Trisilicate           Booker B.D.H.                 Jamaica             do.
 Compound Tablets
No-Rash Cream …               … E. C. De Witt & Co. Ltd.      U.K.                do.
*Nupercaine Cream             … Ciba Laboratories               do.               do.
Ovol Drops       …            … Wallace Pharmaceuticals       Jamaica             do.
                                   International
Paracetamol Compound            Booker B.D.H.                      do.            do.
 Tablets
Panets Baby Syrup            … Optrex Overseas Ltd.           U.K.                do.
Panets Paracetamol Tablets        do.                           do.               do.
Plexafer Tablets …           … Beecham’s Research               do.               do.
Pyrets Lozenges …            … E. C. De Witt & Co. Ltd.         do.               do.
Syrup of Piperazine Citrate  … Booker B.D.H.                  Jamaica             do.
Slimming Disks for Men       … Trentham Laboratories          U.K.                do.
Secron …          …          … E. C. De Witt & Co. Ltd.         do.               do.
Tinactin Cream …             … Schering Corporation           U.S.A.              do.
Tussol            …          … Wallace Pharmaceuticals        Jamaica             do.
                                  International
Tee-Ten Tonic    …           … Texcan Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    Canada              do.
Vibrolex Throat Paint        … Lakeside Laboratories          U.K.                do.
Vibrolex Ear Drops           …    do.                           do.               do.
Vibrolex Polyvitamin Tablets      do.                           do.               do.
Vibrolex Eye Drops           …    do.                           do.               do.
Vibrolex Pain Balm           …    do.                           do.               do.
Vibrolex Nerve & Bone Liniment do.                              do.               do.
Antiminth Chewable Tablets     Pfizer Corporation             Belgium           Third
                                                                                  Schedule
Antiminth Oral Suspension         do.                              do.            do.
Cendevax Rubella Virus         Recherche et Industrie              do.            do.
 Vaccine                          Therapeutiques
Chlorpromazine Tablets 25 mgm. Inter Alia Ltd.                U.K.                do.
Duo Autohaler …             … Riker Laboratories                do.               do.
Chlorpromazine Tablets         Inter Alia Ltd.                  do.               do.
 100 mgm.
Dihydergot Ampoules         … Sandoz Ltd.                     Switzerland         do.
Dihydergot Tablets          …     do.                           do.               do.
*Doriden Tablets …          … Ciba Laboratories               U.K.                do.
Gravol L/A Capsules         … Wallace Pharmaceuticals         Jamaica             do.
                                  International
Gravol Tablets …            …     do.                           do.               do.
Gravol Liquid    …          …     do.                           do.               do.
Iso Autohaler    …          … Riker Laboratories              U.K.                do.
Metosyn Ointment            … I.C.I.                            do.               do.
Pangavit 1000 Injection     … Wallace Pharmaceuticals         Mexico              do.
                                  International
Pangavit 5000 Injection     …     do.                           do.               do.
Palerol Ampoules            … Sandoz Ltd.                     Switzerland         do.
Palerol Tablets …           …     do.                           do.               do.
Propantheline Bromide          Inter Alia Ltd.                U.K.                do.
 Tablets 15 mgm.
Prednisolone Tablets 5 mgm. … Booker B.D.H.                   Jamaica             do.
Sandoven Tablets …          … Sandoz Ltd.                     Switzerland         do.
*Change in formula.


                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                   L.R.O.

                                   UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

146            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer         Country of    Conditions
                                                                                origin       of Sale

               Soma Compound Tablets      … Wallace Pharmaceuticals       Jamaica          Third
                                             International                                 Schedule

               Soma Tablets       …       …    do.                          do.              do .
               Stelazine Tablets 10 mgm. … Smith, Kline & French          U.K.               do.
               Sulphadiazine Tablets      … Booker B.D.H.                 Jamaica            do.
                0.5 gramme
               Sulphadimidine Tablets     …    do.                            do.            do.
                0.5 gm
               Sulphaguanidine Tablets    …    do.                            do.            do.
                0.5 gm.
                                      1
               Phenobarbitone Tablets /2 grain do.                            do.          Controlled
                                                                                             Drug
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 1 grain     do.                       do.              do.
102/1972.      Amrutanjan Dermal Ointment       Amrutanjan Ltd.           India            Freely
               Amrutanjan Gripe Mixture …         do.                       do.              do.
               Amrutanjan Inhaler           …     do.                       do.              do.
               Amrutanjan Pain Balm         …     do.                       do.              do.
               Anoleum Ointment             …   Anglo-French Labs.        Canada             do.
               Hemobex A-C …                …     do.                       do.              do.
               Hemobex Fortis Tablets       …     do.                       do.              do.
               Klev Tablets      …          …     do.                       do.              do.
               Scapin Syrup      …          …   Scandrug                  Denmark            do.
               A.P.C. Tablets    …          …   Eupharma Laboratories     India              do.
               Aspirin Tablets …            …     do.                       do.              do.
               Beniplex S/F Tablets         …     do.                       do.              do.
               Beniplex Fortified liquid    …     do.                       do.              do.
               Emalt …           …          …     do.                       do.              do.
               Euphicin Tablets …           …     do.                       do.              do.
               Euroton Drops …              …     do.                       do.              do.
               Euvitan Elixir    …          …     do.                       do.              do.
               Pyridoxine Hydrochloride           do.                       do.              do.
                   Tablets 10 mgm.
               Pyridoxine Hydrochloride           do.                         do.            do.
                   Tablets 50 mgm.
               Slow Sodium Tablets          …   Ciba Laboratories         U.K.               do.
               Alcosulph Cream …            …   Booker B.D.H.             Guyana             do.
               Hibiscrub         …          …   I.C.I. Ltd.               U.K.               do.
               Emtryl Premix …              …   May & Baker Ltd.            do.              do.
               Lemavit Sugar Coated Tablets     Maltex Tra                W. Germany         do.
               Vicoplex Capsules            …   Esgepharm                   do.              do.
               Tabron Tablets …             …   Parke Davis & Co.         U.S.A.             do.
               Salus Honey with Fennel Syrup    Salu-Haus                 W. Germany         do.
               Cynorin with B6 Injection …      Unique Pharmaceuticals    India            Third
                                                                                             Schedule
               Ifibrium Tablets 5 mgm.    …       do.                         do.            do.
               Ifibrium Tablets 10 mgm.   …       do.                         do.            do.
               Ifibrium Tablets 25 mgm.   …       do.                         do.            do.
               Kinex Tablets     …        …       do.                         do.            do.
               Metrogyl Tablets …         …       do.                         do.            do.
               Widactil Tablets 10 mgm. …         do.                         do.            do.
               Widactil Tablets 25 mgm. …         do.                         do.            do.
               Widactil Tablets 100 mgm. …        do.                         do.            do.
               Aminophylline Tablets      …       Eupharma Laboratories       do.            do.
               Chlorpromazine Tablets 10 mgm.     do.                         do.            do.
               Chlorpromazine Tablets             do.                         do.            do.
                  25 mgm.
               Chlorpheniramine Maleate           do.                         do.            do.
                 Tablets 4 mgm.



                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                    Food and Drugs                       Chap. 30:01                     147
                           Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                          Manufacturer       Country of   Conditions
                                                                  origin      of Sale
Cyanocobalamin Injection            Eupharma Laboratories       India        Third
  100 mcg.                                                                    Schedule
Cyanocobalamin Injection                do.                     do.           do.
  200 mcg.
Cyanocobalamin Injection                do                      do.           do.
   500 mcg.
Digoxin Tablets 0.25 mgm.      …        do.                     do.           do.
Nildrin 100 Tablets            …        do.                     do.           do.
Nildrin 200 Tablets            …        do.                     do.           do.
Prednisolone Tablets           …        do.                     do.           do.
Stabrium Tablets 10 mgm.       …        do.                     do.           do.
Stabrium Tablets 25 mgm.       …        do.                     do            do.
Sulphadimidine Tablets         …        do.                     do.           do.
Tolbutamide Tablets            …        do.                     do.           do.
Eskalith Capsules              …    Smith, Kline & French      U.S.A.         do.
Teldrin Spansules              …        do.                     do.           do.
Diarenine Tablets …            …    Esgepharm                  W. Germany     do.
Alfapsin Injectable            …    Anglo-French Labs.         Canada         do.
Alfapsin Tablets …             …        do.                     do.           do.
Alfapsin Ointment…             …        do.                     do.           do.
D.C.T. Vaccine …               …        do.                     do.           do.
Diphtheria Toxoid              …        do.                     do.           do.
Geriotonique Tablets           …        do.                     do.           do.
Immune Serum Globulin          …        do.                     do.           do.
Influenza Virus Vaccine        …        do.                     do.           do.
Polio Virus Vaccine, Live               do.                     do.           do.
  Oral (Sabin) Trivalent
T.A.B. Vaccine …               …        do.                     do.           do.
T.A.B.T. Vaccine …             …        do.                     do.           do.
Tetanus Toxoid …               …        do.                     do.           do.
Tetanus Antitoxin …            …        do.                     do.           do.
Vaccination Against                     do.                     do.           do.
   Small Pox
Mutabon 4/25 Tablets           …    Schering Corp.             U.S.A.          do.
Flenzavax Flue Vaccine         …    Burroughs Wellcome & Co.   U.K.            do.
Locoid Cream       …           …    Mycofarm                   Holland         do.
Locoid Lotion      …           …        do.                      do.           do.
Locoid Ointment …              …        do.                      do.           do.
Butacote Tablets …             …    Geigy Pharmaceuticals      U.K.            do.
Renese-R Tablets …             …    Pfizer Corp. Ltd.          Canada          do.
Anugesic H.C. Suppositories    …    William H. Warner & Co.    U.K.            do.
Josual Scherurich Dragees      …    E. Scheurich Pharmwerk     W. Germany      do.
Aquacare Dry Skin Cream        …    Allergan                   U.S.A.        Freely          116/1972.
Aquacare Dry Skin Lotion       …        do.                      do.           do.
Acetylsalicylic Acid Tablets        Ipca Laboratories          India           do.
  5 grs.
Alomag Tablets …               …        do.                     do.           do.
Enzymex Tablets …              …        do.                     do.           do.
Enzymex Liquid …               …        do.                     do.           do.
Folisules Tablets …            …        do.                     do.           do.
Folic Acid with Fe Tablets     …        do.                     do.           do.
Ipcamalt           …           …        do.                     do.           do.
Ipcavite Drops     …           …        do.                     do.           do.
Ipcavite Syrup     …           …        do.                     do.           do.
Pyriplex Syrup …               …        do.                     do.           do.
Vipacamine Tablets             …        do.                     do.           do.
Vitamin B6 Tablets 50 mgm.     …        do.                     do.           do.
Vitamin B Complex Forte                 do.                     do.           do.
 Tablets



                                              UNOFFICIAL VERSION                             L.R.O.

                                   UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

148            Chap. 30:01                        Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                     Manufacturer           Country of     Conditions
                                                                                origin        of Sale
               Vitamin C Chewable Tablets …     Ipca Laboratories             India            Freely
               Brolene Eye Drops            …   May & Baker Ltd.              U.K.              do.
               Phosferine Extravite Tablets …   Beecham Products                 do.            do.
               *Cafenol Tablets …           …   Sterling Drug International   Trinidad          do.
               Metamucil Instant Mix Powder     G. D. Searle                  U.K.              do.
               Lensine Contact Lens Solution    Abbott Laboratories           U.S.A.            do.
               Foibyl Dragees …             …   Sopar                         Belgium           do.
               Vitol Dragees     …          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Rynatan Tabules …            …   Mallinckrodt Chemical Works   U.S.A.            do.
               Rynatan Pediatric Suspension         do                           do.            do.
               Rynatuss Tabules …           …       do.                          do.            do.
               Rynatuss Pediatric Suspension        do.                          do.            do.
               Audax Ear Drops …            …    Mapp Laboratories Ltd.       U.K.              do.
               Cuprol Cough Expectorant …           do.                          do.            do.
               Teejel Gel        …          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Xerumenex Ear Drops          …       do.                          do.            do.
               X-Prep Liquid     …          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Anti-B Troches …             …   The De Pree Company           U.S.A.            do.
               De Pree Ear Drops            …       do.                          do.            do.
               DPX Cleanser      …          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Go Pain Capsules             …       do.                          do.            do.
               Go Pain Oral Gel …           …       do.                          do.            do.
               Hista-C Tablets …            …       do.                          do.            do.
               Itchi-Kool Ointment          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Nullo Deodorant Tablets      …       do.                          do.            do.
               Super Hista-C Capsules       …       do.                          do.            do.
               TPO 20 Solution …            …       do.                          do.            do.
               Tip-a-Lip Medicated Balm …           do.                          do.            do.
               Vitamin A & D Cream          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Wheatavims Capsules          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Zodiex Tablets    …          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Balmosa Cream …              …   Pharmax Ltd.                  U.K.              do.
               Pylura Ointment …            …       do.                           do.           do.
               Pylura Suppositories         …       do.                           do.           do.
               Vasogen Cream …              …       do.                           do.           do.
               Forecval Capsules            …   Unigreg Ltd.                      do.           do.
               Forecval Protein …           …       do.                           do.           do.
               Actonorm Gel      …          …   Wallace Manufacturing            do.            do.
                                                  Chemist
               Actonorm Sed Gel             …       do.                          do.            do.
               Concavit Drops …             …       do.                          do.            do.
               Concavit Capsules            …       do.                          do.            do.
               Ironorm Capsules             …       do.                          do.            do.
               Concavit Syrup …             …       do.                          do.            do.
               Ironorm Drops     …          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Ironorm Tonic     …          …       do.                          do.            do.
               Molcer Ear Drops             …       do.                          do.            do.
               Laxeberon Drops …            …   Boehringer Ingelheim          W. Germany        do.
               Clistin-D Tablets …          …   Ontho Pharmaceutical Corp.    U.S.A.            do.
               Geriaplasma Dragees          …   Andey Pharm                   W. Germany        do.
               Tai-Ginseng Liquid           …   Dr. Poehlmann & Co.              do.            do.
               Floradix Kindervital for         Salus-Haus                       do.            do.
                  children
               CA-l,000 Tablets …           …   Sandoz Ltd.                   Switzerland       do.
               Carbomucil Granules          …   Norgine Ltd.                  U.K.              do.
               Enzypam Tablets …            …      do.                           do.            do.
               Norgotin Ear Drops           …      do.                           do.            do.

               *Change in formula.


                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                            Chap. 30:01                  149
                          Approval of New Drugs Notification                                    [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer             Country of    Conditions
                                                                     origin       of Sale
Waxsol Ear Drops             …   Norgine Ltd.                      U.K.          Freely
Abalon Liquifilm Ophthalmic      Allergan                          U.S.A.        Third
   Solution                                                                         Schedule
Epifrin Ophthalmic Solution         do.                               do.             do.
   0.5%
Epifrin Ophthalmic Solution         do.                               do.            do.
   1.0%
Fluoroplex 1% Topical Cream         do.                               do.            do.
F.M.L. Liquifilm Ophthalmic         do.                               do.            do.
   Solution
Flucort Veterinary Injection …   Syntex Pharmaceutical             U.K.              do.
Butacynil Tablets            …   Ipca Laboratories                 India             do.
Chlorpromazine Tablets              do.                               do.            do.
   25 mgm.
Chlorpromazine Tablets              do.                               do.            do.
   50 mgm.
Chlorpromazine Syrup                do.                               do.            do.
   10 mgm. per 5 ml.
Ipcavite Forte Capsules      …      do.                               do.            do.
Chlorpromazine Syrup                do.                               do.            do.
   25 mgm. per 5 ml.
Chlorpromazine Tablets              do.                               do.            do.
   100 mgm.
Euviton Capsules …           …       do.                              do.            do.
Marax Suspension             …   J. B. Roerig Division of Pfizer   U.S.A.            do.
Marax Tablets      …         …       do.                              do.            do.
Pro-Benthine P.A. Tablets …      G. D. Searle                      U.K.              do.
Bezide 5 mgm. Tablets        …   Carlisle Laboratories             Barbados          do.
Dekam 2 Tablets 2 mgm.       …       do.                              do.            do.
Dekam 5 Tablets 5 mgm.       …       do.                              do.            do.
PBZ-100 Tablets 100 mgm. …           do.                              do.            do.
Berkdopa Tablets 500 mgm. …      Berk Pharmaceutical                  do.            do.
Diutensen R Tablets          …   Mallinckrodt Chemical Works          do.            do.
Diutensen Tablets            …       do.                              do.            do.
Lufyllin Tablets …           …       do.                              do.            do.
Lufyllin G.G. Tablets        …       do.                              do.            do.
Lufyllin G.G. Elixir         …       do.                              do.            do.
Motival Tablets 20/0.5 mgm.…     E. R. Squibb                         do.            do.
Nortensin Dragees            …   Farbwerke Hoechst                 W. Germany        do.
Bradilan Tablets …           …   Napp Laboratories Ltd.            U.K.              do.
P.I.B. Spray       …         …       do.                              do.            do.
Doloxene 365 Pulvules        …   Eli Lilly                            do.            do.
Dicynene Tablets 250 mgm. …      Delandale Laboratories               do.            do.
Dicynene Tablets 500 mgm. …          do.                              do.            do.
Dicynene Tablets Injection …         do.                              do.            do.
Crinagen Gel       …         …   Pharmax Ltd.                         do.            do.
Concavit Injection           …   Wallace Manufacturing                do.            do.
                                     Chemist
Ironorm Injection          …         do.                              do.            do.
Tranquo-Buscopan                 Boehringer Ingelheim              W. Germany.       do.
   Suppositories
Corti Bisolvon Inhalant    …        do.                               do.            do.
Celestone Soluspan         …     Schering Corporation              U.S.A.            do.
Etrafon 2/25 Tablets       …        do.                               do.            do.
Etrafon 4/10 Tablets       …        do.                               do.            do.
Etrafon 4/25 Tablets       …        do.                               do.            do.
*Imuran Tablets …          …     Burroughs Wellcome & Co.          U.K.              do.

*Change in formula.


                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                   L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

150            Chap. 30:01                       Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                    Manufacturer        Country of     Conditions
                                                                            origin        of Sale
               Domosa Veterinary Solution …    Syntex Pharmaceuticals     U.K.          Third
                                                                                         Schedule
               Budoform Complex                Dolder Ltd. S.A.           Switzerland       do.
                  Suspension
176/1972.      Acne Creme         …        …   The De Pree Company        U.S.A.           Freely
               Alkalade Liquid …           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Ammoniated Mercury                 do.                        do.            do.
                  Ointment
               Anti-B Mist Nasal Spray     …      do.                        do.            do.
               Azma-Eze Tablets            …      do.                        do.            do.
               Anti-Diarrhoea Compound …          do.                        do.            do.
               B Complex with C Tablets …         do.                        do.            do.
               B 12 Tablets 25 mcg.        …      do.                        do.            do.
               Baby Cough Syrup            …      do.                        do.            do.
               Bronchial Syrup DM          …      do.                        do.            do.
               Bronchial Syrup …           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Buffered Aspirin Tablets    …      do.                        do.            do.
               Children’s Aspirin Tablets …       do.                        do.            do.
               Children’s Cough Syrup      …      do.                        do.            do.
               Cold Sore Lotion            …      do.                        do.            do.
               Decorpa Granules            …   Norgine Limited            U.K.              do.
               Diaper Rash Cream           …   The De Pree Company        U.S.A.            do.
               Dried Yeast Tablets         …      do.                        do.            do.
               Eye Drops          …        …      do.                        do.            do.
               Gardalax Capsules           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Gardalax Powder …           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Gerigard Capsules           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Go-Pain Lotion …            …      do.                        do.            do.
               Ichthammol Ointment 20% …          do.                        do.            do.
               Milk of Magnesia Tablets …         do.                        do.            do.
               Muripsin Tablets …          …   Norgine Limited            U.K.              do.
               Nipe Pediatric Drops        …   Laboratories Vagas S.A.    Venezuela         do.
               Nullo Foot Cream            …   The De Pree Company        U.S.A.            do.
               Nullo Foot Lotion           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Nullo Foot Powder           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Orbit Multivitamins with           do.                        do.            do.
                  Iron Tablets
               Peralvex Liquid …           …   Norgine Limited            U.K.              do.
               Prompt Elixir      …        …   The De Pree Company        U.S.A.            do.
               Prompt Lotion      …        …      do.                        do.            do.
               Prompt Tablets …            …      do.                        do.            do.
               Quartets Capsule …          …      do.                        do.            do.
               Rectal Ointment N.B.        …      do.                        do.            do.
               Rectal Suppositories N.B. …        do.                        do.            do.
               Saccharin Tablets 1/2 grain …      do.                        do.            do.
               Salisan Tablets    …        …      do.                        do.            do.
               Set’l Liquid       …        …      do.                        do.            do.
               Super Hista C Syrup         …      do.                        do.            do.
               Soda Mint Tablets           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Tootache Redi-Kit           …      do.                        do.            do.
               Vitamin Syrup for Children …       do.                        do.            do.
               Whitfield’s Ointment        …      do.                        do.            do.
               Trihemic 600 Tablets        …   Sederle Laboratories          do.            do.
               Histalix Expectorant        …   Wallace Manufacturing      U.K.              do.
                                                  Chemist Ltd.
               Noravita         …        …        do.                         do.           do.
               Salzone Syrup    …        …        do.                         do.           do.
               Vigranon B Syrup          …        do.                         do.           do.



                                      UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                           Chap. 30:01                 151
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                 [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer           Country of     Conditions
                                                                    origin        of Sale
Multivitamin Tablets       …      Chinoin Ltd.                     Hungary        Freely
Polybe Tablets    …        …      Sedeon Richter Ltd.                 do.          do.
Nu-Vita 27 Tablets         …      Chemico G.M.B.H.                 W. Germany      do.
Pancoxin          …        …      Merck Sharp and Dohme            Canada          do.
Pancoxin Plus     …        …         do.                              do.          do.
*Children’s Cafenol Tablets       Sterling Drug International Ltd. Trinidad        do.
Powdered Tyrax …           …         do.                           Jamaica         do.
Lisophen Liquid …          …      Morrison & Merrel Int. Ltd.      Canada          do.
Complex 23 Pharmaton Capsules     Pharmaton Ltd.                   Switzerland     do.
*Geriatric Pharmaton       …         do.                              do.          do.
Kiddi Syrup       …        …         do.                              do.          do.
L.P. 11 Pharmaton Capsules …         do.                              do.          do.
P.P.P. Pharmaton Capsules …          do.                              do.          do.
Bacid Capsules …           …      U.S.V. Pharmaceutical            U.S.A.          do.
                                     Corporation
Co-Salt …        …          …        do.                              do.           do.
Gaviscon Tablets …          …     Rickett & Coleman                U.K.             do.
                                     (Overseas) Ltd.
Geritol Tablets   …         …     The J. B. Williams Co. Inc.      U.S.A.           do.
Geritol Liquid    …         …        do.                              do.           do.
W. L. Tablets     …         …     Rickett & Coleman                U.K.             do.
                                     (Overseas) Ltd.
Adult’s Bronchial Balsam          Wigglesworth Ltd.                   do.           do.
   Syrup
Adult’s Expectorant         …        do.                             do.            do.
Adult’s Nerve Tonic         …        do.                             do.            do.
Benzac Tablets …            …        do.                             do.            do.
Calmo Rheumatic Tablets     …        do.                             do.            do.
Children’s Cherry Cough              do.                             do.            do.
   Linctus
Ephedrine Inhalex Oil       …        do.                             do.            do.
Golden Ear Drops …          …        do.                             do.            do.
Gould’s Gripe Mixture       …        do.                             do.            do.
Gly-Cologne Hand Jelly      …        do.                             do.            do.
Infants Nasal Drops         …        do.                             do.            do.
Junior Expectorant          …        do.                             do.            do.
Opas Powder       …         …        do.                             do.            do.
Opas Tablets      …         …        do.                             do.            do.
Panalene Elixir …           …        do.                             do.            do.
Panalene Tablets …          …        do.                             do.            do.
Rapid Energy Release Tab.   …        do.                             do.            do.
Slim Maid Tablets           …        do.                             do.            do.
Vesagex Antiseptic Oint.    …        do.                             do.            do.
Worm Syrup        …         …        do.                             do.            do.
*Sanatogen Powder           …     Fisons Ltd.                        do.            do.
Supplamins Tablets          …     Minnesota 3 M                      do.            do.
                                     Laboratories Ltd.
Similac Isomil   …        …       M & R Laboratories             Netherlands        do.
Beminal 500 Tablets       …       Ayerst Laboratories            Canada             do.
Ornade Liquid    …        …       Smith Kline & French Ltd.         do.             do.
Ornade D.M. Cough Liquid …           do.                            do.             do.
Salus-Sun Herbal Supplement       Salne-Hans                     W. Germany         do.
Galexir Liquid   …        …          do.                            do.             do.

*Change in formula.


                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                 L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

152            Chap. 30:01                        Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer           Country of    Conditions
                                                                                   origin       of Sale

               **Procol Capsules           …     Promed Pharmaceuticals Ltd.     Trinidad     Freely
               **Prospan Capsules          …        do.                             do.         do.
               Sleeping Tablets …          …     The De Pree Company             U.S.A.       Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               **Provita Tablets …               Promed Pharmaceuticals Ltd.     Trinidad       do.
               Hibispray 1 Quick Prep.    …      I.C.I. Ltd.                     U.K.           do.
               Hibispray 2 Hard Surface …           do.                             do.         do.
                 Disinfectant
               Hibispray 3 Skin Prep. Red …         do.                             do.         do.
               Hibispray 4 Clear Plastic            do.                             do.         do.
                 Dressing
               Hibispray 5 Tropical                 do.                          Trinidad       do.
                 Protective
               Noravita Injection         …      Wallace Manufacturing              do.         do.
                                                    Chemists Ltd.
               Cholera Vaccine Freeze Dried      Institute for Sero-             Hungary        do.
                                                    Bacteriological Production
                                                    and Research
               Digoxin Ampoules 2 ml.       …    Gedeon Richter Ltd.                do.         do.
               Digoxin Tablets 0.25 mgm. …          do.                             do.         do.
               Emetine Hydrochloride             Chinoin Limited                    do.         do.
                  Injection
               Heparin Injection 5 ml.      …    Gedeon Richter Ltd.                do.         do.
               Homofort Injection 2 ml.     …       do.                             do.         do.
               Nevigramon Capsules          …    Chinoin Limited                    do.         do.
               Oxytocin Synthetic Injection …    Gedeon Richter Ltd.                do.         do.
               Pipolphen Tablets            …    United Works of                    do.         do.
                                                    Pharmaceutical and
                                                    Dietetic Products
               Plegomazin Injection 50 mgm.            do.                          do.         do.
               Plegomazin Tablets 25 mgm.              do.                          do.         do.
               Plegomazin Tablets 100 mgm.             do.                          do.         do.
               Sertan Tablets 250 mgm.    …      Chinoin Ltd.                       do.         do.
               Small Pox Vaccine          …      Institute for Sero-                do.         do.
                                                    Bacteriological Production
                                                    and Research
               Vitamin A. Capsules 50,000 I.U.   United Works of                    do.         do.
                                                    Pharmaceutical and
                                                    Dietetic Products
               Vitamin B. Complex Inj.  …        Gedeon Richter Ltd.                do.         do.
               Vitamin B 12 Injection               do.                             do.         do.
                  1000 mcg.
               Rowapraxin Tablets       …        Rowa Ltd.                       Ireland        do.
               Rowapraxin Rectal Capsules             do.                            do.        do.
               Microlut Coated Tablets  …        Schering A.G.                   W. Germany     do.
               Ativan Capsules …        …        Wyeth International                 do.        do.
               Amijex Equine with 5%             Diamond Laboratories            U.S.A.         do.
                  Dextrose Injection
               Amijex Powder …          …           do.                             do.         do.
               Amijex S.A. with 5%                  do.                             do.         do.
                  Dextrose Injection
               Amijex L.A. with 5%                  do.                             do.         do.
                   Dextrose Injection
               Cerespan Capsules        …        U.S.V. Pharmaceuticals             do.         do.
                                                    Corporation

               **Change in name of legal manufacturer.


                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                            Chap. 30:01                  153
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer            Country of     Conditions
                                                                    origin        of Sale
Flaminon Capsules           …     E. R. Squibb                   U.K.          Third
                                                                                 Schedule
Oncovin Injection           …     Eli Lilly & Co.                U.S.A.          do.
Prepurex Pregnancy Test Kit …     The Wellcome Foundation        U.K.            do.
                                      Ltd.
Obin Tablets 500 mgm.    …        Pfizer Ltd.                       do.          do.
Clinium Tablets …        …        Janseen Pharmaceutica          Belgium         do.
Daktarin Cream 2%        …            do.                           do.          do.
Daktarin Powder …        …            do.                           do.          do.
Gyno-Daktarin Cream 2% …              do.                           do.          do.
Orap Tablets 1 mgm.      …            do.                           do.          do.
Orap Forte Tablets       …            do.                           do.          do.
Stugeron Tablets 25 mgm. …            do.                           do.          do.
Complamin Tablets 300 mgm.        Laboratorios Vargas S.A.       Venezuela       do.
Complamin Injection      …            do.                           do.          do.
   100 mgm.
Etoval Tablets 100 mgm.  …        Alkaloida Ltd.                 Hungary       Controlled
                                                                                 Drug
Phenobarbitone Tablets 50 mgm.       do.                            do.          do.
Bridine Aerosol Spray       …     B.D.H. (Canada) Ltd.           Canada        Freely         188/1972.
Bridine Solution …          …        do.                            do.          do.
Bridine Surgical Scrub      …        do.                            do.          do.
Bridine Shampoo Liquid      …        do.                            do.          do.
Calamine Lotion …           …     Wallgreen Laboratories Inc.    U.S.A.          do.
Calcium Lactate Tablets     …        do.                            do.          do.
Chase Cold Tablets          …     A. W. Chase                    Canada          do.
Dispray Tinct. Benz. Co.    …     I.C.I.                         U.K.            do.
Emtryl Soluble …            …     May & Baker Ltd.                  do.          do.
Ferinut Tablets   …         …     Unique Pharmaceutical          India           do.
                                     Laboratories
Geltex Topical Liquid       …     Texcan Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    Canada          do.
Histaspan-D Capsules        …     U.S.V. Pharmaceuticals         U.S.A.          do.
Histalix Expectorant        …     Wallace Manufacturing          U.K.            do.
                                     Chemist Ltd.
Livernut Capsules           …     Unique Pharmaceutical          India           do.
                                     Laboratories
Multiple Vitamin Tablets     …    Wallgreen Laboratories Inc.    U.S.A.          do.
Olaf Super B. Complex                do.                            do.          do.
    with C Tablets
Olaf Vitamin C Tablets 100 mgm.      do.                            do.          do.
Olaf Vitamin E 100 mgm. …            do.                            do.          do.
Pevidine Surgical Scrub      …    Berk Pharmaceutical Ltd.       U.K.            do.
Pevidine Antiseptic Solution …       do.                            do.          do.
Profer Tablets     …         …    Promed Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    Trinidad        do.
Progesic Tablets 500 mgm. …          do.                            do.          do.
Promin 12 Tablets 50 mcg. …          do.                            do.          do.
Sinex Nasal Spray …          …    Richardson-Merrell Inc.        U.S.A.          do.
Sinutab S.A. Tablets         …    William R. Warner & Co. Ltd.   U.K.            do.
Salt Tablets       …         …    Wallgreen Laboratories Inc.    U.S.A.          do.
Soda Mint Tablets            …       do.                            do.          do.
*Senokot Tablets …           …    Reckitt & Coleman              U.K.            do.
Vitanorm           …         …    Wallace Manufacturing             do.          do.
                                     Chemist Ltd.
Wallgreen Aspirin Tablets   …     Wallgreen Laboratories Inc.    U.S.A.          do.
Ancoloxin Tablets           …     B.D.H. Pharmaceutical          U.K.          Third
                                                                                 Schedule
*Change in formula.

                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                  L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

154            Chap. 30:01                       Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                     Manufacturer            Country of     Conditions
                                                                                 origin        of Sale
               Arlidin Tablets    …        …    U.S.V. Pharmaceuticals         U.S.A.        Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Bridine Douche …            …    B.D.H. (Canada) Ltd.           Canada          do.
               Bridine Vaginal Gel         …       do.                            do.          do.
               Butax Tablets 100 mgm.      …    Promed Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    Trinidad        do.
               Estrovis Tablets 4 mgm.     …    William R. Warren & Co. Ltd.   U.K.            do.
               Life Iron Injection         …    Abbott Laboratories            U.S.A.          do.
                                                   International
               Midamor Tablets 5 mgm.     …     Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.       U.K.            do.
               Olaf Vitamin A Capsules          Wallgreen Laboratories Inc.    U.S.A.          do.
                  25,000 units
               Prinalgin Tablets 500 mgm. …     Berk Pharmaceutical Ltd.       U.K.            do.
               Predivit M Capsules        …     Unique Pharmaceutical          India           do.
                                                   Laboratories
               Prednisolone Tablets       …        do.                            do.          do.
               Protran Tablets 25 mgm.    …     Promed Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    Trinidad        do.
               Protran Tablets 50 mgm.    …        do.                            do.          do.
               Protran Tablets 100 mgm. …          do.                            do.          do.
               Scanferon Injection        …     Scanpharm A/S                  Denmark         do.
               Thilozone Tablets 100 mgm. …     Unique Pharmaceutical          India           do.
                                                   Laboratories
               Thilozone Tablets 200 mgm. …        do.                             do.         do.
               Thilozone P Tablets         …       do.                             do.         do.
               Trasicor Tablets 80 mgm. …       CIBA Laboratories              U.K.            do.
               Ulcelac Sachets …           …    Sigurta Farmaceutice           Italy           do.
               Ulcelac Tablets …           …       do.                             do.         do.
               Ventolin Spandets           …    Allen & Hanburys Ltd.          U.K.            do.
               Vermox …           …        …    Janssen Pharmaceutice          Belgium         do.
74/1973.       Garlic Capsules …           …    Natural Brand Sales Co.        U.S.A.        Freely
               Glutamic Acid Tablets       …       do.                             do.         do.
               Kelp Tablets       …        …       do.                             do.         do.
               Lecithin Capsules 71/2 mm. …        do.                             do.         do
               Preventron Tablets          …       do.                             do.         do.
               93% Protein Supplement              do.                             do.         do.
                  Tablets
               Supreme Food Yeast Tablets …        do.                            do.          do.
               11 Vegetable Tablets        …       do.                            do.          do.
               Wheat Germ Capsules         …       do.                            do.          do.
               Wheate Vitamin E Capsules …      Nato Products                     do.          do.
               Malamin Tablets …           …    Promed Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    Trinidad        do.
               Neogen Tablets …            …       do.                            do.          do.
               Probec Capsules …           …       do.                            do.          do.
               Progon Capsules …           …       do.                            do.          do.
               Provem Capsules …           …       do.                            do.          do.
               Op-Site Spray      …        …    Smith & Nephew Ltd.            U.K.            do.
               Otrivine-Antistin Eye Drops …    CIBA Laboratories                 do.          do.
               Tab Ferrous Gluconate            Ronca Pharmaceuticals Ltd.        do.          do.
                  BP 300 mgm.
               Tab Chlorpheniramine BP 4 mgm.     do.                             do.          do.
               Bekunis Dragees …           …    Roha-Werk                      W. Germany      do.
               Minalka Tablets …           …    Marco Pharma Laboratories      Denmark         do.
               Normacol (Antispasmodic) …       Norgine Ltd.                   U.K.            do.
               Normacol (Special)          …      do.                             do.          do.
               Normacol Intestinal                do.                             do.          do.
                  Evacuant (Standard)
               Melbrosia for Men           …    Sanguisan A.G.                 Switzerland     do



                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                           Chap. 30:01                 155
                           Approval of New Drugs Notification                                 [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                   origin       of Sale

Melbrosia P.I.D. for Women …      Sanguisan A.G.                Switzerland Freely
Spontavit-M        …       …      Evers & Co.                   W. Germany    do.
Spontavit-F        …       …         do.                           do.        do.
Oramascul          …       …         do.                           do.      Third
                                                                              Schedule
Becotide Inhaler …        …       Allen & Hanburys              U.K.          do.
Tab Complamin 150 mgm. …          Laboratorios Vargas SA        Venezuela     do.
Meltrol—50 mg. Capsules …         USV Pharmaceutical Corp.      U.S.A.        do.
Eldo-Sed Tablets …        …       Pharmax Ltd.                  U.K.          do.
Prolone Tablets …         …       Promed Pharmaceuticals Ltd.   Trinidad      do.
Promax Capsules …         …          do.                           do.        do.
Synacthen Depot Ampoules          Ciba-Geigy Ltd.               Switzerland   do.
   1 mgm. per 1 ml.
Synacthen Depot Ampoules             do.                           do.         do.
   2 mgm. per 2 ml.
Synacthen Ampoules                   do.                           do.         do.
   0.25 mgm. per ml.
Microval Tablets …        …       Wyeth Pharma GMBH.            W. Germany     do.
Tab Chlordiazepoxide              Ronca Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    U.K.           do.
   BP 10 mgm.
Caps Chlordiazepoxide                do.                           do.         do.
   BP 10 mgm.
Tab Chlorpromazine                   do.                           do.         do.
   BP 25 mgm.
Tab Chlorpropamide                   do.                           do.         do.
   BP 250 mgm.
Tab Digoxin BP 0.25 mgm. …           do.                           do.         do.
Tab Guanethidine BP 10 mgm.          do.                           do.         do.
Tab Imipramine BP 25 mgm.…           do.                           do.         do.
Tab Meprobamate BP 400 mgm.          do.                           do.         do.
Tab Metronidazole                    do.                           do.         do.
   BP 200 mgm.
Tab Methaqualone HCL                 do.                           do.         do.
   BP 150 mgm.
Tab Prednisone BP 1 mgm.             do.                           do.         do.
Tab Prednisone BP 5 mgm.             do.                           do.         do.
Tab Prednisolone BP 1 mgm.           do.                           do.         do.
Tab Prednisolone BP 5 mgm.           do.                           do.         do.
Tab Propantheline BP 15 mgm.         do.                           do.         do.
Tab Phenylbutazone                   do.                           do.         do.
   BP 100 mgm.
Tab Phenylbutazone                   do.                           do.         do.
   BP 200 mgm.
Stelabid Forte Tablets    …       Smith, Kline & French         Canada         do.
* Amps Complamin 150 mgm.         Laboratorios Vargas S.A.      Venezuela      do.
   per ml. x 2 ml.
8 Ativan Tablets …        …       Wyeth-Pharma GMBH.            W. Germany   do.
Progyluton Coated Tablets …       Schering A.G.                    do.       do.
Disium Vaginal Spray      …       Brunton Chemists Ltd.         U.K.       Freely           155/1973.
Noriday Tablets …         …       Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.      do.     Third
                                                                             Schedule
Rondec Oral Drops          …      Abbott Laboratories           U.S.A.     Freely
Rondec Syrup    …          …        do.                            do.       do.

*To correct Notices of Approval dated 18th September 1972.


                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

156            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer        Country of     Conditions
                                                                                origin        of Sale

               Pangavit Injection 25,000     …   Wallace Pharmaceutical       U.S.A.       Third
                                                    International                            Schedule
               Efudix Cream       …        …     Roche Products Ltd.          U.K.           do.
               Clofitrax Capsules          …     Ditrax Pharmaceuticals       Belgium        do.
               Fortavit Children’s Vitamin       Hough, Hoseason & Co. Ltd.   U.K.         Freely
                  Drops
               Sterzac Antibacterial                do.                          do.     Third
                  Shaving Foam                                                             Schedule
               Sterzac Tablet Soap         …        do.                          do.       do.
               Sterzac Bath Concentrate    …        do.                          do.       do.
               Sterzac Washing Cream       …        do.                          do.       do.
               Sucron Mini Lumps           …     Ashe Laboratories Ltd.          do.     Freely
               Vita Diem Drops …           …     Marfleet Refining Co. Ltd.      do.       do.
               Dixarit Sugar Coated Tablets…     C. H. Boehringer & Sons      W. Germany Third
                                                                                           Schedule
               *Andrews Liver Salt       …       Sterling Drug Int. Ltd.      Trinidad   Freely
               Bilopaque Sodium Capsules         Winthrop Laboratories        U.S.A.     Third
                                                                                           Schedule
               Sulfamylon Cream           …        do.                           do.       do.
               Pliafax Laxative Tablets   …      Roberts Laboratories Ltd.    U.K.       Freely
               Themic Antiseptic Lozenges …        do.                           do.       do.
               APC Tablets B.P.C          …        do.                           do.       do.
               Aspirin Tablets B.P.       …        do.                           do.       do.
               Castor Oil B.P. …          …        do.                           do.       do.
               Folic Acid Tablets B.P.    …        do.                           do.       do.
               Liquid Paraffin B.P.       …        do.                           do.       do.
               Olive Oil B.P.     …       …        do.                           do.       do.
               Paracetamol Tablets B.P.            do.                           do.       do.
                  500 mgm.
               Riboflavin Tablets 3 mgm. …          do.                           do.        do.
               White Petroleum Jelly B.P. …         do.                           do.        do.
               Rowachol Capsules          …      Rowa Ltd.                    Ireland        do.
               Rowachol Liquid …          …         do.                           do.        do.
               Rowatinex Liquid           …         do.                           do.        do.
               Rowatirex Capsules         …         do.                           do.        do.
               Pso-rite Cream …           …      The De Pree Co.              U.S.A.       Third
                                                                                             Schedule
               Theragards Vitamin and               do.                          do.         do.
                  Mineral Tablets
               Althesin Anaesthetic              Glaxo Laboratories Ltd.      U.K.           do.
                  Injection 5 ml.
               Althesin Anaesthetic                 do.                          do.         do.
                  Injection 10 ml.
               Iodine Ointment-Non               Bush Boake Allen Ltd.        U.K.         Freely
                  Staining BPC
               Zinc Undecenoate Ointment BP         do.                          do.         do.
               Korean Ginseng Complex            Natural-Vigor Natural        U.S.A.         do.
                  Tablets                           Products
               Vitamin E Capsules 400 I.U.          do.                          do.         do.
               Quinine Solution                  Bush Boake Allen Ltd.        U.K.           do.
                  Ammoniated BPC 1963
               Tolu Solution BPC           …       do.                           do.         do.
               Ferrk Chloride Solution BP …        do.                           do.         do.
               Methyl Salicylate BP        …       do.                           do.         do.
               Paraffin Soft Yellow BP     …     Bush Boake Allan Ltd.           do.         do.

               *Change in formula.


                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                      Food and Drugs                            Chap. 30:01                    157
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                        [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                           Manufacturer            Country of     Conditions
                                                                        origin        of Sale
Tragacanth Powder                    Bush Boake Allan Ltd.            U.K.          Freely
   Compound BP
Orange Tincture BPC          …          do.                              do.          do.
Ipecacuanha Tincture BP      …          do.                              do.          do.
Lavender Tincture                       do.                              do.          do.
   Compound BPC 1949
Naxogin Tablets …            …       Carlo-Erba                       Italy         Third
                                                                                      Schedule
Imap Injection    …          …       Janssen Pharmaceutical           Belgium         do.
*Topilar Cream    …          …       Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.      U.K.            do.
Lenium            …          …       Winthrop Products Inc.              do.        Freely
Mil-Par           …          …          do.                              do.          do.
D.P.T. Vaccine    …          …       Institut Merieux International   France        Third
                                                                                      Schedule
D. T. Vaccine    …           …          do.                              do.          do.
Sabin Oral Poliomyelitis                do.                              do.          do.
   Vaccine
Soparine Tablets …           …       Sophar S.A.                      Belgium       Freely
Ocal Eye Bath    …           …          do.                              do.          do.
Ocal Eye Drops …             …          do.                              do.          do.
Phenergan Compound                   May & Baker Ltd.                 U.K.            do.
   Cough Linctus
Purantix Cream …             …       Sandoz Ltd.                      SwitzerlandThird
                                                                                   Schedule
Purantix Ointment            …         do.                               do.       do.
Landromil Powder             …       Wander Ltd.                         do.       do.
Landromil Tincture           …         do.                               do.       do.
Landromil Ointment           …         do.                               do.       do.
Pantozyme Bitabs…            …         do.                               do.       do.
Spasmo-Canulase Bitabs       …         do.                               do.       do.
Tegretol Tablets …           …       Geigy Pharmaceuticals            U.K.         do.
Anafranil Capsules 10 mgm. …           do.                               do.       do.
Taxofit Effervescent Tablets         Anasco                           W. Germany Freely
  500 mgm.
Taxofit Effervescent Tablets            do.                              do.          do.
  1 gramme
Sali-Catapres Tablets        …       C. H. Boehringer                    do.        Third
                                                                                      Schedule
Infrocin Suppositories     …         Charles E Frosst & Co.           Canada          do.
Supres Tablets—150         …            do.                              do.          do.
Supres Tablets—250         …            do.                              do.          do.
Claradin Tablets …         …         Nicholas Laboratories Ltd.       U.K.          Freely
Lantigen B. Sublingual Drops         Lantigen Ltd.                       do.        Third
                                                                                      Schedule
Lantivac Sublingual Drops …            do.                               do.          do.
Aluminium Hydroxide Tablets          Regent Laboratories Ltd.            do.        Freely
   BP 500 mgm.
Aspirin Tablets BP 300 mgm.             do.                              do.          do.
Folic Acid Tablets BP 5 mgm.            do.                              do.          do.
Sulphadimidine Tablets BP               do.                              do.        Third
    500 mgm.                                                                          Schedule
Sulphaguanidine Tablets BP              do.                              do.          do.
    500 mgm.
Prednisolone Tablets 1 mgm.             do.                              do.          do.
Prednisolone Tablets 5 mgm.             do.                              do.          do.
Imipramine Tablets 10 mgm.              do.                              do.          do.


*To include additional indication.


                                              UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                    L.R.O.

                                     UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

158            Chap. 30:01                        Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer       Country of    Conditions
                                                                              origin       of Sale
               Imipramine Tablets 25 mgm.       Regent Laboratories Ltd.    U.K.       Third
                                                                                         Schedule
               Isoniazid Tablets 50 mgm. …      do.                            do.       do.
               Isoniazid Tablets 100 mgm. …     do.                            do.       do.
               Promazine Tablets 10 mgm. …      do.                            do.       do.
               Amylobarbitone Tablets           do.                            do.     Controlled
                  100 mgm.                                                               Drug
               Aminophylline Compound Capsules do.                             do.       do.
               Sine-Off Tablets …         …  Manley & James Ltd.            Canada       do.
               Klaron Lotion      …       …  Dermik Laboratories Ltd.       U.S.A.     Freely
               Rezamid Lotion …           …     do.                            do.       do.
               Zetar Shampoo …            …     do.                            do.       do.
               Vanoxide Lotion …          …     do.                            do.       do.
               Primodian Tablets          …  Schering Ltd.                  W. Germany Third
                                                                                         Schedule
               Ralgex Analgesic Spray       …   Eurcyl Ltd.                 U.K.       Controlled
                                                                                         Drug
               Benzyl Benzoate Emulsion BP      Bush Boake Allen Ltd.          do.     Freely
               Calamine BP        …         …     do.                          do.       do.
               Liquorice Liquid Extract BP …      do.                          do.       do.
               Piperazine Citrate Elixir BP …     do.                          do.       do.
               Liquid Paraffin and Phenolph       do.                          do.       do.
                  Thalein Emulsion BPC
               Senega Infusion Concentrate         do.                        do.         do.
                  BPC
               Orange Peel Infusion                do.                        do.         do.
               Concentrated BPC
               Camphor Liniment BP          …     do.                         do.         do.
               Soap Liniment BPC Meth. …          do.                         do.         do.
               Turpentine Liniment BP       …     do.                         do.         do.
               Iodine Solution Strong BP 1958     do.                         do.         do.
               Iodine Solution Weak BP      …     do.                         do.         do.
               Alquinax Anti-diarrhoea          Roberts Laboratories Ltd.     do.         do.
                  Suspension
               Alquinax Anti-diarrhoeal            do.                         do.        do.
                  Tablets
               Antagal Antacid Suspension …        do.                        do.         do.
               Antagal Antacid Tablets      …      do.                        do.         do.
               Antiworm Elixir BPC          …      do.                        do.         do.
               Children’s Soluble Aspirin          do.                        do.         do.
                  Tablets
               Fam-Lax Tablets …            …      do.                        do.         do.
               Kay’s Linseed Compound …            do.                        do.         do.
               Kaybell’s Glycerin Lemon            do.                        do.         do
                  and Honey
               Kaybell’s Glycerin Lemon            do.                         do.        do.
                  and Ipecac
               Pliafax Laxative Syrup       …      do.                         do.        do.
               Vitamin E 50 I.U. Capsule …      The De Pree Co.             U.S.A.        do.
               Vitamin E 100 I.U. Capsule …        do.                         do.        do.
               Vitamin E 200 I.U. Capsule …        do.                         do.        do.
               Vitamin E 400 I.U. Capsule …        do.                         do.        do.
               Protein Tablets 250 mgm. …          do.                         do.        do.
               Iron and Yeast Tablets       …      do.                         do.        do.
               Iron Tablets       …         …      do.                         do.        do.
               Kelp Tablets       …         …      do.                         do.        do.
               Calcigards Tablets           …      do.                         do.        do.
               Lecithin Capsules …          …      do.                         do.        do.




                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                          Chap. 30:01                  159
                          Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer          Country of     Conditions
                                                                  origin        of Sale

Vitamin A 25,000 I.U.            The De Pree Co.                U.S.A.        Third
   Capsules                                                                     Schedule
Chargers Tablets …           …      do.                            do.          do.
Anti-Tension Tablets         …      do.                            do.          do.
Motion Sickness Tablets      …      do.                            do.        Freely
Corn Liquid       …          …      do.                            do.          do.
Zinc Oxide Ointment          …      do.                            do.          do.
Allergy Tablets …            …      do.                            do.          do.
Wheat Germ Oil liquid        …      do.                            do.          do.
Wheat Germ Oil Capsules …           do.                            do.          do.
Adult Glycerin Suppositories…       do.                            do.          do.
Infant Glycerin Suppositories…      do.                            do.          do.
Wart Away         …          …      do.                            do.          do.
Toothache Drops …            …      do.                            do.          do.
Toothache Wax …              …      do.                            do.          do.
Ear Oil …         …          …      do.                            do.          do.
Drawing Salve     …          …      do.                            do.          do.
Blue Ointment     …          …      do.                            do.          do.
Boric Acid Ointment          …      do.                            do.          do.
Go-pain Analgesic Cream …           do.                            do.          do.
Wheatacol Tablets            …      do.                            do.          do.
Decongestant Syrup           …      do.                            do.          do.
Itchi-kool Liquid …          …      do.                            do.          do.
Itchi-kool Ointment          …      do.                            do.          do.
Alkacade Tablets …           …      do.                            do.          do.
Hinkle’s Formula Laxative …         do.                            do.          do.
Terpin Hydrate with                 do.                            do.          do.
   D-methorphan Liquid
Limbo All-purpose Liniment …        do.                           do.           do.
Vitamin C 100 mgm. Tablets …        do.                           do.           do.
Vitamin C 250 mgm. Tablets …        do.                           do.           do.
Treats Multi-vitamin Tablets …      do.                           do.           do.
Fiorinal—P Capsules          …   Sandoz Ltd.                    Switzerland   Third
                                                                                Schedule
Visken Ampoules            …        do.                            do.          do.
Visken Tablets 5 mgm.      …        do.                            do.          do.
Sandomigran Coated Tablets …        do.                            do.          do.
Prothiaden Capsules 25 mgm.      The Crooks Laboratories Ltd.   U.K.            do.
*Scanal Compound Capsules        Scanpharm                      Denmark       Freely
Auraltone Ear Drops        …     Wade Pharmaceuticals Ltd.      U.K.            do.
Bronchotone Liquid         …        do.                            do.          do.
Secaderm Salve …           …        do.                            do.          do.
Phytocil Cream …           …        do.                            do.          do.
Phytocil Powder …          …        do.                            do.          do.
Stastabs 600      …        …     Lederle                           do.          do.
Mynah Tablets     …        …        do.                            do.        Third
                                                                                Schedule
Uni-Hem 12 Forte Capsules …      Uni-Chem Labs. Ltd.            India         Freely
Allujel DF Tablets        …        do.                             do.          do.
Lota Ointment      …      …      Eupharmalabs Ltd.                 do.          do.
Ringworm Ointment         …      Bengal Pharmaceutical Works       do.          do.
Magsil Tablets     …      …        do.                             do.          do.
Eutheria Anodyne Cream    …        do.                             do.          do.
Antiflamin Poultice       …        do.                             do.          do.
Ear Drops          …      …        do.                             do.          do.
Catazoc Nasal Drops       …        do.                             do.          do.
Dentol Toothache Drops    …        do.                             do.          do.

*Change in formula.


                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

160            Chap. 30:01                          Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                 Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                         Manufacturer         Country of     Conditions
                                                                                  origin        of Sale

               Antiben Tablets    …          …    Bengal Pharmaceutical Works   India         Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Uniferon F12 Injection        …    Unichem Labs. Ltd.               do.          do.
               E.P. Forte Tablets            …       do.                           do.          do.
               E.P. Forte Injection          …       do.                           do.          do.
               Unidys Compound Tablets       …       do.                           do.          do.
               Unithiben Forte (S) Tablets   …       do.                           do.          do.
               Altacite Tablets …            …    Roussel Laboratories Ltd.     U.K.          Freely
               Altacite Suspension           …       do.                           do.          do.
               Micronor Tablets …            …    Ortho Pharmaceuticals Ltd.       do.        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Solcohepsyl Injection        …     Solco Basle Ltd.              Switzerland     do.
               Solcoseryl Injection         …        do.                           do.          do.
               Solcoseryl Jelly …           …        do.                           do.          do.
               Solcoseryl Ointment          …        do.                           do.          do.
               Astringosol Liquid           …     Breon Laboratories Inc.       U.S.A.        Freely
               Paracetamol Tablets BP 500 mgm.    The Boots Co. Ltd.            U.K.            do.
202/1973.      *Lenium Shampoo              …     Winthrop Laboratories            do.          do.
               Midol Tablets      …         …     Glenbrook Laboratories        U.S.A.          do.
               Hexopal Tablets …            …     Winthrop Products Inc.           do.        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Winstrol Injectable        …          do.                           do.          do.
               Bonemeal with Vitamin D            Natura-Vigor Natural             do.        Freely
                  Tablets                            Products
               Vitamin E. Capsules        …          do.                           do.          do.
               Cod Liver Oil Capsules     …          do.                           do.          do.
               Honeyed Protein Tablets    …          do.                           do.          do.
               Torula Yeast Tablets       …          do.                           do.          do.
               Iron Hematinic with B12 and           do.                           do.          do.
                  C Tablets
               Children’s Chewable Multiple          do.                           do.          do.
                  Vitamin Formula Tablets
               Super B Complex with Cano             do.                           do.          do.
                  Fe Tablets
               Wheat Germ Oil Capsule     …          do.                           do.          do.
               Chewable Vitamin E. Tablets…          do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin E 100 I.U.         …          do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin A and D …          …          do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin E 100 I.U.         …          do.                           do.          do.
               Rose Hips Vitamin C        …          do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin A          …       …          do.                           do.        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Vitamin B Complex Elixir …         Halewood Chemical Ltd.        U.K.          Freely
               Nasciodine        …      …         Strenol Products Ltd.            do.          do.
               Haledrin Suspension      …            do.                           do.          do.
               Haledrin Tablets …       …            do.                           do.          do.
               Hale-B-Plex Tablets      …            do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin B Complex with                do.                           do.          do.
                  Ascorbic Acid Tablets
               Vitamin B Complex Strong              do.                           do.          do.
                  Tablets
               Yeast Tablets 300 mgm.   …         Halewood Chemical Ltd.           do.          do.
               Yeast Tablets 450        …            do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin B Compound Tablets            do.                           do.          do.

               *Change in formula.


                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                       LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                          Chap. 30:01                   161
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer          Country of     Conditions
                                                                   origin        of Sale

Vitamin B Compound Strong         Halewood Chemical Ltd.       U.K.           Freely
   Tablets
Carbachol Injection      …           do.                           do.        Third
                                                                                Schedule
Halebarb Tablets …          …        do.                           do.        Controlled
                                                                                Drug
Maalox Suspension           …     Laboratories Vargas S.A.     Venezuela      Freely
Maalox Tablets No. I        …        do.                          do.           do.
Maalox Tablets No. 2        …        do.                          do.           do.
Emetrol Solution …          …        do.                          do.           do.
Pankreon Compositum                  do.                          do.           do.
   Tablets
Isoderm Liquid 125 ml.      …        do.                           do.          do.
Isoderm Liquid 250 ml.      …        do.                           do.          do.
Isoderm Liquid 1000 ml.     …        do.                           do.          do.
Ananase Dragees …           …        do.                           do.        Third
                                                                                Schedule
Dermovate Cream             …     Glaxo Laboratories Ltd.      U.K.             do.
Aspro Junior Tablets        …     Nicholas Products Ltd.          do.         Freely
Probutamid Tablets          …     Dominion Pharmacal           Canada         Third
                                                                                Schedule
Win-Ger Tablets …           …        do.                          do.           do.
Promide Tablets …           …        do.                          do.           do.
Prodoxide Tablets           …        do.                          do.           do.
Glycemex Tablets            …        do.                          do.           do.
Gastrindon Tablets          …     Indo-Pharma Pharmaceutical   India          Freely
                                     Works (Private) Ltd.
Butacortindon Tablets       …        do.                           do.    Third
                                                                          Schedule
Amphetindon Tablets         …        do.                           do.    Controlled
                                                                            Drug
Dermovate Ointment          …     Glaxo Laboratories Ltd.      U.K.       Third
                                                                          Schedule
Eryfer Capsules …        …        Farbwerke Hoechst AG         W. Germany Freely
Flaminon-Alka Capsules            E. R. Squibb & Sons          Ireland    Third
   125 mgm.                                                                 Schedule
Exluton Tablets …        …        M. V. Organon                Holland      do.
*Iberet 500 Filmtab      …        Abbott Laboratories          U.S.A.     Freely
Rowarolan Dusting Powder …        Rowa Ltd.                    Ireland      do.
Rowlind Liniment …       …           do.                           do.      do.
Junior Phensic Tablets            Curacao Labs.                Barbados     do.
Phensic Cough Mixture    …        Beecham Products Overseas    U.K.         do.
                                     Ltd.
Backache Kidney Bladder Pills     Cupal Ltd.                       do.          do.
Strepsils with Honey and          The Boots Co. Ltd.               do.          do.
   Lemon
Terfluzin Tablets …       …       May & Baker Ltd.                 do.        Third
                                                                                Schedule
Ex-Lax Instant Mix          …     Glenbrook Laboratories          do.         Freely
Ecotrin Tablets 10 grains   …     Smith Kline & French         Canada           do.
                                     (Canada) Ltd.
Inderal 80 Tablets          …     I.C.I.                       U.K.           Third
                                                                                Schedule
Sucaryl Liquid       …      …     Consolidated Laboratories    Jamaica        Freely          62/1974.
                                    Ltd.
Sucaryl Tablets …           …       do.                            do.          do.
Surbex T. Tablets …         …       do.                            do.          do.

*Change in formula.


                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                 L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

162            Chap. 30:01                           Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                          Manufacturer         Country of     Conditions
                                                                                   origin        of Sale

               Ibert 500 Liquid …            …     Consolidated                Jamaica        Freely
                                                     Laboratories Ltd.
               Rondec Syrup      …           …       do.                           do.          do.
               Rondec D.M. Syrup             …       do.                           do.          do.
               Oretic 25 mg. Tablets         …       do.                           do.        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Oretic 50 mg. Tablets         …       do.                          do.           do.
               Cofcur-A Expectorant          …     Unichem Laboratories Ltd.   India          Freely
               Lignocaine 2% Injection       …       do.                          do.         Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Uni-Testosterone Depot Injection       do.                          do.          do.
               Uni-Progestin Forte Depot              do.                          do.          do.
                 Injection
               Uni-B Complex Forte Injection          do.                         do.           do.
               Dalmane Capsules …            …     Roche Products Ltd.         England          do.
               Junior Disprin Tablets        …     Rackitt & Coleman           U.K.           Freely
               Dexatopic Ointment 15G        …     Organon                     Holland        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Dexatopic Ointment 30G      …          do.                         do.           do.
               *Isoptocarpine Eye Drops 1% …       Alcon Ltd.                  U.S.A.           do.
               *Isoptocarpine Eye Drops 2% …          do.                         do.           do.
               *Isoptocarpine Eye Drops 3%            do.                         do.           do.
               †Vicks Vaporub …            …       Richardson-Merrell Ltd.     Mexico         Freely
               Haynon Syrup     …          …       R. P. Drugs Ltd.            U.K.             do.
               Antedon Elixir   …          …          do.                         do.           do.
               Vitamin B Complex with                 do.                         do.           do.
                  Iron Syrup
               Prometh Syrup …             …          do.                          do.     do.
               Nor-B12 Syrup …             …          do.                          do.     do.
               Dozic Syrup      …          …          do.                          do.     do.
               Guanor Syrup     …          …          do.                          do.     do.
               Guanex Elixir    …          …          do.                          do.     do.
               Norvol Suspension           …          do.                          do.     do.
               Haynon Tablets …            …          do.                          do.     do.
               Oxionor S.A.     …          …          do.                          do.     do.
               Methisol Tablets …          …          do.                          do.   Third
                                                                                           Schedule
               Ventolin Tablets 4 mg.        … Allen & Hanburys Ltd.           do.         do.
               Tathiogal Tablets 100 mg.     … Lab. Vargas                  Venezuela      do.
               Tathiogal Amps 100 mg.        …     do.                         do.         do.
               Alfathesin Injection 5 ml.    … Glaxo Laboratories           U.K.           do.
               Alfathesin Injection 10 ml. …       do.                         do.         do.
               Listerine Antiseptic          … Warner Lambert Ltd.          U.S.A.       Freely
               Listerine Antiseptic          … Warner Lambert (Canada) Ltd. Canada         do.
               Tab Acetylsalicylic Acid         Spofa United Pharmaceutical Czechoslovakia do.
                  300 mg.                          Works
               Tab Acetylsalicylic Acid 500 mg.    do.                         do.         do.
               Tab Aminophylline 100 mg. …         do.                         do.         do.
               Tab Aminophylline 200 mg. …         do.                         do.         do.
               Tab Antazoline HC1 100 mg. …        do.                         do.         do.
               Tab A.P.C.         …          …     do.                         do.         do.

               *Increase in percentage or preservative.
               †Change in Country of Origin.

                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                   163
                           Approval of New Drugs Notification                                 [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                  origin       of Sale

Tab Ephedrine HC1 15 mg.    …    Spofa United               Czechoslovakia Freely
                                    Pharmaceutical Works
Tab Ephedrine HC1 30 mg. …          do.                           do.          do.
Tab Ephedrine HC1 60 mg. …          do.                           do.          do.
Tab Ferrous Sulphate        …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab Nicotinamide 100 mg.    …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab Piperazine Adipate 300 mg.      do.                           do.          do.
Tab Piperazine Adipate 500 mg.      do.                           do.          do.
Tab Vit. B2 10 mg.          …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab Vit. B1 100 mg.         …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab. Vit. B6 20 mg.         …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab. Vit. B6 50 mg.         …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab Vit. B Complex          …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab Vit. C 50 mg.           …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab Vit. C 100 mg.          …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab Vit. C 200 mg.          …       do.                           do.          do.
Tab. Vit. C 500 mg.         …       do.                           do.          do.
Caps Vit. E 10 mg.          …       do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Nicotinamide lc.c. 25% …       do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Oxytocin 5 I.U.        …       do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Procaine HC1 1% x 5cc …        do.                           do.        Third
                                                                               Schedule
Inj. Procaine HC1 2% x 5cc …        do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Procaine HC1 2% x 1cc …        do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Procaine HC1 1% x 10cc …       do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Procaine HC1 2% x 10cc …       do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Procaine cum Adrenaline        do.                           do.          do.
   2% x 2cc
Inj. Procaine cum Adrenaline        do.                           do.          do.
   1% x 2cc
Inj. Procaine cum Adrenaline        do.                           do.          do.
   1% x 5cc
Caps. Vit. E 100 mg.         …      do.                           do.        Freely
Tab Ergometrine Mal 0.2 mg.         do.                           do.        Third
                                                                               Schedule
Tab Ergometrine Mal 0.5 mg.         do.                           do.          do.
Tab Ergotamine Tart 1 mg. …         do.                           do.          do.
Tab Methyltestosterone 5 mg.        do.                           do.          do.
Tab Methyltestosterone 10 mg.       do.                           do.          do.
Tab Phthalysulphathiazole           do.                           do.          do.
   500 mg.
Tab Stilboestrol 0.5 mg.     …      do.                           do.          do.
Tab Stilboestrol 5.0 mg.     …      do.                           do.          do.
Tab Stilboestrol 20 mg.      …      do.                           do.          do.
Tab Sulphadimidine 500 mg. …        do.                           do.          do.
Tab Trisulpha 500 mg         …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Ergometrine Mal 0.2 mg. …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Ergotamine Tart 0.5 mg. …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Glucose 10% x 10cc      …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Glucose 20% x 10cc      …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Glucose 40% X 10cc      …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Herparin 5,000 I.U.     …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Lobeline HC1 3 mg.      …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Lobeline HC1 10 mg      …      do.                           do.          do.
Inj. Methylergometrine              do.                           do.          do.
   Mal 0.2 mg.



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

164            Chap. 30:01                        Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer         Country of    Conditions
                                                                                 origin       of Sale

               Inj. Procaine cum Adrenaline      Spofa United Pharmaceutical   Czechoslovakia Third
                  2% x 5 cc                         Works                                      Schedule
               Inj. Progesterone 10 mg.     …       do.                           do.          do.
               Inj. Testosterone Propionate         do.                           do.          do.
                  10 mg. per cc
               Inj. Testosterone Propionate         do.                          do.           do.
                  25 mg. per cc
               Inj. Vit. B1 100 mg. per cc  …       do.                          do.           do.
               Inj. Vit. B2 10 mg. per cc   …       do.                          do.           do.
               Inj. Vit. B6 50 mg. per cc   …       do.                          do.           do.
               Inj. Vit. B. Complex 1cc     …       do.                          do.           do.
               Inj. Vit. C. 100 mg. per cc  …       do.                          do.           do.
               Inj. Vit. C 200 mg. per cc   …       do.                          do.           do.
               Inj. Vit. C 500 mg. per cc   …       do.                          do.           do.
               Tab Phenobarbitone 30 mg. …          do.                          do.          Controlled
                                                                                               Drug
               Tab Phenobarbitone 60 mg. …          do.                          do.           do.
               Inj. Thiopental 0.5G vial            do.                          do.           do.
                  + solv 20 cc
               Inj. Thiopental 1.0G vial            do.                          do.           do.
                  + solv 20 cc
               Tab Sulphaguanidine 500 mg.          do.                          do.          Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Tab. Sulphathiozole 500 mg.   …      do.                           do.          do.
               Diprosone Cream 0.05%         …   Schering Cooperation          U.S.A.          do.
               Septrin for Infusion          …   Burroughs, Wellcome & Co.     U.K.            do.
               Naprosyn Tablets …            …   Syntex Pharmaceutical Ltd.       do.          do.
               Maxolon Paediatric Drops      …   Beecham Research                 do.          do.
                                                    Laboratories L
               Benylin Paediatric …         …    Parke-Davis & Co.             U.S.A.         Freely
               Prolan Oil 500 I.U. per ml.       Bayer A.G.                    W. Germany     Third
                 Injection                                                                      Schedule
               Prolan Oil—S Injection       …       do.                           do.           do.
               Prolan-A 500 I.U. Injection …        do.                           do.           do.
               Rompun 2% Injection          …       do.                           do.           do.
               Haldol Ampoules              …    Janssen Pharmaceutica         Belgium          do.
               Haldol Drops      …          …       do.                           do.           do.
               Haldol Tablets    …          …       do.                           do.           do.
               Retin-A 0.1% Cream           …    Johnson & Johnson Ltd.        U.S.A.           do.
               Retin-A 0.05% Liquid         …       do.                           do.           do.
               Semap Tablets 20 mg.         …    Janssen Pharmaceutica         Belgium          do.
               Horixone Injectable 2 mg.    …    P.V.U. Inc.                   Canada           do.
               Horixone Injectable 5 mg.    …       do.                           do.           do.
               Dixazone Injectable          …       do.                           do.           do.
               Oxytocin Injectable          …       do.                           do.           do.
               Phenylbutazone Bolus 1000 mg.        do.                           do.           do.
               Phenylbutazone Tablets 100 mg.       do.                           do.           do.
               Phenylbutazone Injectable            do.                           do.           do.
                 200 mg.
               Progesterone Injectable      …       do.                           do.          do.
               Progen Injection 5,000 I.U. …        do.                           do.          do.
               Progen Injection 10,000 I.U. …       do.                           do.          do.
               Butalk Tablets    …          …    Regent Laboratories Ltd.      U.K.            do.
               E-Pam Tablets 2 mg.          …    I.C.N. Canada Ltd.            Canada          do.
               E-Pam Tablets 5 mg.          …       do.                           do.          do.
               E-Pam Tablets 10 mg.         …       do.                           do.          do.



                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                          Chap. 30:01                     165
                           Approval of New Drugs Notification                                    [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer           Country of     Conditions
                                                                   origin        of Sale
Methyldopa Tablets 250 mg. …     I.C.N. Canada Ltd.             Canada          Third
                                                                                  Schedule
Urozide Tablets 50 mg.      …       do.                            do.            do.
Rhinopront Syrup …          …    Heinrich Mach                  W. Germany      Freely
Vibazine with B Complex          Pfizer Quimica Ltd.            Brazil            do.
  Tablets
Demulen Tablets 0.5 mg.     …    G. D. Searle & Co.             U.K.            Third
                                                                                  Schedule
Fasigyn Tablets …           …    Pfizer Corp.                   Belgium           do.
Orande Expectorant Cough         Smith Kline & French           Canada          Freely
  Mixture                           (Canada) Ltd.
Gervine Capsules …          …    Cyanamid International         U.S.A.            do.
Zubes Lemon and Honey            Roberts Laboratories           U.K.              do.
  Lozenges
Parfenac Cream 5%           …    Lederle Laboratories           U.S.A.            do.
SK 65 Capsules …            …    Smith Kline & French              do.          Third
                                    Cooperation                                   Schedule
*Nilvern Drench …           …    I.C.I. Ltd.                    U.K.            Freely
*Nilzan Drench …            …       do.                            do.            do.
Darbid Tablets  …           …    SKF (Canada) Ltd.              Canada          Third
                                                                                  Schedule
Sanatogen Junior Vitamins  …     Fisons Ltd.                    U.K.            Freely
Fenopron 415 Pulvules 200 mg.    Eli Lilly & Co.                U.S.A.          Third
                                                                                  Schedule
Fenopron 416 Pulvules 300 mg.       do.                            do.            do.
Leponex Ampoules           …     Sandoz Ltd.                    Switzerland       do.
Leponex Tablets …          …        do.                            do.            do.
Tetavax …          …       …     Merial SA                      France            do
Tremaril Tablets …         …     Wander Ltd.                    Switzerland       do.
Tremaril Bitabs …          …        do.                            do.            do.
Halothane BP       …       …     May & Baker Ltd.               U.K.              do.
Noveril Tablets …          …     Sandoz Ltd.                    Switzerland       do.
Korean Ginseng Capsules    …     Korean Ginseng Products Co.    Korea           Freely
Melbrosia For Men Tablets …      Melbrosin                      Austria           do.
Melbrosia P.I.D. for Women …        do.                            do.            do.
Okabukal Tablets …         …     Hormo Pharma                   W. Germany      Third
                                                                                  Schedule
Baoercon Capsules           …    China National                 China           Freely     130/1974.
                                    Pharmaceutical Industries
Vicks Lipwick      …        …    Richardson-Merrell Co.         U.K.           do.
Pankreosil Tablets          …    Laboratorios Vargas SA         Venezuela      do.
Maalox Plus Tablets         …    W. H. Rorer                    Canada         do.
Maalox Plus Suspension      …       do.                            do.         do.
Biligram Amps …             …    Schering AG                    W. Germany Third
                                                                             Schedule
Microgynon 30 Tablets       …      do.                             do.     Freely
Microgynon 30 E. D. Tablets …      do.                             do.       do.
Denorex Medicated                Whitehall Laboratories Inc.    U.S.A.       do.
  Shampoo Liquid
Denerex Medicated                   do.                            do.          do.
  Shampoo Gel.
Anbesol          …          …       do.                            do.          do.
Resiguard Liquid …          …    Nicholas Laboratories Ltd.     U.K.            do.
Aldecin Inhaler …           …    Schering Corp.                 U.SA.         Third
                                                                                Schedule
*Change in formula.


                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                   L.R.O.

                                UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

166            Chap. 30:01                          Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                 Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer            Country of    Conditions
                                                                                    origin       of Sale
               Ascorbic Acid Tablets 500 mg.      Regent Labs. Ltd.               U.K.         Freely
               C-Forte 500 Tablets         …      Rondex Laboratories Inc.        U.S.A.         do.
               Alkacid Tablets …           …        do.                              do.         do.
               Theravem-12 Tablets         …        do.                              do.         do.
               Enervite-E Tablets          …        do.                              do.         do.
               Tongen 12 Tablets           …        do.                              do.         do.
               Butalka Tablets             …      Regent Labs. Ltd.               U.K.         Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Propantheline Tablets 15 mg.          do.                             do.         do.
               Butobarbitone Tablets 100 mg.         do.                             do.         do.
               Alcobon Tablets 500 mg.      …     Roche Products Ltd.                do.         do.
               Nordette Tablets …           …     Wyeth Pharma GMBH               W. Germany Freely
               Di-Jel Liquid     …          …     Plough Export Inc.              U.S.A.         do.
               Di-Jel Tablets    …          …        do.                             do.         do.
               Enervit Multivitamin Drops …       Mac Private Laboratories Ltd.   India          do
               Camphor Ice Ointment         …        do.                             do.         do.
               Heptules TR Capsules         …        do.                             do.         do.
               Biofol 12 Elixir …           …        do.                             do.         do.
               Tristina Expectorant         …        do.                             do.         do.
               Theomac Tablets …            …        do.                             do.         do.
               Macqizide Tablets            …        do.                             do.       Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Neosoralen Tablets             …      do.                             do.         do.
               Curasmin Tablets               …      do.                             do.         do.
               Alzia Gripe Syrup              …   Alzia Products                     do.       Freely
               Omnizole Bolus                 …   Merck Sharp and Dohme           U.S.A.         do.
               Andursil Suspension            …   Geigy Pharmaceuticals           U.K.           do.
               Andursil Tablets …             …      do.                             do.         do.
               Tandacote Tablets              …      do.                             do.       Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Orudis Capsules …              …   May and Baker Ltd.                 do.         do
               Safflower Oil Capsules         …   J. I. Rodale & Co. Ltd.         U.K.         Freely
               Vitamin E. Tablets 200 I.U.    …       do.                            do.         do.
               Coricidin Demilets Tablets     …   Schering Corporation            U.S.A.         do.
               Septrin Dispersible Tablets    …   Wellcome Foundation             U.K.         Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Catapres Composition Tabs.     …   C. H. Boehringer Sohn           W. Germany     do.
               Compound W        …            …   Whitehall Laboratories          U.K.         Freely
               Bactrim Dispersible Tablets    …   Roche Products Ltd.                do.       Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Alcylpyrin Tablets 300 mg.         United Pharm Works              Czechoslovakia Freely
               Aminophylline Tablets 100 mg.          do.                            do.         do.
               Aminophylline Tablets 200 mg.          do.                            do.         do.
               Ephedrine Tablets 15 mg.      …        do.                            do.         do.
               Ephedrine Tablets 30 mg.      …        do.                            do.         do.
               Acerola Capsules …            …    J. I. Rodale & Co.              U.K.           do.
               Brewers Yeast Tablets         …        do.                            do.         do.
               Bioflavonoid Complex Tablets           do.                            do.         do.
               Bone Meal Tablets             …        do.                            do.         do.
               Dessicated Liver Tablets      …        do.                            do.         do.
               Dolomite Tablets …            …        do.                            do.         do.
               Emulsified Vit. E. Caps 30 I.U.        do.                            do.         do.



                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                    167
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer          Country of     Conditions
                                                                   origin        of Sale
Emulsified Vit. E Caps 75 I.U.    J. I. Rodale & Co.         U.K.             Freely
Extravite Tablets …           …       do.                       do.             do.
Garlic Capsules …             …       do.                       do.             do.
Garlic and Parsley Capsules …         do.                       do.             do.
Garlic and Parsley Tablets    …       do.                       do.             do.
Halibut Liver Oil Capsules …          do.                       do.             do.
Hi-Pro Liver Tablets          …       do.                       do.             do.
High Potency B Complex                do.                       do.             do.
   Capsules
High Potency Brewers Yeast           do.                           do.          do.
   Tablets
Phisoderm Liquid              …   Winthrop Laboratories            do.          do.
Integrin Capsules …           …     do.                            do.        Third
                                                                                Schedule
Integrin Tablets …          …        do.                        do.             do.
Ferofolindon Tablets        …     India Pharmaceuticals      India            Freely
Neo Fortindon Tablets       …        do.                        do.             do.
Laxindon Tablets …          …        do.                        do.             do.
Pine Bros. Cough Drops      …     Beach Nut Inc.             U.S.A.             do.
Beach Nut Cough Drops       …        do.                        do.             do.
Pred Mild Ophthalmic              Allergan International        do.           Third
   Suspension                                                                   Schedule
Pred Forte Ophthalmic                do.                           do.          do.
   Suspension
Sinemet Tablets …           …     Merck Sharp & Dohme           do.       do.
Desone Tablets 0.5 mg.      …     British Pharmaceuticals    India        do.
Desone Injection …          …        do.                        do.       do.
Diazepam Tablets 5 mg.      …        do.                        do.       do.
Vagyl Tablets     …         …        do.                        do.       do.
Chlorpromazine Syrup        …        do.                        do.       do.
Aspirin Tablets 300 mg.     …     Wallis Laboratories        U.K.       Freely
Paracetamol Tablets 500 mg. …        do.                        do.       do.
Carr’s Nasal Inhalers       …        do.                        do.       do.
Trental Dragees …           …     Farbwerke Hoechst          W. Germany Third
                                                                          Schedule
Trental Ampoules 5 ml.       …       do.                        do.       do.
Spasmacid Tablets            …    Franco Laboratories        Canada     Freely
Serenack Tablets 2 mg.       …    Nardic Biochemicals           do.     Third
                                                                          Schedule
Sanatogen Vit. C. Tablets    …    Fisons Ltd.                U.K.       Freely
Rynacrom Capsules            …       do.                        do.       do.
Dantrium Capsules 25 mg.     …    Eaton Labs. Ltd.           U.S.A.     Third
                                                                          Schedule
Poly B Syrup      …          …    U.S.V. Pharmaceutical      Jamaica    Freely
Equipoise Injection          …    E. R. Squibb Ltd.          U.SA.      Third
                                                                          Schedule
Alligoa Garlic Pills         …    E. Scheurich Pharm         Germany    Freely
De-Menthasin Lozenges        …       do.                        do.       do.
Restora Dragees …            …       do.                        do.       do.
Corti-Europuran Ointment     …       do.                        do.     Third
                                                                          Schedule
Hijuven Capsules             …    Eisai Co. Ltd.             Japan      Freely
Richbron Capsules            …       do.                        do.       do.
Strocain Tablets …           …       do.                        do.       do.
Methaphyllin Tablets         …       do.                        do.     Third
                                                                          Schedule
Franol TF Tablets            …    Sydney Ross Co.            Mexico     Freely



                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                 L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

168            Chap. 30:01                          Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                         Manufacturer         Country of     Conditions
                                                                                  origin        of Sale
               Pedialyte Oral Electrolite         Abbott Laboratories           U.S.A.       Third
                  Solution                                                                     Schedule
               Mecadox Premix …               …   Pfizer Corporation               do.       Freely
               Iron Formula Tablets           …   J. I. Rodale & Co. Ltd.       U.K.           do.
               Lecithin Capsules …            …       do.                          do.         do.
               Kelp Tablets       …           …       do.                          do.         do.
               Marrow Bone Tablets            …       do.                          do.         do.
               Natrodale Geriatric Formula            do.                          do.         do.
                  Tablets
               Natrodale Junior Formula              do.                           do.         do.
                  Tablets
               Natrodale Protein Plus Tablets        do.                           do.         do.
               Naturavite Tablets             …      do.                           do.         do.
               Pineapple Bromelain Tablets           do.                           do.         do.
               Pro Vitamin A Capsules         …      do.                           do.         do.
               Pure Pollen Tablets            …      do.                           do.         do.
               Rose Hips Capsules 30 mg. …           do.                           do.         do.
               Rose Hips Capsules 100 mg. …          do.                           do.         do.
               Rose Hips Capsules 200 mg. …          do.                           do.         do.
               Rutin Tablets      …           …      do.                           do.         do.
               Serenack Tablets 5 mg.         …   Nardic Biochemicals           Canada       Third
                                                                                             Schedule
               Serenack Tablets 10 mg.     …          do.                          do.         do.
               Vit. B 12 Injection 1000    …          do.                          do.         do.
               Vitamin E Tablets 50 I.U.   …      J. I. Rodale & Co. Ltd.          do.         do.
               Vitamin B12 Tablets 25      …          do.                          do.         do.
               Vitamin B Complex Capsules             do.                          do.         do.
               Wheat Germ Oil Capsules     …          do.                          do.         do.
               Wheat Germ Oil 5 I.U. Capsules         do.                          do.         do.
               Natrodate 3 tabs. …         …          do.                          do.         do.
               Vibazine Syrup …            …      Pfizer International Corp.    Mexico       Freely
               Vibazine Tablets …          …          do.                          do.         do.
               Selvigon Drops …            …      Laboratorios Vargas           Venezuela      do.
               Selvigon Suppositories      …          do.                          do.         do.
               Selvigon Tablets …          …          do.                          do.         do.
24/1975.       Dimiril Expectorant Syrup   …      Chowgale & Co.                India          do.
               Mytivite Syrup …            …          do.                          do.         do.
               Nasodrin Nasal Drops        …          do.                          do.         do.
               Neofluvenal Tablets         …          do.                          do.         do.
               Orliver Capsules …          …          do.                          do.         do.
               Pantothindon Tablets        …      Indo Pharma Pharmaceuticals      do.         do.
               Novalgetol Injections       …      Chowgale & Co.                   do.       Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Dinonindon Tablets           …     Indo Pharma Pharmaceuticals      do.       Controlled
                                                                                               Drug
               Dexamethasone Injection      …     Wolins                        U.S.A.       Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Acth Gel           …         …        do.                           do.         do.
               Amyl Nitrite Capsules        …        do.                           do.         do.
               Azo Sulfisoxasole Tablets    …        do.                           do.         do.
               Chorionic Gonadotropin       …        do.                           do.         do.
               Colchicine Tablets           …        do.                           do.         do.
               Cortisone Acetate Tablets    …        do.                           do.         do.
               Cortisone Injection          …        do.                           do.         do.
               Chloral Hydrate Syrup        …        do.                           do.         do.
               Conjugated Estrogens Tablets          do.                           do.         do.
               Conjugated Estrogens Injection        do.                           do.         do.



                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                   169
                           Approval of New Drugs Notification                                 [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer          Country of     Conditions
                                                                  origin        of Sale
Chlorphentermine Tablets    …    Wolins                     U.S.A.           Third
                                                                               Schedule
Chlorpromazine Tablets       …     do.                            do.          do.
Dicyclomine Injection        …     do.                            do.          do.
Dicyclomine HC1 Tablets      …     do.                            do.          do.
Digitoxin Tablets …          …     do.                            do.          do.
Dexamethasone Tablets        …     do.                            do.          do.
Dihydroxycoumarin Tablets …        do.                            do.          do.
Digitalis Tablets …          …     do.                            do.          do.
Diphenylhydantoin Capsules …       do.                            do.          do.
Digoxin Tablets …            …     do.                            do.          do.
Diethylpropion HCI Tablets …       do.                            do.          do.
Epinephrine HC1 Injection …        do.                            do.          do.
Diphenhydramine Injection …        do.                            do.          do.
Estradiol Valerate Tablets   …     do.                            do.          do.
Ergonovine Maleate Tablets …       do.                            do.          do.
Gluthimide Tablets           …     do.                            do.          do.
Hydralazine Tablets          …     do.                            do.          do.
Hydrocortisone Cream         …     do.                            do.          do.
Hydrocortisone Ointment      …     do.                            do.          do.
Hydrocortisone Tablets       …     do.                            do.          do.
Hydrocortisone Injection     …     do.                            do.          do.
Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets …      do.                            do.          do.
Meclizine HC1 25 mg. Tablets       do.                            do.        Freely
Mannitol Hexanitrate Tablets       do.                            do.          do.
Nytime Syrup       …         …     do.                            do.          do.          24/1975.
Promethazine Expectorant     …     do.                            do.          do.
Promethazine Pediatric             do.                            do.          do.
   Expectorant
Promethazine Tablets         …     do.                            do.          do.
Promethazine Phenylephrine         do.                            do.          do.
   Expectorant
Poly-Flor-Vite     …         …     do.                            do.          do.
Poly-Vite          …         …     do.                            do.          do.
Sinudrain Tablets …          …     do.                            do.          do.
Sinu-Wol Tablets …           …     do.                            do.          do.
Sinu-Wol II Tablets          …     do.                            do.          do.
Sansprin Tablets …           …     do.                            do.          do.
Sansprin Chewable Tablets …        do.                            do.          do.
Syr-Vite           …         …     do.                            do.          do.
Theophylline Elixir          …     do                             do.          do.
Theophylline K. I. Elixir    …     do.                            do.          do.
Theolate Elixir …            …     do.                            do.          do.
Trio-Wol Tablets …           …     do.                            do.          do.
Trio-Wol Syrup …             …     do.                            do           do.
Tri-Vites          …         …     do.                            do.          do.
Tuss-Chlorphenade Caps       …     do.                            do.          do.
Vitamin E Capsules           …     do.                            do.          do.
Vita-Min Tablets …           …     do.                            do.          do.
Vita-Min T. Tablets          …     do.                            do.          do.
Una-Vit Tablets …            …     do.                            do.          do.
Una-Vit Fer Tablets          …     do.                            do.          do.
Vitamin B12 Tablets          …     do                             do.          do.
Vit-A-Day Capsules           …     do.                            do.          do.
Vit-A-Day M. Capsules        …     do.                            do.          do.
Vit-A-Day T. Capsules        …     do.                            do.          do.
Wolgraine Tablets            …     do.                            do.          do.
Wolgelsil Tablets …          …     do.                            do.          do.
Wol-Lac Tablets …            …     do.                            do.          do.
Woltrinsic Capsules          …     do.                            do.          do.



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

170            Chap. 30:01                          Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                          Manufacturer    Country of     Conditions
                                                                              origin        of Sale
               Woltrinsic F Capsules         …     Wolins                   U.S.A.       Freely
               Heparin Sodium Injection      …       do.                       do.       Third
                                                                                           Schedule
               Isoniazid Tablets …             …     do.                        do.        do.
               Isosorbide Dinitrate Tablets …        do.                        do.        do.
               Iodo-HC Cream …                 …     do.                        do.        do.
               Liver Injection     …           …     do.                        do.        do.
               Liver Painless Injection        …     do.                        do.        do.
               Lidocaine Injection             …     do.                        do.        do.
               Mersalyl Ampoules               …     do.                        do.        do.
               Meprobamate Tablets             …     do.                        do.        do.
               Nylidrin Tablets …              …     do.                        do.        do.
               Nitrofurazone Soluble Dressing        do.                        do.        do.
               Nitrofurantoin Tablets          …     do.                        do.        do.
               Methyltestosterone Tablets      …     do.                        do.        do.
               Nitroglycerine T.D. Capsules          do.                        do.        do.
               Optised O.S.        …           …     do.                        do.        do.
               Parcotane Tablets …             …     do.                        do.        do.
               Pava-Wol Capsules               …     do.                        do.        do.
               Probenecid with Colchicine            do.                        do.        do.
                  Tablets
               Propoxyphene HC1 Capsules …           do.                        do.        do.
               Prednisolone Tablets            …     do.                        do.        do.
               Prednisolone T.B.A. Injection         do.                        do.        do.
               Prednisolone Tablets            …     do.                        do.        do.
               Procaine HC1 Injection          …     do.                        do.        do.
               PETN Tablets        …           …     do.                        do.        do.
               PETN T.D. Capsules              …     do.                        do.        do.
               Promethazine Injection          …     do.                        do.        do.
               Propantheline Bromide Tablets         do.                        do.        do.
               Propantheline P.B. Tablets      …     do.                        do.        do.
               Phendorex Tablets               …     do.                        do.        do.
               Progesterone Injection          …     do.                        do.        do.
               Procainamide Capsules           …     do.                        do.        do.
               Propylthiouracil Tablets        …     do.                        do.        do.
               Prednisolone Injection          …     do.                        do.        do.
               Phenylbutazone Vet Tablets …          do.                        do.        do:
               Rauwolfia Serpentina Tablets          do.                        do.        do.
               Reserpine Tablets               …     do.                        do.        do.
               Stilboestrol Tablets            …     do.                        do.        do.
               Spasmolin T. D. Caps            …     do.                        do.        do.
               Spasmolin Tablets …             …     do.                        do.        do.
               Sulfizoxasole Tablets           …     do.                        do.        do.
               Serpazide Tablets …             …     do.                        do.        do.
               Sodium Sulphacetamide Eye             do.                        do.        do.
                  Drops
               Testosterone Enanthate with           do.                        do.        do.
                  Estradiol Valerate Injection
               Testosterone Cypionate with           do.                        do.        do.
                  Estradiol Cypionate Injection
               Testosterone Injection          …     do.                        do.        do.
               Tolazoline HC1 Tablets          …     do.                        do.        do.
               Thyroglobin Tablets             …     do.                        do.        do.
               Triple Sulfa Tablets            …     do.                        do.        do.



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                       Chap. 30:01                    171
                          Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer        Country of     Conditions
                                                                 origin        of Sale
Tetracaine Ophthalmic             Wolins                   U.S.A.           Third
   Solution                                                                   Schedule
Theobromine Tablets         …       do.                          do.          do.
Thyroid Tablets …           …       do.                          do.          do.
Vitamin A Capsules          …       do.                          do.          do.
Vitamin B1 Injection        …       do.                          do.          do.
Vit B 12 Injection          …       do.                          do.          do.
Vaginal Sulfa Cream         …       do.                          do.          do.
Amobarbital Capsules        …       do.                          do.        Controlled
                                                                              Drug
Batabarbital Elixir           …     do.                          do.          do.
Butabarbital Tablets          …     do.                          do.          do.
Dicyclomine HC1 with                do.                          do.          do.
Phenobarbital Capsules
Dexamo Capsules …             …     do.                          do.          do.
Dextro-Amphetamine                  do.                          do.          do.
   Sulphate Tablets
Pentobarbital Sodium                do.                          do.          do.
   Capsules
Pentobarbital Sodium Elixir         do.                          do.          do.
Pentobarbital Sodium Injection      do.                          do.          do.
Secobarbital Sodium Capsules        do.                          do.          do.
PETN with Phenobarbital Tablets     do.                          do.          do.
D.S.S. Syrup        …         …     do.                          do.        Freely
Dicalcium Phosphate Capsules        do.                          do.          do.
Dimenhydrinate Tablets        …     do.                          do.          do.
Decongestant Antitussive Elixir     do.                          do.          do.
Decongestant Expectorant      …     do.                          do.          do
D.S.S. with Casanthranol            do.                          do.          do.
   Capsules
Ferrous Sulfate Tablets       …     do.                          do.          do.
Ferrous Gluconate Tablets     …     do.                          do.          do.
Folic Acid Tablets            …     do.                          do.          do.
H.B. Ear Drops …              …     do.                          do.          do.
H.P. Bee-Cee Capsules         …     do.                          do.          do.
Histawol Elixir …             …     do.                          do           do.
Kaowol Suspension             …     do.                          do.          do.
Liothyronine Sodium Tablets         do.                          do.          do.
Magnalum Tablets              …     do.                          do.          do.
Magwol Liquid …               …     do.                          do.          do.
Aminophylline Tablets         …     do.                          do.          do.
Ammonium Chloride Tablets           do.                          do.          do.
Asperin E.C. Tablets          …     do.                          do.          do.
Aspirin Buffered Tablets      …     do.                          do.          do.
Apap Elixir         …         …     do.                          do.          do.
B. Complex & C.H.P. Tablets …       do.                          do.          do.
B. Complex T. Tablets         …     do.                          do.          do.
Bellacher Tablets …           …     do.                          do.          do.
Bromphenate DC Expectorant          do.                          do.          do.
Bisalex Tablets …             …     do.                          do.          do.
Chlorpheniramine Maleate            do.                          do.          do.
   Tablets
Chlorpheniramine Maleate            do.                          do.          do.
   Syrup



                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

172            Chap. 30:01                          Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                         Manufacturer             Country of     Conditions
                                                                                      origin        of Sale
               Co-Sansprin Tablets         …      Wolins                           U.S.A.        Freely
               Chlorphenade T.D. Capsules …         do.                               do.          do.
               Diphenhydramine HC1 Capsules         do.                               do.          do.
               Diphenhydramine Elixir      …        do.                               do.          do.
               Diphenhydramine Expectorant          do.                               do.          do.
               Dioctyl Sodium Drops        …        do.                               do.          do.
               Magwol Tablets …            …        do.                               do.          do.
               Methenamine Mandelate Tablets        do.                               do.          do.
               Mucil-Wol Powder            …        do.                               do.          do.
               Liprinal Capsules 250 mg.   …      Mead Johnson                     Mexico        Third
                                                                                                   Schedule
               Liprinal Capsules 500 mg.     …       do.                              do.          do
               Dentinox Teething Liquid      …    D.D.D. Company Ltd.              U.K.          Freely
               Dentinox Teething Gel         …       do.                              do.          do.
               Medijel …         …           …       do.                              do.          do.
               Chlorazene Tablets            …    Wisconsin Pharmacal Co. Inc.     U.S.A.          do.
               Consin Compound Salve         …       do.                              do.          do.
               Div Tabs          …           …       do.                              do.          do.
               Duraprin Tablets …            …       do.                              do.          do.
               Earacaine Ear Drops           …       do.                              do.          do.
               Go Pain Throat Spray          …       do.                              do           do.
               Joy-O-Dent        …           …       do.                              do.          do.
               Medi-chlor Antiseptic Skin            do.                              do.          do.
                 Cleaner
               Potable Aqua Tablets          …       do.                              do.          do.
               Neo Bile HP Tablets           …       do.                              do.          do.
               Hescor-K Tablets              …       do.                              do.        Third
                                                                                                   Schedule
               Nicotron Tablets …            …        do.                             do.          do.
               Potassium Chloride Syrup      …        do.                             do.          do.
               Acne Aid Bar      …           …    Stiefel Laboratories (UK) Ltd.   U.K.          Freely
               Brasivol No. 1 Fine           …        do.                             do.          do.
               Brasivol No. 2 Medium         …        do.                             do           do.
               Brasivol No. 3 Coarse         …        do.                             do.          do.
               Panoxyl 5 Gel.    …           …        do.                             do.          do.
               Panoxyl 10 Gel …              …        do.                             do.          do.
               Polyfar Liquid    …           …        do.                             do.          do.
               Zeasorb Powder …              …        do.                             do.          do.
               Dicalcium Phosphate                The De Pree Co.                  U.S.A.          do.
                  Capsules with Vit. D.
               Frut Pak Tablets 250 mg.      …      do.                               do.          do.
               Forceval Capsules …           …    Unigreg Ltd.                     U.K.            do.
               Uniflu Plus Gerovite C Tablets       do.                               do           do.
               Unigest Capsules              …      do.                               do.          do.
               Virilmin Capsules             …      do.                               do.        Third
                                                                                                   Schedule.
               Bactrim for Infusion          …    Roche Products Ltd.                 do.          do.
               Algex Cream        …          …    Sopar SA .                       Belgium       Freely
               Cevitan Tablets …             …       do.                              do.          do.
               Celestone S. Colloidal Eye Drops   Schering Corp.                   U.S.A.        Third
                                                                                                   Schedule
               Celestagesic Tablets          …       do.                              do.          do.
               Celestoderm V. Cream          …       do.                              do.          do.
               Tab. Safapyrin    …           …    Pfizer Ltd.                      U.K.          Freely
               Tab. Safapyrin Co.            …       do.                              do.          do.



                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                       Food and Drugs                        Chap. 30:01                    173
                               Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                           Manufacturer          Country of     Conditions
                                                                      origin        of Sale
Vitamin E. 100 I.U.                 Pfizer Inc.                    Canada        Freely
   (Natural) Capsules
Vitamin E. 100 (Synthetic) I.U.        do.                            do.          do.
Vitamin E. 200 (Natural) I.U. …        do.                            do.          do.
Vitamin E. 200     (Synthetic) I.U.    do.                            do.          do.
Vitamin E. 400 (Natural) I.U. …        do.                            do.          do.
Vitamin E. 400 (Synthetic) I.U.        do.                            do.          do.
Vitamin C 100 mg.                      do.                            do.          do.
   Chewable Tablets
Vitamin C 25 mg.                       do.                            do.          do.
   Chewable Tablets
Vitamin C 500 mg.                      do.                            do.          do.
   Chewable Tablets
Otoryl Ear Drops …            … May & Baker Ltd.                   U.K.         do.
Euthatal Solution …           …           do.                         do.     Controlled
                                                                                Drug
*Synandone Cream                …    I.C.I.                        U.K.       Third
                                                                                Schedule
*Synalar Forte Cream            …       do.                            do.      do.
Blocadren Tablets               …    Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.          do.      do
Rowacylat Tablets               …    Rowa Ltd.                     Ireland    Freely
Ovral Tablets 21’s              …    Wyeth GMBH                    W. Germany   do.
Nordiol Tablets 21’s            …       do.                            do.      do.
Ovulen 50 Tablets               …    G. D. Searle & Co.            U.K.         do.
Ovulen Tablets …                …       do.                            do.    Third
                                                                                Schedule
Enavid 5 mg. Tablets            …       do.                            do.      do.
Metrulen-M Tablets              …       do.                            do.      do.
Norinyl-L Tablets               …    Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd.       do.    Freely
Noriday Tablets …               …       do.                            do.      do.
Nopmenon Tablets                …       do.                            do.      do.
Norinyl-2 Tablets               …       do.                            do.    Third
                                                                                Schedule
Microgynon 30 Tablets           …    Schering AG                   W. Germany Freely
Anovlar 21 4 mg. Tablets        …       do.                            do.      do.
Anovlar 1 mg. Tablet            …       do.                            do.      do.
Gynovlar 21 Tablets             …       do.                            do.      do.
Eugynon Tablets …               …       do.                            do.      do.
Eugynon ED Tablets              …       do.                            do.      do.
Neogynon Tablets                …       do.                            do.      do.
Neogynon ED Tablets             …       do.                            do.      do.
Microlut Tablets                …       do.                            do.      do.
Rivotril Tablets 0.5 mg.        …    Roche Products Ltd.           U.K.       Third
                                                                                Schedule
Rivotril Injection 1 mg./ml.    …       do.                            do.      do.
Rivotril Tablets 2.0mg.         …       do.                            do.      do.
†Trasicor Tablets 20mg.         …    Ciba Laboratories                 do.      do.
†Trasicor Tablets 40mg.         …       do.                            do.      do.
†Trasicor Tablets 80mg.         …       do.                            do.      do.
‡Engran Tablets …               …    E. R. Squibb & Sons           U.S.A.     Freely
§Flaminon Capsules              …       do.                        Guatemala  Third
                                                                                Schedule

*Denotes change in Formula.
†Now film coated.
‡Change in excipient.
§Change in country of origin.



                                              UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                 L.R.O.

                                    UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

174            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer          Country of     Conditions
                                                                                  origin        of Sale
               Questran Powder …            …    Mead Johnson & Co.             U.S.A.        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Prodocol Tablets …           …    William R. Warner & Co. Ltd.   U.K.            do.
               Palmer’s Skin Success             E. T. Browne Drug Co. Inc.     U.S.A.        Freely
                  Medicated Astringent
               Summer’s Eye Disposable           C. B. Fleet Co. Inc.              do.          do.
                  Douche
               Isotrate Tablets 5 mg.       …    Parke David & Co.              Colombia      Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Isotrate Tablets 10 mg.      …       do.                           do.           do.
               Isotrate Tablets 40 mg.      …       do.                           do.           do.
               Insulin 40 U/ml. …           …    Swiss Serum & Vaccine          Switzerland     do.
                                                    Institute
               Insulin 80 U/ml. …           …       do.                             do.      do.
               Protamine Zinc Insulin 40 U/ml.      do.                             do.      do.
               Protamine Zinc Insulin 80 U/ml.      do.                             do.      do.
               Insulin NPH 40 U/ml.         …       do.                             do.      do.
               Insulin NPH 80 U/ml.         …       do.                             do.      do.
               Diphtheria Antitoxin 2000 U/ml.      do.                             do.      do.
               Diphtheria Antitoxin 4000 U/ml.      do.                             do.      do.
               Rabies Antitoxin 1000 U/ml.          do.                             do.      do.
               Tetanus Antitoxin 1000 U/ml.         do.                             do.      do.
               Tetanus Antitoxin 1500 U/ml.         do.                             do.      do.
               Tetanus Antitoxin 2000 U/ml.         do.                             do.      do.
               Tetanus Antitoxin 4000 U/ml.         do.                             do.      do.
               Rowagastrit Tablets          …    Rowa Ltd.                      Ireland    Freely
               Acnaveen Medicated Bar       …    Cooper Laboratories            Puerto Rico  do.
               Deconamine Capsules          …       do.                             do.      do.
               Aveeno Colloidal Oatmeal     …       do.                             do.      do.
               Deconamine Elixir            …       do.                             do.      do.
               Dacriose Ophthalmic          …       do.                             do.      do.
               Irrigating Solution          …       do.                             do.      do.
               Elixophyllin-KI Elixir       …       do.                             do.      do.
               Elixophyllin-Capsules        …       do.                             do.      do.
               Sarco…              …        …    Ditrax                         Belgium      do.
               Emulave             …        …    Cooper Laboratories            Puerto Rico  do.
               Sebaveen Medicated Shampoo           do.                             do.      do.
               Inflamase Forte Ophthalmic           do.                             do.    Third
                   Solution                                                                  Schedule
               Kay Ciel Elixir …            …       do.                            do.       do.
               Sus-phrine Injection         …       do.                            do.       do.
               Tearisol Ophthalmic Lubricant        do.                            do.     Freely
               Quinaglute Dura-Tabs         …       do.                         U.S.A.     Third
                                                                                             Schedule
               Fugoa Depot        …         …    E. Scheurich Pharmwerk         W. Germany   do.
               Zellaforte Plus Tablets      …    Zellaforte Vertriels              do.     Freely
               Fefol Spansule     …         …    Smith Kline & French           U.K.         do.
                                                    Laboratories Ltd.
               Fesovit Spansule …           …       do.                            do.          do.
               Micralax Enema …             …       do.                            do.          do.
               Loxapac Tablets 10 mg.       …    Lederle Labs. Ltd.             U.S.A.        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Loxapac Tablets 25 mg.       …       do.                            do.          do.
               Loxapac Tablets 50 mg.       …       do.                            do.          do.



                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                   175
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                 [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                   origin       of Sale

Climestrone Tablets 0.625    …    Charles E. Frosst & Co.    Canada           Third
                                                                                Schedule
Climestrone Tablets 1.25     …       do.                        do.             do.
Sandopart Tablets 50 I.U.    …    Sandoz Ltd.                Switzerland        do.
Teronac Tablets 1 mg.        …       do.                        do.             do.
Teronac Tablets 2 mg.        …       do.                        do.             do.
Cadilagripe Liquid           …    Cadila Laboratories        India            Freely
Cadimalt          …          …       do.                        do.             do.
Cadiplex Tablets …           …       do.                        do.             do.
Cadrol Tablets    …          …       do.                        do.             do.
Cadistin Expectorant         …       do.                        do.             do.
Cadistin Tablets …           …       do.                        do.             do.
Fergulate Syrup …            …       do.                        do.             do.
Hoopar Granules …            …       do.                        do.             do.
Multimin Drops …             …       do.                        do.             do.
Multimin Liquid …            …       do.                        do.             do.
Neuroxin-12 Tablets          …       do.                        do.             do.
Vitarbin Elixir   …          …       do.                        do.             do.
Wormicid Elixir …            …       do.                        do.             do.
Butadex Tablets …            …       do.                        do.           Third
                                                                                Schedule
Cabrium Tablets …            …    do.                           do.             do.
Cadiprol Tablets …           …    do.                           do.             do.
Cadisper-C Tablets           …    do.                           do.             do.
Cadistin Injection …         …    do.                           do.             do.
Cadiphylate Injection        …    do.                           do.             do.
Caduserp Tablets …           …    do.                           do.             do.
Calcirol D2 Granules         …    do.                           do.             do.
Cal-D-Rubra Injection        …    do.                           do.             do.
Cardina Tablets …            …    do.                           do.             do.
Cemide Eye Drops 10%         …    do.                           do.             do.
Cemide Eye Drops 20%         …    do.                           do.             do.
Cemide Eye Drops 30%         …    do.                           do.             do.
Chlorformin Tablets          ...  do.                           do.             do.
Dexaphylate Tablets          …    do.                           do.             do.
Dexona Tablets …             …    do.                           do.             do.
Dexona Injection …           …    do.                           do.             do.
Epsolin Tablets …            …    do.                           do.             do.
Isocadipas Tablets           …    do.                           do.             do.
Isopar Tablets     …         …    do.                           do.             do.
Neurabol-H Injection         …    do.                           do.             do.
Neuroxin-12 Injection        …    do.                           do.             do.
Novrison Capsules             …   do.                           do.             do.
Pesulin Liquid     …         …    do.                           do.             do.
Pesulin-O Liquid …           …    do.                           do.             do.
Phenormin Tablets            …    do.                           do.             do.
P.M.T. Tablets     …         …    do.                           do.             do.
Renitol Injection …          …    do.                           do.             do.
Socrol Injection …           …    do.                           do.             do.
Thisopar Tablets …           …    do.                           do.             do.
Panadol Elixir     …         … Winthrop Pharmaceuticals      U.K.             Freely
Allerest Tablets …           … Pharmacraft Penwalt           U.S.A.             do.
                                  Corporation
Allerest Time Capsules       …    do.                              do.          do.
Coldene Adult Cough          …    do.                              do.          do.
  Formula Syrup
Coldene Children’s Cough     …       do.                           do.          do.
  Formula Syrup
Cruex Aerosol    …           …       do.                           do.          do.
Desenex Ointment             …       do.                           do.          do.



                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

176            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer             Country of     Conditions
                                                                                    origin        of Sale
               Desenex Powder …              …    Pharmacraft Penwalt             U.S.A.        Freely
                                                     Corporation
               Desenex Aerosol …          …          do.                             do.       do.
               Desenex Solution           …          do.                             do.       do.
               A-E-Mulsin Drops           …       Mucos                           W. Germany   do.
               E-Mulsin Drops …           …          do.                             do.       do.
               E-Mulsin Forte Drops       …          do.                             do.       do.
               E-Mulsin Fortissimum Drops            do.                             do.       do.
               Multin-Mulsin Drops        …          do.                             do.     Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Zaroxolyn Tablets 2.5 mg.     …    Penwalt Prescription Products   U.S.A.       do.
               Zaroxolyn Tablets 5.0 mg.     …       do.                             do.       do.
               Zaroxolyn Tablets 10.0 mg.    …       do.                             do.       do.
               Eyes Right Capsule            …    Ashe Laboratories Ltd.          U.K.       Freely
               Korean Ginseng Tonic               Korean Ginseng Co.              Korea      Freely
                 Liquid Extract
               Caldesene Powder              …    Pharmacraft Penwalt             U.S.A.          do.
                                                     Corporation
31/1975.       Topisolon Ointment            …    Farbwerke Hoechst A.G.          W. Germany Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Dantrium Capsules 100 mg.     …    Eaton Labs. Ltd.                U.S.A.       do.
               Lyndiol 22 Tablets            …    Organon Labs. Ltd.                 do.     Freely
               Benoxyl Cream Plain           …    Stiefel Labs. Ltd.              U.K.         do.
               Benoxyl Cream Regular         …        do.                            do.       do.
               Benoxyl Cream Strong          …        do.                            do.       do.
               Ceanel Concentrate            …    Quinoderm Ltd.                     do.       do.
               Quinoderm Cream               …        do.                            do.       do.
               Quinoped Cream …              …        do.                            do.       do.
               Quinoderm Cream with                   do.                            do      Third
                 Hydrocortisone 1 per cent                                                     Schedule
               Biphasil Tablets …            …    Wyeth Pharma GMBH               W. Germany Freely
               Madopar Capsules 125 mg.      …    Roche Products Ltd.             U.K.       Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Madopar Capsules 250 mg.      …       do.                             do.       do.
               Coricidin Cough Relief             Schering Corp.                  U.S.A.     Freely
                 Formula
               Coricidin Nasal Mist          …       do.                             do.          do.
               Hydrocare Protein Remover     …    Allergan Ltd.                   Canada          do.
               Tryptizol Tablets 50 mg.      …    Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.        U.K.          Third
                                                                                                  Schedule
               Bicozene Cream …              …    Ex-Lax Inc.                     U.S.A.        Freely
               Fefol-Vit Spansule            …    Smith Kline & French Labs       U.K.            do.
57/1975.       Nitrospan Capsules 2.5 mg.    …    U.S.V. Pharmaceutical Corp.     U.S.A.        Third
                                                                                                  Schedule
               Trasicor Tablets 160 mg.      …    Ciba Laboratories               U.K.            do.
               Serpina Tablets …             …    Himalaya Drug Co.               India           do.
               Nico-stop Capsules            …    Ditrax                          Belgium       Freely
               Novaldex Tablets 10 mg.       …    I.C.I.                          U.K.          Third
                                                                                                  Schedule
               Diucardin Tablets 50 mg.    …      Ayerst Labs.                    Canada          do.
               Dyrenium Tablets 100 mg.    …      S.K.F.                             do.          do.
               *Hibitane Obstetric Cream   …      I.C.I.                          U.K.          Freely
               Ambredin Tablets            …      Solco Basle                     Switzerland     do.
               Orlest Tablets 28’s         …      Parke-Davis & Co.               U.S.A.          do.
               Norlestrin Tablets          …         do.                             do.          do.
               Norlestrin Fe Tablets       …         do.                             do.          do.
               Ortho Novum 1/50 Tablets 21’s      Ortho Pharmaceutical               do.          do.
                                                     Incorporated
               *Change in formula.


                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                          Chap. 30:01                    177
                          Approval of New Drugs Notification                                     [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer            Country of     Conditions
                                                                    origin        of Sale
Micronor Tablets 42’s       …     Ortho Pharmaceutical           U.S.A.        Freely
                                     Incorporated
Ortho Novum Tablets 2 mg. 21’s       do.                            do.        Third
                                                                                 Schedule
Ortho Novum 1/80 Tablets 21’s      do.                              do.          do.
Glucophage Tablets 850 mg.       Rona Labs.                      U.K.            do.
Novinol 21 Tablets           … Desbergers Ltd.                   Canada          do.
Novinol 28 Tablets           …     do.                              do.          do.
Oestrilin Vaginal Cones      …     do.                              do.          do.
Oestrilin Tablets 0.65 mg.     …   do.                              do.          do.
Oestrilin Tablets 1.25 mg.     …   do.                              do.          do.
Oestrilin Vaginal Cream      …     do.                              do.          do.
Rubion 1000 Injection        …     do.                              do.          do.
Metaboline Tablets           …     do.                              do.          do.
B-Totum with Vitamin C Tablets     do.                              do.        Freely
B-Totum 500 Capsules         …     do.                              do.          do.
Hemo-Somaton with Vitamin          do.                              do.          do.
   C Ampoules and Tablets
Kaolin Pectin Mixture NF     …     do.                              do.          do.
Maxi-6 Tablets …             …     do.                              do.          do.
Maxi-10 Tablets …            …     do.                              do.          do.
Neo-Derm Powder              …     do.                              do.          do.
Fertinic Capils     …        …     do.                              do.          do.
Vasculine Tablets            …     do.                              do.          do.
Aminophylline Tablets 100 mg.    Approved Prescription Service   U.K.            do.
Ascorbic Acid Tablets 100 mg.      do.                              do.          do.
Aspirin Tablets 300 mg.      …     do.                              do.          do.
Calcium with Vitamin D Tablets     do.                              do.          do.
Ephedrine Hydrochloride            do.                              do.          do.
   Tablets 15 mg.
Ferrous Sulphate Tablets     …     do.                              do.       do.
Multivitamin Tablets         …     do.                              do.       do.
Vitamin Capsules             …     do.                              do.       do.
Bendrofluazide Tablets 2.5 mg.     do.                              do.     Third
                                                                              Schedule
Digoxin Tablets 0.25 mg.      …      do.                             do.      do.
Phenylbutazone Tablets 100 mg.       do.                             do.      do.
Prednisolone Tablets 1 mg. …         do.                             do.      do.
Burinex Tablets 1 mg.         …   Leo Laboratories Ltd.          Ireland      do.
Burinex Injection 0.25 mg./ml.       do.                             do.      do.
Septrin Dispersible Tablets …     Burroughs Wellcome             U.K.         do.
Nutripak Vitamins Capsules …      W. T. Rawleigh Co.             U.S.A.     Freely
Vitamin E Capsules            …      do.                             do.      do.
Vitamin C Tablets             …      do.                             do.      do.
Chewable Vitamin C Tablets …         do.                             do.      do.
Chewable Multivitamins        …      do.                             do.      do.
Senior Multivitamins          …      do.                             do.      do.
Multivitamin Mineral Capsules        do.                             do.      do.
Dabylen Tablets …             …   Schi-Wa                        W. Germany   do.
Dabylen Forte Tablets         …      do.                             do.      do.
Dabylen-Calcium Tablets       …      do.                             do.      do.
Migranant Tablets             …   Rowa Ltd.                      Ireland    Third
                                                                              Schedule



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                   L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

178            Chap. 30:01                             Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                           Manufacturer   Country of     Conditions
                                                                              origin        of Sale
               Councilabs Cod Liver Oil           Council Labs. Inc.        U.S.A.        Freely
                  Capsules
               Unifam-M Tablets              …         do.                      do.         do.
               Councilabs Daily Multiple               do.                      do.         do.
                  Vitamins Plus Iron Tablets
               Aspirin Tablets for Children …          do.                      do.         do.
               Chewable Multivitamins        …         do.                      do.         do.
               Chewable Vitamins for Children          do.                      do.         do.
                  and Adults
               Chewable Vitamins Plus Iron …           do.                      do.         do.
               Councilabs Vitamins E                   do.                      do.         do.
                  Capsules 100 I.U.
               Councilabs Vitamins E                   do.                      do.         do.
                  Capsules 200 I.U.
               Councilabs Daily Multiple               do.                      do.         do.
                  Vitamins
               Ladytone Capsules             …    Vitabiotics Ltd.          U.K.            do.
               Oralcer Pellets    …          …       do.                       do.          do.
               Omega H3 Capsules             …    Europa Biological Ltd.       do.          do.
               Introl Tablets     …          …    Nadeau Laboratory Ltd.    Canada          do.
               Nabex-C Tablets …             …       do.                       do.          do.
               Histapec Syrup …              …       do.                       do.          do.
               Gestamine Tablets             …       do.                       do.          do.
               Dentition Teething Syrup      …       do.                       do.          do.
               B-Totum 500 Capils            …       do.                       do.          do.
               *Vermox Tablets …             …    Janssen Pharmaceutical    Belgium         do.
               Daktacort Cream …             …       do.                       do.        Third
                                                                                            Schedule
               Brondecon Tablets             …    Warner-Chilcott Labs.     U.S.A.        Freely
               Brondecon Elixir …            …       do.                       do.          do.
               Gelusil Liquid    …           …    Warner-Lambert Ltd.          do.          do.
               †Ferrol Tonic     …           …    Booker B.D.H.             Guyana          do.
               †Ferrol Compound              …       do.                       do.          do.
               Witch Stik Salve …            …    Ethichem Ltd.             U.K.            do.
               Witch Doctor      …           …       do.                       do.          do.
               Hygroton-K Tablets            …    Geigy Pharmaceuticals        do.        Third
                                                                                            Schedule
               †Sandomigran Tablets         …     Sandox Ltd.               Switzerland     do.
               †Mosegor Tablets             …        do.                       do.          do.
99/1975.       ‡Mydriacil 1 per cent Eye Drops    Alcon Laboratories        U.S.A.          do.
               Tenospam Tablets 2 mg.       …     Farmos Group              Finland         do.
               Tenospam Tablets 5 mg.       …        do.                       do.          do.
               Tenospam Tablets 10 mg.      …        do.                       do.          do.
               Tenospam Injection 5 mg.     …        do.                       do.          do.
               Furesis Tablets   …          …        do.                       do.          do.
               Furesis Compound Tablet      …        do.                       do.          do.
               Oculo Korti Eye Drops        …        do.                       do.          do.
               Korti Balsam      …          …        do.                       dp.          do.
               Dolopam Tablets …            …        do.                       do.          do.
               Trimo-sulpha Tablet          …        do.                       do.          do.
               Korti Injection   …          …        do.                       do.          do.

               *Denotes change of condition of sale.
               †Denotes change in formula.
               ‡Change in Preservative.
                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                    179
                           Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                  origin       of Sale
Koshmir Pain Balm           …    National Trading Co.         India          Freely
Tonic Indon Syrup           …    Indo-Pharma Pharmaceutical      do.           do.
                                    Works
Lysindon Drops …           …        do.                           do.          do.
Spasmindon Pediatric Drops …        do.                           do.        Third
                                                                               Schedule
Geriatric Indon Tablets     …      do.                            do.          do.
Univite Drops     …         …    Unichem Laboratories             do.        Freely
Sycocam 5 Tablets           …      do.                            do.        Third
                                                                               Schedule
Sycocam 10 Tablets      …           do.                          do.           do.
Sycocam Injection       …           do.                          do.           do.
Borolene Cream …        …        G. D. Pharmaceutical            do.         Freely
Vapolene Ointment       …           do.                          do.           do.
Neurovitam Tablets      …        Farmos Group                 Finland          do.
Multivitan Tablets      …           do.                          do.           do.
Vitafer Tablets    …    …           do.                          do.           do.
Beoktan Tablets …       …           do.                          do.           do.
Reumuzol Compound Ointment          do.                          do.           do.
Potentol Tablets …      …           do.                          do.         Third
                                                                               Schedule
Bellavita Ointment          …       do.                           do.          do.
Ani-korti Compound                  do.                           do.          do.
   Suppositories
Vitone Tablets    …         …    Hough Hoseason and           U.K.           Freely
                                    Company Limited
Ludiomil Tablets 10 mg.     …    Ciba-Geigy (U.K.) Ltd.           do.        Third
                                                                               Schedule
Ludiomil Tablets 25 mg.    …        do.                          do.           do.
Ludiomil Tablets 50 mg.    …        do.                          do.           do.
Beconase Nasal Spray       …     Allen and Hanbury’s Ltd.        do.           do.
Summer’s Eve Disposale Douche    C. B. Fleet Co. Inc.         U.S.A.         Freely
Urecholine Tablets 5 mg.   …     Merck Sharp and Dohme Inc.      do.         Third
                                                                               Schedule
Urecholine Tablets 10mg.  …        do.                          do.            do.
Urecholine Tablets 25mg.  …        do.                          do.            do.
Globuman Berna            …      Swiss Serum                  Switzerland      do.
B.C.G. See Vaccine        …        do.                          do.            do.
Ferrum Hausmann Drops     …      Hausmann Labs. Inc.            do.          Freely
Ferrum Hausmann Syrup     …        do.                          do.            do.
Ferrum S.R. Capsules      …        do.                          do.            do.
Calcium Hausmann Syrup    …        do.                          do.            do.
Swizzina Tonic …          …        do.                          do.            do.
Sansilla           …      …        do.                          do.            do.
Ferrum Hausmanm Intravenous        do.                          do.            do.
Kalium S.R. Capsules      …        do.                          do.            do.
Ferrum Hausmann           …        do.                          do.            do.
   Intramuscular
Hippiron 400      …       …         do.                          do.           do.
Ferrum Hausmann Vet       …         do.                          do.           do.
Solcoseryl Eye Gel        …      Solco Bolse Limited             do.           do.
Stugeron Forte Capsules   …      Janssen Pharmaceuticals      Belgium        Third
                                                                               Schedule
Triperidol Tablets 1 mg.    …       do.                           do.          do.



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                 L.R.O.

                                UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

180            Chap. 30:01                          Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                 Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                          Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                                    origin       of Sale
               Triperidol Amps 2.5 mg. per ml.     Janssen Pharmaceuticals        Belgium      Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Triperidol Drops 0.05 mg.              do.                            do.         do.
                  per drop
               †Famel Cough Syrup             …    Optrex Limited                 U.K.         Freely
               †Famel Honey and Lemon                do.                             do.         do.
                  Cough Linctus
               †Famel Children’s Cough                do.                            do.         do.
                  Linctus
               Acon Capsule 25,000 U.         …    Endo Laboratories              U.S.A.       Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Acon Capsule 50,000 U.         …       do.                            do.         do.
               Coumadin Tablets               …       do.                            do.         do.
               Valpin Tablets    …            …       do.                            do.         do.
               Valpin Elixir     …            …       do.                            do.         do.
               Valpin PB Tablets              …       do.                            do.         do.
               Valpin PB Elixir …             …       do.                            do.         do.
               Narcan Injection …             …       do.                            do.         do.
               Tyzine Nasal Solution          …    Pfizer Corp.                   Costa Rica   Freely
               Viterra Plus      …            …       do.                            do.         do.
               Viterra Therapeutic            …       do.                            do.       Third
                                                                                                   Schedule
               Vistaril Tablets 25 mg.        …       do.                         U.S.A.         do.
               Vistaril Tablets 50 mg.        …       do.                            do.         do.
               Vistaril Tablets 100 mg.       …       do.                            do.         do.
               Vistaril Oral Suspension       …       do.                            do.         do.
               Vistaril Injection …           …       do.                            do.         do.
               Pankreosil Tablets             …    Laboratories Vargos            Venezuela    Freely
               Tathiogal Injection 100 mg.    …    Yamanouche Pharmaceutical      Japan        Third
                                                      Company Limited                            Schedule
               Vivalan Tablets 50 mg.         …    Imperial Chemical Industries   U.K.           do.
               Momentum Muscular                   Whitehall Laboratories Inc.    U.S.A.       Freely
                 Backache Formula
               Burinex-K Tablets              …    Leo Pharmaceuticals Ltd.       U.K.         Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Kloramin Tablets …            …     Halsey Drug Co. Inc.           U.S.A.       Freely
               Aminophylline Tablets 100 mg.          do.                            do.         do.
               Wheat Germ Oil Capsules 3 min.         do.                            do.         do.
               Wheat Germ Oil Capsules 6 min.         do.                            do.         do.
               Geriprime Capsules            …        do.                            do.         do.
               Beceevite Capsules            …        do.                            do.         do.
               Amber Solution Mouth Wash              do.                            do.         do.
               Vitalitee Cod Liver Oil Capsules       do.                            do.         do.
               Pentran No. 2 Tablets         …        do.                            do.       Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Lasonyl Jelly    …             …    Nadeau Laboratories Ltd.       Canada       Freely
               Vitamin C 100 mg. Tablets      …    Halsey Drug Co. Ltd.           U.S.A.         do.
               Vitamin C 100 mg.                      do.                            do.         do.
                  Chewable Tablets
               Vitamin C 250 mg. Tablets      …       do.                            do.         do.
               Vitamin C 250 mg.                      do.                            do.         do.
                  Chewable Tablets

               †Denotes change in formula.


                                        UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                        Chap. 30:01                    181
                          Approval of New Drugs Notification                                   [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer         Country of     Conditions
                                                                  origin        of Sale
Vitamin C 500 mg. Tablets …       Halsey Drug Co. Ltd.         U.S.A.        Freely
Vitamin E 100 I.U. Capsules …        do.                          do.          do.
Vitamin E 200 I.U. Capsules …        do.                          do.          do.
Vitamin E 400 I.U. Capsules …        do.                          do.          do.
Vitamin E 1,000 I.U. Capsules        do.                          do.          do.
Nalefirm Capsules …           …      do.                          do.          do.
Aspirin Tablets 300 mg        …   John Bell, Hills and Lucas   U.K.            do.
Folic Acid Tablets 5 mg.      …      do.                          do.          do.
Sodium Bicarbonate                   do.                          do.          do.
   Compound Tablets
Vitamin B Compound                   do.                          do.          do.
   Tablets B.P.C.
Ferrous Gluconate Tablets            do.                          do.          do.
   300 mg.
Multivitamin Tablets          …      do.                          do.          do.
Phthalylsulphathiazole               do.                          do.        Third
   Tablets 500 mg.                                                             Schedule
Prednisolone Tablets 5 mg. …         do.                          do.          do.
Prednisone Tablets 5 mg.      …      do.                          do.          do.
Sulphaguanidine Tablets              do.                          do.          do.
   500 mg.
Sulphadimidine Tablets               do.                          do.          do.
   500 mg.
Imipramine Tablets 25 mg. …          do,                          do.          do.
Phenylbutazone Tablets               do.                          do.          do.
   200 mg.
Phenobarbitone Tablets 30 mg.        do.                          do.        Controlled
                                                                                    Drug
Phenobarbitone Tablets 60 mg.        do.                          do.          do.
Seirogan Pills   …          …     Taikoh Pharmaceutical        Japan         Freely
                                     Company Limited
Kelpathin Tablets             …   4 Way Diet                   U.S.A.        do.
Paradenyl Tablets             …   Hormo-Pharma                 W. Germany    do.
Bio-Strath Sedative Formula   …   Bio-Strath A.G.              Switzerland   do.
Madecassol Powder             …   Rona Laboratories            U.K.        Third             27/1976.
                                                                             Schedule
Madecassol Ointment          …       do.                          do.        do.
Heptacort Plus Cream         …       do.                          do.        do.
Heptacort Plus Suppositories …       do.                          do.        do.
Dimenhidrinato Tablets 50 mg.     McKesson Lab.                Venezuela     do.
Indometacina Capsules 25 mg.         do.                          do.        do.
Chlordiazepoxide Tablets 10 mg.      do.                          do.        do.
Furosemida Tablets 40 mg. …          do.                          do.        do.
Diazepam Tablets 2 mg.       …       do.                          do.        do.
Diazepam Tablets 5 mg.       …       do.                          do.        do.
Metronidazol Tablets 250 mg.         do.                          do.        do.
Fenilbutazona Tablets 200 mg.        do.                          do.        do.
Reserpina Tablets 0.25 mg. …         do.                          do.        do.
Prednisolona Tablets 5 mg. …         do.                          do.        do.
Sulfametazina 25% Injection          do.                          do.        do.
Levamisol Injectable         …       do.                          do.        do.
Acid Nalidixoco 500 mg.      …       do.                          do.        do
Pankreon Compositum Dragees       Lab. Vargas                  Venezuela   Freely



                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

182            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer     Country of     Conditions
                                                                             origin        of Sale
               Complamin Retard Tablets     …    Lab. Vargas               Venezuela    Third
                                                                                          Schedule
               Sotacor Tablets 160 mg.      …    Bristol Laboratories      Canada         do.
               Sotacor Tablets 320 mg.      …       do.                       do.         do.
               Liquiprin Drops …            …    Mitchum Thayer Inc.       U.S.A.       Freely
               Femicin Tablets …            …       do.                       do.         do.
               Dependal Tablets …           …    S.K.F.                    India        Third
                                                                                          Schedule
               Diazepam Tablets 10 mg.      …    McKesson Lab.             Venezuela      do.
               Pulmadil Inhaler …           …    Riker Labs.               U.K.         Freely
               Pulmadil Auto     …          …       do.                       do.         do.
               Actifed Plus Tablets         …    Burroughs Wellcome Ltd.   Canada         do.
               Actifed Plus Cough Syrup     …       do.                       do.         do.
               Actifed A Tablets …          …       do.                       do.         do.
               Actifed A Elixir …           …       do.                       do.         do.
               Lanvis Tablets 40 mg.        …       do.                       do.       Third
                                                                                          Schedule
               Biverplex Tablets …         …     Ropharma SA               Belgium      Freely
               Totavita Dragees …          …       do.                        do.         do.
               Rophascorbine Tablets 500 mg.       do.                        do.         do.
               Rohepar Ampoules            …       do.                        do.       Third
                                                                                          Schedule
               Rinophar Nasal Spray          …      do.                       do.         do.
               Rinophar Nasal Drops          …      do.                       do.         do.
               Wasp-Eze Aerosol Spray        …   Potter and Clarke Ltd.    U.K.           do.
               Burn-Eze Aerosol Spray        …      do.                       do.         do.
               Blue Cross Chewable               Halsey Drug Co.           U.S.A.       Freely
                  Vitamin C Tablets 100 mg.
               Naturell-Vitamin E 1000 I.U.         do.                        do.        do.
                  Capsules
               Naturell-Vitamin E 200 I.U.          do.                        do.        do.
                  Capsules
               Naturell-Vitamin E 100 I.U.          do.                        do.        do.
                  Capsules
               Vitali-Tee Natural Kelp Tablets      do.                        do.        do.
               Vital-Tee Natural Organic            do.                        do.        do.
                  Vitamin C Tablets
               Blue Cross D-Sist Liquid      …      do.                        do.        do.
               Blue Cross Ferrous Sulphate          do.                        do.        do.
                  Tablets 5 grains
               Blue Cross Halenol Tablets …         do.                        do.        do.
               Vitali-Tee Natural Vitamin           do.                        do.        do.
                  E 1000 I.U. Capsules
               Vitali-Tee Natural Vitamin           do.                        do.        do.
                  E 400 U Capsules
               Vitali-Tee Natural Vitamin           do.                        do.        do.
                  E 200 I.U. Capsules
               Vitali-Tee Natural Vitamin           do.                        do.        do.
                  E 100 I.U. Capsules
               Blue Cross Ascorbic Acid             do.                        do.        do.
                  Tablets 500 mg.
               Blue Cross Ascorbic Acid             do.                        do.        do.
                  Tablets 250 mg.
               Blue Cross Ascorbic Acid             do.                        do.        do.
                  Tablets 100 mg.
               Blue Cross Chewable Vitamin          do.                        do.        do.
                  C Tablets 250 mg.



                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                           Chap. 30:01                  183
                          Approval of New Drugs Notification                                 [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer          Country of     Conditions
                                                                  origin        of Sale
Novobutamide Tablets 500 mg.        Novopharm Ltd.                Canada     Third
                                                                               Schedule
Novofuran Tablets 50 mg.    …       do.                           do.          do.
Novofuran Tablets 100 mg. …         do.                           do.          do.
Novoflurazine Tablets 1 mg. …       do.                           do.          do.
Novoflurazine Tablets 2 mg. …       do.                           do.          do.
Novohydrozide Tablets 50 mg.        do.                           do.          do.
Novophenyl Tablets 100 mg. …        do.                           do.          do.
Novopoxide Tablets 10 mg. …         do.                           do.          do.
Novopropamide Tablets 250 mg.       do.                           do.          do.
Novopropoxeyn Compound              do.                           do.          do.
  Capsules 65 mg
Novodiapam Tablets 5 mg. …         do.                            do.          do.
Novodiapam Tablets 10 mg. …        do.                            do.          do.
Novonidazole Oral Tablets   …      do.                            do.          do.
Novempro 400 mg. Tablets …         do.                            do.          do.
Roha-Lac Stomach Tablets …       Roha-Werk                     Germany       Freely
Decadron—La Injection       …    Merck Sharp & Dohme           U.S.A.        Third
                                                                               Schedule
Kilofort Granules …        …     Pharmakon SA                  Switzerland   Freely
Orgabolin Tablets 2 mg.    …     N.V. Organon                  Holland       Third          131/1976.
                                                                               Schedule
Dantrium Capsules 50 mg.     …   Norwich International         U.S.A.          do.
Epilim Tablets 200 mg.       …   Reckitt & Coleman Ltd.        U.K.            do.
Amiconal Ophthalmic Solution     Alcon Laboratories            Canada          do.
Naphcon Forte Ophthalmic …          do.                           do.          do.
Cetamide Solution Ointment …        do.                           do.          do.
Cetapred Ophthalmic Ointment        do.                           do.          do.
Atropine Ophthalmic Ointment        do.                           do.          do.
Balanced Salt Solution       …      do.                           do.          do.
Econopred Suspension 1.8%           do.                           do.          do.
Econopred Suspension 1%      …      do.                           do.          do.
Glaucon Solution 0.5%        …      do.                           do.          do.
Glaucon Solution 1.0%        …      do.                           do.          do.
Glaucon Solution 2.0%        …      do.                           do.          do.
Valadol Tablets 325 mg.      …   E. R. Squibb & Sons           U.S.A.          do.
Halog Cream 0.1%             …      do.                           do.          do.
Metronidazole Tablets 200 mg.    Harris Pharmaceuticals Ltd.    U.K.           do.
Sulphadimidine Tablets 500 mg.      do.                           do.          do.
Cyclandelate Tablets 500 mg. …      do.                           do.          do.
Amitriptyline Tablets 10 mg. …      do.                           do.          do.
Nalidixie Acid 500 mg.       …      do.                           do.          do.
Phenylbutazone & Prednisone         do.                           do.          do.
   Tablets
Osiren Dragees 50 mg.        …   Farbwerke Hoechst             W. Germany   do.
Osiren Dragees 100 mg.       …      do.                           do.       do.
Gamma-Veinine Vaccine        …      do.                           do.       do.
IFA Tablets       …          …   Carlisle Laboratories Ltd.    Barbados   Freely
IFA Syrup         …          …      do.                           do.       do.
Diphenyl Expectorant         …      do.                           do.       do.
Hypopect Diarrhoea Mixture …        do.                           do.       do.
Tridyl 2 Tablets …           …      do.                           do.     Third
                                                                            Schedule



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

184            Chap. 30:01                          Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                         Manufacturer         Country of    Conditions
                                                                                  origin       of Sale
               Tridyl 5 Tablets    …        …     Carlisle Laboratories Ltd.    Barbados     Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Ionil Dandruff Shampoo       …     Owen Laboratories             U.S.A.       Freely
               Ionil T. Shampoo …           …        do.                           do.         do.
               Ionax Scrub       …          …        do.                           do.         do.
               Nutraderm Lotion             …        do.                           do.         do
               Nutraplus Lotion …           …        do.                           do.         do.
               Pabagel Gel       …          …        do.                           do.         do.
               Phenobarb/Theobromine              Harris Pharmaceuticals Ltd.   U.K.         Controlled
                  Tablets                                                                      Drug
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 30 mg.         do.                          do.          do.
               Pentobarbitone Capsules 100 mg.       do.                          do.          do.
131/1976.      Prednisone Tablets 5 mg.     …        do.                          do.        Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Bendrofluazide Tablets 5 mg. …        do.                          do.          do.
               Chlordiazepoxide Tablets 10 mg.       do.                          do.          do.
               Cortisone Acetate Tablets 25 mg.      do.                          do.          do.
               Diazepam Tablets 2 mg.        …       do.                          do.          do.
               Diazepam Tablets 5 mg.        …       do.                          do.          do.
               Methaqualone and                      do.                          do.          do.
                  Diphenhydramine Tablets
               Orphenadrine Tablets 50 mg. …         do.                          do.          do.
               Glutethimide Tablets 250 mg.          do.                          do.          do.
               Promazine Tablets 25 mg.      …       do.                          do.          do.
               Promazine Tablets 50 mg.      …       do.                          do.          do.
               Promazine Tablets 100 mg. …           do.                          do.          do.
               Quinidine Sulphate Tablets            do.                          do.          do.
                  300 mg.
               Quinidine Sulphate Tablets            do.                          do.          do.
                  200 mg.
               Imipramine Tablets 25 mg. …           do.                          do.          do.
               Phenylbutazone Tablets 100 mg.        do.                          do.          do.
               Guanethidine Tablets 10 mg.           do.                          do.          do.
               Guanethidine Tablets 25 mg.           do.                          do.          do.
               Digoxin Tablets 0.25 mg.      …       do.                          do.          do.
               Prednisolone Tablets 5 mg. …          do.                          do.          do.
               Prochlorperazine Maleate              do.                          do.          do.
                  Tablets 50 mg.
               Benzhexol Tablets 2 mg.       …       do.                          do.          do.
               Benzhexol Tablets 5 mg.       …       do.                          do.          do.
               Nitrofurantoin Tablets 50 mg.         do.                          do.          do.
               Nitrofurantoin Tablets 100 mg.        do.                          do.          do.
               Propantheline Tablets 15 mg.          do.                          do.          do.
               Sulphamethizole Tablets 100 mg.       do.                          do.          do.
               Chlorpropamide Tablets 250 mg.        do.                          do.          do.
               Hydroflumethiazide Tablets            do.                          do.          do.
                  50 mg.
               Paracetamol Tablets 500 mg. …         do.                          do.        Freely
               Dimenhydrinate Tablets 50 mg.         do.                          do.          do.
               Quinine Bisulphate Tablets            do.                          do           do.
                  300 mg



                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                        Chap. 30:01                    185
                          Approval of New Drugs Notification                                   [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer         Country of     Conditions
                                                                  origin        of Sale
Quinine Sulphate Tablets 300 mg. Harris Pharmaceuticals Ltd.   U.K.          Freely
Ferrous Gluconate Tablets           do.                           do.          do.
  300 mg.
Promethazine Tablets 25 mg.         do.                           do.          do.
Biscodyl Tablets 5 mg.        …     do.                           do.          do.
Chlorpheniramine Tablets 4 mg.      do.                           do.          do.
Quinine Bisulphate Tablets          do.                           do.          do.
  200 mg.
Chlorpromazine Tablets 25 mg.       do.                           do.        Third
                                                                               Schedule
Chlorpromazine Tablets 100 mg.       do.                         do.           do.
Chlorpromazine Tablets 50 mg.        do.                         do.           do.
Frusemide Tablets 40 mg.     …       do.                         do.           do.
Trimipramine Tablets 25 mg. …        do.                         do.           do.
Meprobamate Tablets 400 mg.          do.                         do.           do.
Akrofollin Injection         …    Gideon Ritcher Ltd.          Hungary         do.
Diaphyllin Gluteosum Injection       do.                         do.           do.
Hydrocortisone Injection             do                          do.           do.
   125 mg./5 ml.
Rausedyl Tablets 0.25 mg.    …       do.                          do.          do.
Seduxen Tablets 10 mg.       …       do.                          do.          do.
Klion Tablets 250 mg.        …       do.                          do.          do.
Rigedal Tablets …            …       do.                          do.          do.
Rigenicid Dragees            …       do.                          do.          do.
Atravet Injectable           …    Ayerst Laboratories          Canada          do.
Atravet Granules …           …       do.                          do.          do.
Atravet Tablets …            …       do.                          do.          do.
Atravet Eye and Wound Powder         do.                          do.          do.
Vertigon Spansule 10 mg.     …    Smith Kline & French Ltd.    U.K.            do.
Vertigon Spansule 15 mg.     …       do.                          do.          do.
Maalox Plus Suspension            William H. Rorer             U.S.A.        Freely
   (lemon flavoured)
Maalox Plus Tablets                  do.                          do.          do.
   (lemon flavoured)
Thiamine HC 1 Tablets 10 mg.      Jamaica Organic Chemicals    Jamaica      do.
Paracetamol Tablets 500 mg.          do.                          do.       do.
Pyridoxine HC 1 Tablets 25 mg.       do.                          do.       do.
Folic Acid Tablets 5 mg.     …       do.                          do.       do.
Piperazine Citrate Elixir    …       do.                          do.       do.
Prednisolone Tablets 5 mg. …         do.                          do.     Third
                                                                            Schedule
Digoxin Tablets 0.25 mg.      …      do.                          do.       do.
Reserpine Tablets 0.25 mg. …         do.                          do.       do.
Sulphadimidine Tablets 500 mg.       do.                          do.       do.
Phenobarbital Tablets 1/4 gr. …      do.                          do.     Controlled
                                                                            Drug
Phenobarbital Tablets 1/2 gr. …      do.                          do.       do.
Phenobarbital Tablets 1 gr.   …      do.                          do.       do.
Sequilar Tablets …            …   Schering A.G.                W. Germany Freely



                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

186            Chap. 30:01                           Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                 Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                          Manufacturer          Country of     Conditions
                                                                                    origin        of Sale
               Sequilar E.D. Tablets           …   Schering AG                 W. Germany Freely
               Gynodian Depot Injection        …      do.                         do.     Third
                                                                                            Schedule
               Mother Brown Anti-Rheumatic         Blakoe Ltd.                 U.K.       Freely
                  Wristlet
               Mother Brown Anti-Rheumatic            do.                           do.          do.
                  Anklet
               Mother Brown Anti-Rheumatic            do.                           do.          do.
                  Knee Cap
               Blakoe Bliss Cream for Women           do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin E Cream …          …           do.                           do.          do.
               Male Hormone Cream         …           do.                           do.          do.
               Carry on Cream …           …           do.                           do.          do.
               Lumuscoba Body Belt        …           do.                           do.          do.
               Ponderax Pacaps …          …        Servier Laboratories Ltd.        do.        Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Damicron Tablets             …          do.                        do.            do.
               Natrilix Tablets …           …          do.                        do.            do.
               Ponderax Tablets …           …          do.                        do.            do.
               Kashmir Snow      …          …      National Trading Co.        India           Freely
               Bactgras Tulle Gras Dressing        T. J. Smith & Nephew        U.K.              do.
               Titralac Liquid Concentrate …       Riker Laboratories             do.            do.
               Alcetamol Elixir …           …      Alzia Products              India             do.
               M-Vital Drops     …          …          do.                        do.            do.
               Ropha Pect Syrup …           …      Rophapharma S.A.            Belgium           do.
               Rheumaban Cream              …      J. Pickles & Sons           U.K.              do.
               Healthy Feet Cream           …          do.                        do.            do.
               Pickles Ointment …           …          do.                        do.            do.
               Verrugon Ointment            …          do.                        do.            do.
               Snufflebabe Vapour Rub       …          do.                        do.            do.
               S.C.R. Ointment …            …          do.                        do.            do.
               Swarm Ointment …             …          do.                        do.            do.
               Seleze Ointment …            …          do.                        do.            do.
               Colser Cream      …          …          do.                        do.            do.
               Chilblain Cream …            …          do.                        do.            do.
               Wartex            …          …          do.                        do.            do.
               Antiminth Tablets            …      Pfizer Corporation          Costa Rica        do.
               Antiminth Suspension         …          do.                        do.            do.
               Sinequan Capsules 50 mg.     …          do.                     Canada          Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Sinequan Capsules 100 mg.       …      do.                         do.            do.
               Endecon Tablets …               …   Endo Laboratories           U.S.A.          Freely
               Endoglobin Forte Tablets        …     do.                          do.            do.
               Percogesic Tablets …            …     do.                          do.            do.
               Narcan/Neonatal Injection       …     do.                          do.          Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Molivate Cream …                …   Glaxo Holdings Ltd.         U.K.              do.
               Molivate Ointment               …      do.                         do.            do.
               Winolate Suspension             …   Sterling Winthrop              do.          Freely
               Insulin Injection 80 U/ml.      …   Novo Industri               Denmark         Third
                                                                                                 Schedule
               Insulin Lente 80 U/ml.       …         do.                         do.            do.
               Insulin Semilente 80 U/ml. …           do.                         do.            do.
               Protamine Zinc Insulin 80 U/ml.        do.                         do.            do.
               Enervite Liquid …            …      Consolidated Laboratories   Jamaica         Freely
               Solcisil          …          …      Cuticura Laboratories       UK.               do.



                                            UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                    187
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                      Manufacturer            Country of    Conditions
                                                                   origin       of Sale
Ludiomil Tablets 75 mg.       …   Ciba-Geigy (U.K.) Ltd.     U.K.             Third
                                                                                Schedule
Vitamin E Skin Oil            …   Halsey Drug Co.            U.S.A.           Freely
Vitamin E Skin Cream          …      do.                        do.             do.
Vitamin C & E (Vitalitee)            do.                        do.             do.
   Capsules
Oriental Ginseng Capsules     …      do.                        do.             do.
Omni-M Tablets …              …      do.                        do.             do.
H-11 Tablets      …           …   Standard Laboratories      U.K.             Third
                                                                                Schedule
H-11 Extract 2.5 ml.          …     do.                         do.             do.
H-11 Oral liquid 50 cc.       …     do.                         do.             do.
H-11 Suppositories…           …     do.                         do.             do.
H-11 Ointment …               …     do.                         do.             do.
Prednisolene Injection           Pitman Moore Inc.           U.S.A.             do.
   10 mg. per ml.
Psymod Tablets 1 mg.          …     do.                            do.          do.
Psymod Injection 2 mg./ml. …        do.                            do.          do.
Renzol Tablets     …          …     do.                            do.          do.
Repositol Progesterone              do.                            do.          do.
   Injection 50 mg./ml.
Sparteine Digitalis …         …     do.                            do.          do.
Strophanthin Compound               do.                            do.          do.
   Tablets
Stiglyn 1,500 Injection       …     do.                            do.          do.
Telmin Powder …               …     do.                            do.          do.
Thorazine Tablets 10 mg./25 mg.     do.                            do.          do.
Thorazine Injection 25 mg/ml.       do.                            do.          do.
Tussivax           …          …     do.                            do.          do:
Atropine Sulphate Injection …       do.                            do.          do.
Bactrovet 125 mg. Tablets     …     do.                            do.          do.
Bactrovet 250 mg. Tablets     …     do.                            do.          do.
Bactrovet 1G Tablets          …     do.                            do.          do.
Bactrovet Injection 100 mg./ml.     do.                            do.          do.
Bactrovet Suspension 125 mg./ml.    do.                            do.          do.
Conofile Cream 2 per cent     …     do.                            do.          do.
Dexamethasone Injection             do.                            do.          do.
   2 mg/ml.
Ectoral Emulsifiable Concentrate    do.                            do.          do.
Ectoral Tablets 250 mg.             do.                            do.          do.
   500 mg. 1G
Innovar-vet        …          …     do.                            do.          do.
Metofane           …          …     do.                            do.          do.
Phenylbutozone Injection            do.                            do.          do.
   20 per cent
Canex Solution …              …     do.                            do.        Freely
Cerbinol Solution …           …     do.                            do.          do.
Cerbinol Cream …              …     do.                            do.          do.
Diryl Powder       …          …     do.                            do.          do.
Epitone Liquid …              …     do.                            do.          do.
Ferrogen Liquid …             …     do.                            do.          do.
Iron-Dextran complex          …     do.                            do.          do.
K.F.L. Insecticide Shampoo …        do.                            do.          do.



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                  L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

188            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                             Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer           Country of     Conditions
                                                                                   origin        of Sale
               Lubrivet          …         …     Pitman Moore Inc.               U.S.A.       Freely
               Mercaptocaine Creme         …        do.                             do.         do.
               Paltone Powder …            …        do.                             do.         do.
               Pellitol Ointment …         …        do.                             do.         do.
               P/M Shampoo       …         …        do.                             do.         do.
               Turcapsol Solution          …        do.                             do.         do.
               Hypnodil Injection          …     Janssen Pharmaceuticals         Belgium      Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Stresnil Injection …        …        do.                            do.          do.
               Spasmentral Injection       …         do.                           do.          do.
               Fentanyl Injectable         …        do.                            do.          do.
               Droperidol Injectable       …         do.                           do.          do.
               Thalamonal Injectable       …         do.                           do.          do.
               Triperidol Tablets          …        do.                            do.          do.
               Triperidol Drops …          …        do.                            do.          do.
               Triperidol Injectable       …         do.                           do.          do.
               Immodium Capsules           …        do.                            do.          do.
               Immodium Drops              …        do.                            do.          do.
               A.T.S. 1500 U/ml.           …     Institute for Serobactero-      Hungary        do.
                                                    logical Production and
                                                    Research
               Lidocain 2 per cent with             do.                             do.         do.
                 Adrenaline 0.001 per cent
                 Injection
               Diphedan Tablets …          …     United Works of Pharma-              do.       do.
                                                    ceutical and Dietetic Products
               Dopegyt Tablets …            …       do.                               do.       do.
               Malipramin Tablets            …      do.                               do.       do.
               Sanotensin Tablets            …      do.                               do.       do.
               Teperin Tablets …             …      do.                               do.       do.
               Neopepulsan Tablets          …    Chinoin                              do.       do.
               Nitrofurantoin Tablets 100 mg.       do.                               do.       do.
               Oterben Tablets …             …      do.                               do.       do.
               Trofurit Tablets 40 mg.       …      do.                               do.       do.
               Ion-Aid            …         …    Diamond Laboratories              U.S.A.     Freely
               Feraplex Injectable Iron      …      do.                               do.       do.
               Insulin Injection 80 v/ml.    …   Novo Industri                     Denmark    Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Insulin Lente 80 v/ml.       …      do.                              do.         do.
               Insulin Semilente 80 v/ml.   …      do.                              do.         do.
               Protamine Zink Insulin 80 v/ml.     do.                              do.         do.
               Ronyl Tablets      …         …    Rona Laboratories               U.K.           do.
               Ascorbic Acid Tablets 25 mg.      Approved Prescription              do.       Freely
                                                   Services
               Ascorbic Acid Tablets 200 mg.       do.                              do.         do.
               Ascorbic Acid Tablets 500    …      do.                              do.         do.
               Ferrous Sulphate Compound           do.                              do.         do.
                  Tablets
               Soluble Aspirin Tablets      …       do.                             do.         do.
               Vitamin E Tablets 50 mg.     …       do.                             do.         do.
               Vitamin E Tablets 200 mg.    …       do.                             do.         do.
               Vitamin E Tablets 300 mg.    …       do.                             do.         do.
               Saccharin Tablets            …       do.                             do.         do.
               Caps Vitaminorum             …       do.                             do.         do.
               Cascara Sagrada Tablets 300 mg.      do.                             do.         do.



                                       UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                  Food and Drugs                       Chap. 30:01                    189
                         Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer        Country of    Conditions
                                                                origin       of Sale
Aminophylline Tablets 100 mg.    Approved Prescription     U.K.            Third
                                     Services                                Schedule
Bendrofluazide Tablets 5 mg.       do.                          do.          do.
Methylthiouracil Tablets           do.                          do.          do.
   100 mg.
Methyltestosterone Tablets          do.                         do.          do.
   10 mg.
Stilboestrol Tablets 1 mg.   …      do.                       do.            do.
Stilboestrol Tablets 5 mg.   …      do.                       do.            do.
Sulphadimidine Tablets 500 mg.      do.                       do.            do.
Sip’n Rinse Powder           …   Drug Concentrates Inc.    U.S.A.          Freely
Virazole Capsules 100 mg. …      I.C.N.                    Canada          Third
                                                                             Schedule
Polioral 2 ml.     …         …   Scalvo Inc.               Italy             do.
Dif-Tet-All Vaccine          …      do.                        do.           do.
Diphtheria and Tetanus       …      do.                        do.           do.
Toxoids and Pertussis
  Vaccine
Diphtheria Antitoxin 20,000U        do.                       do.            do.
Normal Saline Injection      …   Elkin Sin Lab             U.S.A.            do.
Potassium Chloride Injection        do.                       do.            do.
Aminophylline I.V. Injection        do.                       do             do.
Lignocaine Hydrochlor 1 per         do.                       do.            do.
  cent Plain for Injection
Saccharin Tablets            …    Zenith Laboratories           do.        Freely
Ferrous Sulphate Tablets     …      do.                         do.          do.
Halibut Liver Oil Capsules …        do.                         do.          do.
Calcium Lactate Tablets      …      do.                         do.          do.
Ferrous Gluconate Tablets           do.                         do.          do.
  300 mg.
Calcium Gluconate Tablets           do.                         do.          do.
  600 mg.
Folic Acid Tablets 5 mg.     …      do.                         do.          do.
Ergometrine Maleate Tablets …       do.                         do.        Third
                                                                             Schedule
Digitalis Tablets 30 mg.    …       do.                         do.          do.
Digitalis Tablets 60 mg.    …       do.                         do.          do.
Imipramine Tablets 25 mg. …         do.                         do.          do.
Glyceryl Trinitrate Tablets         do.                         do.          do.
   0.5 mg.
Dogmatil Capsules           …    Delagrange Laboratories   France            do.
Dogmatil Oral Solution      …       do.                       do.            do.
Dogmatil Ampoules           …       do.                       do.            do.
Primperan Elixir            …       do.                       do.            do.
Primperan Suppositories     …       do.                       do.            do.
Primperan Drops …           …       do.                       do.            do.
Primperan Paediatric        …       do.                       do.            do.
   Suppositories
Primperan Injection         …      do.                        do.            do.
Primperan Tablets           …      do.                        do.            do.
Phenylbutozone Tablets 200 mg.   Approved Prescription     U.K.            Third
                                   Services                                  Schedule
Acetomenaphthone Tablets …         do.                          do.          do.
Phenobarbitone Tablets 15 mg.      do.                          do.        Controlled
                                                                             Drug



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                                 UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

190            Chap. 30:01                             Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                            Manufacturer         Country of     Conditions
                                                                                     origin        of Sale
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 30 mg.         Approved Prescription         U.K.          Controlled
                                                         Services                                  Drug
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 50 mg.             do.                          do.          do.
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 60 mg.             do.                          do.          do.
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 100 mg.            do.                          do.          do.
               Sulfur Soap        …          …       Stiefel Laboratories Inc.     U.S.A.        Freely
               Satsid Soap        …          …           do.                          do.          do.
               Salicylic Acid and Sulfur Soap            do.                          do.          do.
               Aspirin Compound Tablets …            Zenith Laboratories              do.          do.
               Promethazine Tablets 25 mg.               do.                          do.          do.
               Salt Glucose Tablets          …           do.                          do.          do.
               Ephedrine Hydrochloride       …           do.                          do.          do.
                  Tablets 30 mg.
               Ephedrine Hydrochloride                  do.                           do.          do.
                  Tablets 60 mg.
               Paracetamol Tablets 500 mg. …            do.                           do.          do.
               Ephedrine Hydrochloride                  do.                           do.          do.
                  Tablets 7.5 mg.
               Aneurine Hydrochloride                Approved Prescription         U.K.            do.
                  Tablets 50 mg.                       Services
               Aneurine Compound Tablets …             do.                            do.          do.
               Ascorbic Acid Tablets 50 mg.            do.                            do.          do.
               Nicotinic Acid Tablets 50 mg.           do.                            do.          do.
               Isoniazid Tablets 100 mg.     …         do.                            do.        Third
                                                                                                   Schedule
               Ergometrine Maleate Tablets              do.                           do.          do.
                  0.5 mg.
               Stilboestrol Tablets 5 mg.   …           do.                           do.          do.
               Chlorpromazine Tablets 25 mg.            do.                           do.          do.
               Chlorpromazine Tablets 100 mg.           do.                           do.          do.
               Prednisolone Tablets 5 mg. …             do.                           do.          do.
               Butobarbitone Tablets 100 mg.            do.                           do.        Controlled
                                                                                                   Drug
               Jack and Jill Rub …               …   Carib Drug Co., Ltd.          Guyana        Freely
               Sectral Capsules …                …   May & Baker Ltd.              U.K.          Third
                                                                                                   Schedule
               Brufen Tablets 400 mg.       …        The Boots Co., Ltd.              do.          do.
               Heparin (Mucous) Injection            Weddel Pharmaceuticals Ltd.      do.          do.
                 without Preservative
                 1000 V/ml.
               Protamine Sulphate Injection             do.                           do.          do.
                 1 per cent
               Lopressor Tablets 50 mg.     …        Geigy Pharmaceuticals           do.           do.
               Lopressor Tablets 100 mg.    …           do.                          do.           do.
               Rhinalgin Tablets            …        Sandoz Ltd.                   Switzerland   Freely
               Tonopan Tablets …            …           do.                          do.         Third
                                                                                                   Schedule
               Atasol Drops       …            …     Frank W. Horner Ltd.          Canada        Freely
               Atasol Liquid      …            …        do.                           do.          do.
               Insulin Injection B.P. 20 U/ml.       Weddel Pharmaceuticals Ltd.   U.K.          Third
                                                                                                   Schedule
               Insulin Injection B.P. 40 U/ml.          do.                           do.          do.



                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                    191
                            Approval of New Drugs Notification                                 [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                   origin       of Sale
Insulin Injection B.P. 80 U/ml.   Weddel Pharmaceuticals Ltd.   U.K.          Third
                                                                                Schedule
Isophane Insulin Injection        do.                              do.          do.
   40 V/ml.
Isophane Insulin Injection        do.                              do.          do.
   80 V/ml.
Protamine Zinc Insulin 40 V/ml.   do.                              do.          do.
Protamine Zinc Insulin 40 V/ml.   do.                              do.          do.
Heparin (Mucous) Injection        do.                              do.          do.
   with Preservative 1000 V/ml.
Heparin (Mucous) Injection        do.                              do.          do.
   with Preservative 5000 V/ml.
Heparin (Mucous) Injection        do.                              do.          do.
   with Preservative 25000 V/ml.
Phenylbutazone Tablets 200 mg. Harris Pharmaceuticals Ltd.         do.          do.
Tinactin Aerosol …           … Schering Corp.                   U.S.A.        Freely         149/1976.
Etrafon A Tablets …          …    do.                              do.        Third
                                                                                Schedule
Etrafon D Tablets …        …         do.                           do.          do.
Etrafon M Tablets          …         do.                           do.          do.
Hyperstat I.V. Injection   …         do.                           do.          do.
Quitaxon Tablets 10 mg.    …      Boehringer Mannheim           Germany         do.
Quitaxon Tablets 25 mg.    …         do.                           do.          do.
Euglocan Tablets 5 mg.     …         do.                           do.          do.
Sotacor Ampoules           …      Mead Johnson                  Canada          do.
Zipix Tablets 40 mg.       …         do.                           do.          do.
Eros Surface Anaesthetic          Savoy Labs., (Int.) Ltd.      U.K.          Freely
   Cream
Eros Surface Anaesthetic             do.                           do.          do.
   Spray
Datril Tablets     …       …      Bristol-Meyers                U.S.A.          do.
Datril Syrup       …       …         do.                           do.          do.
Sebulex Cream …            …      Westwood Pharmaceuticals         do.          do.
Sebulex Lotion …           …         do.                           do.          do.
Fostex Cake        …       …         do.                           do.          do.
Fostex Cream Lotion        …         do.                           do.          do.
Estar Gel          …       …         do.                           do.          do.
Sebucare Lotion …          …         do.                           do.          do.
Transact Gel       …       …         do.                           do.          do.
Pernox Regular Cream       …         do.                           do.          do.
Pernox Lemon Scented Cream           do.                           do.          do.
Lowika Cake        …       …         do.                           do.          do.
Fostril Lotion     …       …         do.                           do.          do.
Fostril HC Lotion          …         do.                           do.        Third
                                                                                Schedule
Diuril Tablets    …         …     Charles E. Frost & Co.        Canada          do.
Aldactone A Tablets 100 mg. …     G. D. Searle & Co. Ltd.       U.K.            do.
Dubam Spray       …         …     Norma Chemicals Ltd.             do.        Freely
Neothylline Tablets 200 mg. …     Lemmon Pharmacal Co.          U.S.A.        Third
                                                                                Schedule
Neothylline Tablets 400 mg.          do.                           do.          do.
Neothylline Elixir …        …        do.                           do.          do.
Neothylline Injection       …        do.                           do.          do.



                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

192            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer           Country of     Conditions
                                                                                   origin        of Sale

4/1977.        Ascriptin A/D Tablets         …   William H. Rorer Inc.       U.S.A.           Freely
               Drixoral SA Tablets           …   Schering Corporation           do.           Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Frisium Tablets …             …   Farbwerke Hoechst           Germany            do.
               A.R.M. Capsules …             …   Merley & Jones Ltd.         U.S.A.           Freely
               Primperan Tablets 10 mg.      …   Berk Pharmaceuticals        U.K.             Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Primperan Injection 2 ml      …      do.                         do.             do.
               Primperan Syrup 5 ml          …      do.                         do.             do.
               Hydergine Tablets 1.5 mg.     …   Sandoz Ltd.                 Switzerland        do.
               Viskenit 25 capsules          …      do.                         do.             do.
               Sandovene F Tablets           …      do.                         do.           Freely
               Santussal Syrup               …      do.                         do.             do.
               Tavegyl Syrup                 …      do.                         do.             do.
               Fennings Soluble Junior Aspirin   Fennings Pharmaceutical     U.K.               do.
               Fennings Gripe Mixture        …      do.                         do.             do.
               Fennings Mixture-Lemon               do.                         do.             do.
                  Flavour
               Fennings Children’s Cooling          do.                            do.          do.
                  Powder
               Fennings Children’s Cooling          do.                            do.          do.
                  Tablets
               Fennings Adult Cooling Powder        do.                         do.             do.
               Congreve’s Balsamic Elixir …         do.                         do.             do.
               Antivert Tablets 12.5 mg.     …   Pfizer Co. Ltd.             Puerto Rico        do.
               Antivert Tablets 25.0 mg.     …      do.                         do.             do.
               Phenbutazone Tablets 100 mg.      I.C.N.                      Canada           Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               E-Pam Tablets 2 mg.           …      do.                            do.          do.
               E-Pam Tablets 5 mg.           …      do.                            do.          do.
               E-Pam Tablets 10 mg.          …      do.                            do.          do.
               Terfluzine Tablets 2 mg.      …      do.                            do.          do.
               Terfluzine Tablets 5 mg.      …      do.                            do.          do.
               Terfluzine Tablets 10 mg .    …      do.                            do.          do.
               Furoside Tablets …            …      do.                            do.          do.
               Trikacide Tablets …           …      do.                            do.          do.
               Dopamet Tablets …             …      do.                            do.          do.
               Acetazolam Tablets            …      do.                            do.          do.
               Impril Tablets 10 mg.         …      do.                            do.          do.
               Impril Tablets 25 mg.         …      do.                            do.          do.
               Impril Tablets 50 mg.         …      do.                            do.          do.
               Travamine Tablets             …      do.                            do.        Freely
               Bisacolax Tablets             …      do.                            do.          do.
               One Daily Vitamins & Iron            do.                            do.          do.
                  Tablets
               One Daily Vitamins Tablets    …      do.                            do.          do.
               Hematogene-12 Elixir          …      do.                            do.          do.
               Vitamin B Forte with C               do.                            do.          do.
                  Capsules
               Multimin Tablets …            …      do.                            do.          do.
               Levate Tablets 10 mg          …      do.                            do.        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Levate Tablets 25 mg.         …      do.                            do.          do.
               Levate Tablets 50 mg.         …      do.                            do.          do.
               Aparkane Tablets 2 mg.        …      do.                            do.          do.



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                    Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                   193
                             Approval of New Drugs Notification                                 [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                         Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                    origin       of Sale
Aparkane Tablets 5 mg.         …   I.C.N.                        Canada        Third
                                                                                 Schedule
Chloromide Tablets            …       do.                           do.          do.
Corax Capsules 5 mg.          …       do.                           do.          do.
Corax Capsules 10 mg.         …       do.                           do.          do.
Corax Capsules 25 mg.         …       do.                           do.          do.
Ade Powder         …          …    Whitmoyer Laboratories Inc.   U.S.A.        Freely
Biodin             …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Bronclear          …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Eddi …             …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Electrosan         …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Flav-a-Dee         …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Head Start Poultry            …       do.                           do.          do.
Head Start Swine …            …       do.                           do.          do.
Piperazine Dihydrochloride …          do.                           do.          do.
Piperazine Wormer Solution …          do.                           do.          do.
Ro-Con             …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Tri-Sulfalyte      …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Whitstn-S          …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Wheat Germ Oil …              …       do.                           do.          do.
Whit Vim Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 6 …         do.                           do.          do.
Piperazine A/M …              …       do.                           do.          do.
B-Comp Injection              …       do.                           do.          do.
Respiraid          …          …       do.                           do.          do.
Sorbitrate Oral Tablets 5 mg. …    Stuart Pharmaceuticals        U.S.A.        Third
                                                                                 Schedule
Sorbitrate Oral Tablets 10 mg.        do.                           do.          do.
Sorbitrate Chewable Tablets           do.                           do.          do.
  5 mg.
Sorbitrate Sublingual Tablets         do.                           do.          do.
  2.5 mg.
Sorbitrate Sublingual Tablets         do.                           do.          do.
  5 mg.
Suladyne Tablets …             …      do.                           do.          do.
Kinesed Chewable Tablets       …      do.                           do.        Controlled
                                                                                 Drugs
Evadyne Tablets 25 mg.         …   Ayerst Laboratories           U.K.          Third
                                                                                 Schedule
Evadyne Tablets 50 mg.         …      do.                           do.          do.
Stuart Prenatal with Folic         Stuart Pharmaceuticals        U.S.A.        Freely
   Acid Tablets
Theron Tablets     …           …      do.                           do.          do.
Antasil Tablets    …           …      do.                           do.          do.
Antasil Liquid     …           …      do.                           do.          do.
Sylixon-80 Tablets             …      do.                           do.          do.
Cari-Tab Tablets …             …      do.                           do.          do.
Dialose Capsules …             …      do.                           do.          do.
Dialose Plus Capsules          …      do.                           do.          do.
Effersyllium Instant Mix       …      do.                           do.          do.
Ferancee HB Tablets            …      do.                           do.          do.
Stuart Hematinic Tablets       …      do.                           do.          do.
Stuart Hematinic Liquid        …      do.                           do.          do.
Mucoplex Tablets               …      do.                           do.          do.
Mulvidren-F Tablets            …      do.                           do.          do.
Orexin Tablets     …           …      do.                           do.          do.
Probec-T Tablets …             …      do.                           do.          do.
Stuart Amino Acids Tablets     …      do.                           do.          do.



                                            UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                   UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                    LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

194            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                               Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                       Manufacturer           Country of     Conditions
                                                                                  origin        of Sale
               Stuart Formula Tablets        …   Stuart Pharmaceuticals     U.S.A.           Freely
               Stuart Amino Acids & B12      …      do.                        do.             do.
               Stuartinic Tablets            …      do.                        do.             do.
               Stuartnatal 1 + 1 Tablets     …      do.                        do.             do.
               Stuart Prenatal Tablets       …      do.                        do.             do.
               Electrosulf—3      …          …   Affiliated Laboratories       do.             do.
               Glytab-D           …          …      do.                        do.             do.
               Hydrodine Powder              …      do.                        do.             do.
               Methacide Capsules            …      do.                        do.             do.
               Mitone              …         …      do.                        do.             do.
               V-L-I-B            …          …      do.                        do.             do.
               V-Pectamalt        …          …      do.                        do.             do.
               Aristocort Tablets 2 mg.      …   Lederle Laboratories          do.           Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Aristocort Tablets 4 mg.      …      do.                           do.          do.
               Normacide Tablets             …   Stuart Pharmaceuticals           do.        Freely
               Aristocort Tablets 8 mg.      …   Lederle Laboratories             do.        Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Aristocort Cream 0.1%          …    do.                         do.             do.
               Aristocort Ointment 0.1%       …    do.                         do.             do.
               Aristocort A Cream             …    do.                         do.             do.
               Aristocort Parenteral 40 mg./1 cc   do.                         do.             do.
               Aristocort Intralesional 25 mg./cc  do.                         do.             do.
               Aristocort Syrup …             …    do.                         do.             do.
               Aristogesic Capsules           …    do.                         do.             do.
               Artab Tablets       …          … Affiliated Laboratories        do.             do.
               Ergonovine Maleate Injectable       do.                         do.             do.
               Equilytes           …          …    do.                         do.             do.
               Metavin Chewable Tablets       …    do.                         do.             do.
               Metavin Injectable             …    do.                         do.             do.
               V-Estrovarin Aqueous           …    do.                         do.             do.
               Pyrazine Injectable            …    do.                         do.             do.
               Sudine Tablets      …          …    do.                         do.             do.
               Symbio              …          …    do.                         do.             do.
               Tympacaine          …          …    do.                         do.             do.
               Syntocin            …          …    do.                         do.             do.
               Uritab-Canine       …          …    do.                         do.             do.
               Feospan Capsules               … Smith Kline & French Inc.   Canada           Freely
               Tranxene Capsules 5 mg.        … Glaxo Aust Ltd.             Australia        Third
                                                                                               Schedule
               Tranxene Capsules 10 mg.      …      do.                        do.             do.
               Tranxene Capsules 15 mg.      …      do.                        do.             do.
               Ventolin Injection 1 ml.      …   Allen & Hanbury Ltd.       U.K.               do.
               Ventolin Injection 5 mg.      …      do.                        do.             do.
               Luvatrene 5 mg. Tablets       …   Cilag-Chemie               Switzerland        do.
               Luvatrene S.A. Tablets        …      do.                        do.             do.
               Lysfapen Tablets …            …      do.                        do.             do.
               Lysfapen Micro Tablets        …      do.                        do.             do.
               Lysfapen Drops …              …      do.                        do.             do.
               Vitamycin Powder              …   Pitman-Moors Inc.          U.S.A.           Freely
               Weladol Disinfectant          …      do.                        do.             do.
               Weladol Creme …               …      do.                        do.             do.
               Weladol Shampoo               …      do.                        do.             do.
               Vermiplex Capsules            …      do.                        do.             do.
               Night Nurse Cough Syrup       …   Beechams Products Ltd.     U.K.               do.
               Equiben Paste      …          …   Merck Sharp & Dohme        U.S.A.             do.
               Noviben Paste      …          …      do.                        do.           Third
                                                                                               Schedule



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                      LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                    www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                    Food and Drugs                       Chap. 30:01                     195
                           Approval of New Drugs Notification                                  [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer         Country of    Conditions
                                                                  origin       of Sale
Coforta Injection …           …   Bayer AG                    Germany     Third
                                                                            Schedule
Chloroprom Tablets 25 mg.     …   I.C.N.                      Canada        do.
Chloroprom Tablets 50 mg.     …      do.                         do.        do.
Chloroprom Tablets 100 mg.    …      do.                         do.        do.
Eryfer Compound Capsules      …   Fabwerke Hoechst A. G.      W. Germany Freely              213/1977.
Merital Capsules 25 mg.       …      do.                         do.        do.
Merital Capsules 50 mg.       …      do.                         do.        do.
Amprovine 25% …               …   Diamond Laboratories Inc.   U.S.A.        do.
Amprovine 20% W.S.P.          …      do.                         do.        do.
Equine Proleen 775 Pelletes   …      do.                         do.        do.
Vitasil Plus Powder           …      do.                         do.        do.
Anaprime Injection            …      do.                         do.      Third
                                                                            Schedule
Synsac Solution Enema         …      do.                         do.        do.
Synotic Otic Solution         …      do.                         do.        do.
Norpace 100 mg. Capsules      …   G. D. Serle and Co. Ltd.    U.K.          do.
Norpace 150 mg. Capsules      …      do.                         do.        do.
Valpin 50 Tablets …           …   Endo Laboratories           U.S.A.        do.
Valpin 50 P. B. Tablets       …      do.                         do.      Controlled
                                                                            Drug
Oculosan Eye Drops            …   Dr. E. Baeschlin            Switzerland Freely
Novesin Eye Drops 0.4%        …      do.                         do.      Third
                                                                            Schedule
Oculoforte Eye Drops        …        do.                         do.        do.
Sperscarpine Eye Ointment …          do.                         do.        do.
Sperscarpine Eye Ointment 1%         do.                         do.        do.
Sperscarpine Eye Ointment 2%         do.                         do.        do.
Sperscarpine Eye Ointment 3%         do.                         do.        do.
Spersallerg Eye Drops       …        do.                         do.        do.
Spersacarpine H6 Drops 1% …          do.                         do.        do.
Spersacarpine H6 Eye Drops           do.                         do.        do.
   2%
Spersacarpine H6 Eye Drops           do.                          do.          do.
   3%
Spersacarpine H6 Eye Drops           do.                          do.          do.
   4%
Vitamin B12 Tablets 50 mcg.       Humphrey Pharmacal          U.S.A.         Freely
Lecithin Capsules           …       do.                          do.           do.
Humphrey’s High Potency             do.                          do.           do.
   Vitamin B Complex Tablets
Humphrey’s High Potency              do.                          do.          do.
   with Mineral Tablets
Humphrey’s Vitamin C                 do.                          do.          do.
   300 Tablets
Humphrey’s Vitamin E                 do.                          do.          do.
   100 Capsules
Humphrey’s Vitamin C                 do                           do.          do.
   500 Tablets
Humphrey’s Vitamin E                 do.                          do.          do.
   200 Capsules
Humphrey’s Multivitamins             do.                          do.          do.
   with Iron Tablets
Equimate Injection          …     I.C.I. Ltd.                 U.K.           Third
                                                                               Schedule
Estrumate Injection           …      do.                          do.          do.



                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

196            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                              Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer        Country of     Conditions
                                                                                origin        of Sale
               Yohistrin Tablets …          …    Chinoin Budapest             Hungary      Third
                                                                                             Schedule
               Yohistrin Ampoules           …      do.                           do.         do.
               Lidocaine Spray 10%          …      do.                           do          do.
               Theolair Elixir  …           …    3M Riker Laboratories Inc.   U.S.A.       Freely
               Peptard Tablets …            …      do.                        U.K.           do.
               Filair Elixir    …           …      do.                           do.       Third
                                                                                             Schedule
               Optulle Paraffin …           …    Pousael Laboratories Ltd.    U.K.         Freely
               Gauze Dressing …             …       do.                          do.         do.
               Rythmodan Capsules           …       do.                          do.       Third
                                                                                             Schedule
               Ondonid Tablets …            …    do.                              do.        do.
               Adalgur Coated Tablets       …    do.                              do.        do.
               Topicorte Skin Cream         …    do.                              do.        do.
               Topicorte Skin Ointment      …    do.                              do.        do.
               Sulphadimidine Tablets 500 mg. Biological Developments Ltd.    Ireland        do.
               Sulphaguenidine Tablets 500 mg.   do.                              do.        do.
               Phthalylsulphathiasole            do.                              do.        do.
                 Tablets 500 mg.
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 15 mg.     do.                             do.       Controlled
                                                                                             Drug
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 30 mg.        do.                          do.         do.
               Phenobarbitone Tablets 60 mg.        do.                          do.         do.
               Calcium Lactate Tablets 300 mg.      do.                          do.       Freely
               Ephedrine Hydrochloride              do.                          do.         do.
                  Tablets 60 mg.
               Ferrous Gluconate Tablets            do.                          do.         do.
                  300 mg.
               Paracetamol Tablets 500 mg.          do.                          do.       do.
               Folic Acid Tablets 5 mg.     …       do.                          do.       do.
               Vegetable Laxative Tablets …         do.                          do.       do.
               Ascorbic Acid Tablets 100 mg.        do.                          do.       do.
               Pradnisolone Tablets 5 mg. …         do.                          do.     Third
                                                                                           Schedule
               Narisone Ointment            … Schering A. G.                  W. Germany   do.
               Narisone Fatty Ointment      …    do.                             do.       do.
               Narisone Cream …             …    do.                             do.       do.
               Amosan Powder …              … Knox Laboratories               U.K.       Freely
               Cystax Tablets    …          …    do.                             do.       do.
               Mendaco Tablets …            …    do.                             do.       do.
               Nixoderm Ointment            …    do.                             do.       do.
               Vitaba Tablets    …          …    do.                             do.       do.
               Victoraminea Capsules        … G. R. Lane Health Products         do.       do.
                                                 Ltd.
               Lanea Brewers Yeast          …    do.                             do.         do.
                 Tablets 300 mg.
               Lanes Frutrosa Syrup          …      do.                          do          do.
               Lanes Wheat Germ Oil          …      do.                          do.         do.
               Rich-O-Cal Tablets            …      do.                          do.         do.
               Rational Bone Meal Tablets …         do.                          do.         do.
               Fort-E-Vite Capsules 100 I.U.        do.                          do.         do.



                                         UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                   Food and Drugs                          Chap. 30:01                   197
                          Approval of New Drugs Notification                                    [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                        Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                   origin       of Sale
Fort-E-Vite Capsules 200 I.U.     G. R. Lane Health Products Ltd. U.K.        Freely
Mild Ocean Help Tablets       …       do.                            do.        do.
Lanes Carotene Capsules       …       do.                            do.        do.
Lanes Wheat Germ Capsules …           do.                            do.        do.
Lanes Geriatric Zentron Tablets       do.                            do.        do.
Lusty’s Lecithin Capsules     …   Lusty’s Natural Products Ltd.      do.        do.
Lusty’s Garlic Pearls         …       do.                            do.        do.
Lusty’s Malted Kelp Tablets …         do.                            do.        do.
A and D Halibut Liver Oil         I. C. U. Canada Ltd.            Canada        do.
   Capsules
Dried Yeast Tablets 500 mg. …        do.                            do.         do.
One Daily and Iron                   do.                            do.         do.
   Multivitamin Tablets
A and D Cod Liver Oil                do.                            do.         do.
   Capsules 300 mg.
Ferrous Sulfate Tablets              do.                            do.         do.
   300 mg. U.S.P.
Ferrous Gluconate Tablets            do.                            do.         do.
   300 mg. N.F.
Calcium Gluconate Tablets            do.                            do.         do.
   600 mg.
Calcium Lactate Tablets              do.                            do.         do:
   600 mg.
Vitamin E 100 I.U. Capsules …     I.C.N. Canada Ltd.                do.         do.
Vitamin E 200 I.U. Capsules …        do.                            do.         do.
Vitamin B6 with Kelp,             The De Pree Company            U.S.A.         do.
   Lecithin and Cider Vinegar
   Capsules
Go-Pain Gel        …          …      do.                            do.         do.
Toilet Lanolin Cream          …   Maws Limited                   U.K.           do.
Golden Eye Ointment           …      do.                            do.         do.
Cold Sore Ointment            …      do.                            do.         do.
Orange Halibut Vitamins       …      do.                            do.         do.
Medicated Prickly Heat Powder        do.                            do.         do.
K-Lens Wetting Solution       …      do.                            do.         do.
Junior Antiseptic Cream       …      do.                            do.         do.
Vapine Rub         …          …      do.                            do.         do.
Tancolin Linctus …            …      do.                            do.         do.
Maws Gripe Mixture            …      do.                            do.         do.
K. L. N. Suspension           …      do.                            do.         do.
Soothadent Liquid             …      do.                            do.         do.
Vitamin C 250 mg.                 I.C.N. Canada Ltd.             Canada         do.
   Chewable Tablets
Vitamin C 500 mg.                    do.                            do.         do.
   Chewable Tablets
Vitamin B1 50 mg. Tablets …          do.                            do.         do.
Vitamin B1 100 mg. Tablets …         do.                            do.         do.
Vitamin B1 500 mg. Tablets …         do.                            do.         do.
Vitamin B6 25 mg. Tablets …          do.                            do.         do.
Vitamin B6 100 mg. Tablets …         do.                            do.         do.
Vitamin B12 25 mcg. Tablets …        do.                            do.         do.
Multimin Multivitamin and            do.                            do.         do.
   Mineral Tablets
One Daily Multivitamins       …      do.                            do.         do.



                                           UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                 L.R.O.

                                  UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                   LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

198            Chap. 30:01                         Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                Approval of New Drugs Notification

               Trade Name and Form                         Manufacturer          Country of    Conditions
                                                                                   origin       of Sale
               One Daily Chewable                 I.C.N. Canada Ltd.           Canada         Freely
                  Multivitamins
               Vitamin C 100 mg. Tablets     …       do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin C 250 mg. Tablets     …    I.C.U.Canada Ltd.                do.          do.
               Vitamin C 500 mg. Tablets     …       do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin C 1000 mg. Tablets    …       do.                           do.          do.
               Vitamin C 100 mg.                     do.                           do.          do.
                  Chewable Tablets
               Symmetrel Capsules            …    Endo Laboratories Ltd.       U.S.A.         Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Symmetrel Syrup …             …       do.                           do.          do.
               Marax-DF Syrup …              …    Pfizer Laboratories              do.        Freely
               Vistrax 5 Tablets …           …       do.                           do.        Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Vistrax 10 Tablets …          …       do.                          do.           do.
               Minipres Capsules 0.5 mg.     …       do.                          do.           do.
               Minipres Capsules 1.0 mg.     …       do.                          do.           do.
               Minipres Capsules 2.0 mg.     …       do.                          do.           do.
               Minipres Capsules 5.0 mg.     …       do.                          do.           do.
               Marcain Injection 0.25%       …    Befors Nobel Kami            Sweden           do.
               Marcain Injection 0.50%       …       do.                          do.           do.
               Marcain Injection 0.75%       …       do.                          do.           do.
               Thorazine Spansula 50 mg.     …    Smith Kline & French Ltd.    U.S.A.           do.
               Thorazine Spansula 75 mg.     …       do.                          do.           do.
               Thorazine Spansula 200 mg.    …       do.                          do.           do.
               Thorazine Spansula 150 mg.    …       do.                          do.           do.
               Thorazine Spansula 300 mg.    …       do.                          do.           do.
               Stuart Formula Liquid         …    Stuart Pharmaceuticals          do.         Freely
               Stuart Therapeutic                    do.                          do.           do.
                  Multivitamin Tablets
               Mulvidran Tablets             …       do.                           do.          do.
               Ferancee-HP Tablets           …       do.                           do.          do.
               Normacid Tablets              …       do.                           do.          do.
               Stuart Amino Acids Powder     …       do.                           do.          do.
               Stuart Amino Acids with               do.                           do.          do.
                  B12 Powder
               Migraleve Tablets             …    International Laboratories   U.K.             do.
                                                      Ltd.
               Crampex Tablets …             …        do.                         do.           do.
214/1977.      Kay’s Gripe Mixture           …    Robert Laboratories          England          do.
               Excel Elixir     …            …        do.                         do.           do.
               Spraymate Breath Freshner     …    De Witt International           do.           do.
               Secron           …            …        do.                         do.           do.
               Rynacrom Nasal Spray          …    Fisons Ltd.                     do.         Third
                                                                                                Schedule
               Opticrom Eye Drops            …       do.                           do.          do.
               Deltazone Tablets                  Arthur Cox & Co.                 do.          do.
                  100 mg. & 200 mg.
               Deltamine Tablets                     do.                           do.          do.
                  25 mg. & 10 mg.
               Digidel Tablets                       do.                           do.          do.
                  250 mg. & 62.5 mg.
               Deltapam Tablets 2 mg.        …       do.                          do.           do.
               Deltazide Tablets 40 mg.      …       do.                          do.           do.
               Ludiomil Tabs 150 mg.         …    Ciba-Geigy UK                   do.           do.
               Slow Trasicor      …          …       do.                          do.           do.
               Trasidrex Tablets …           …       do.                          do.           do.
215/1977.      Kloref-S Sachets              …    Arthur H. C. Co.             England        Freely



                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                             Food and Drugs                         Chap. 30:01                  199
                      Approval of New Drugs Notification                                [Subsidiary]

Trade Name and Form                Manufacturer            Country of    Conditions
                                                             origin       of Sale
Kloref Tablets   …     …    Arthur H. C. Co.           England          Freely
Histalon Tablets …     …    I. C. N. Canada Ltd.       Canada             do.
Duofilm Liquid …       …    Stiefel Laboratories       U.S.A.             do.
Dristan          …     …    Whitehall Labs.               do.             do.
Darvocet N50 & 100     …    Eli Lilly & Co.               do.           Third
                                                                          Schedule




                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                L.R.O.

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

200            Chap. 30:01                   Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]

51/1969.                         †WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL OF
                                   NEW DRUGS NOTIFICATION
                       issued under paragraph 8 of Division 3 of the Second Schedule
                                    of the Food and Drugs Regulations

               The approval of the following new drugs is withdrawn:
                      Water, B.P.—Manufactured by Bieffe, Florence, Italy;
                      Normal Saline, B.P.—Manufactured by Bieffe, Florence,
                      Italy;
                      5% Dextrose in Water B.P.—Manufactured by Bieffe,
                             Florence, Italy;
                      10% Dextrose in Water B.P.—Manufactured by Bieffe,
                             Florence, Italy;
                      5% Dextrose in Normal Saline B.P.—Manufactured by
                             Bieffe, Florence, Italy;
                      10% Dextrose in Normal Saline B.P.—Manufactured by
                             Bieffe, Florence, Italy.




               †See Note on page 2.




                                      UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                            Food and Drugs            Chap. 30:01             201
                                                                      [Subsidiary]


  FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS REGULATIONS
                ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION
    1. Citation.
    2. Interpretation.
                                 PART I
                              GENERAL
    3.   Prohibition.
    4.   Requirements for vessels.
    5.   Transporting fish.
    6.   Restriction on export.
    7.   Marketing imported fish.
    8.   Certifying of establishment.
    9.   Operation of certified establishment.
   10.   Export Licence.
   11.   Import Licence.
   12.   Notification by importer.
   13.   Conditions on licence.
   14.   Standard licence condition.
   15.   Suspension or revocation of licence.
   16.   Exemption permits.
   17.   Performance bond.
   18.   Failure to comply.
   19.   Recall Order.
   20.   Fees for services or use of facilities.
   21.   Non-payment of fees.
   22.   Offshore inspection arrangements.
   23.   Contents of arrangement.
   24.   Foreign government inspections.
   25.   Designation of methods and equipment.
   26.   Approved laboratories.
                                 PART II
   SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR HANDLING FISH
   27. Inspection/ re-inspection.
   28. Owner to assist inspection.


                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                 L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

202            Chap. 30:01                  Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                       Fish and Fishery Products Regulations

                         ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS—Continued

               REGULATION

                  29.   Import/export.
                  30.   Requirements for importation.
                  31.   Import licence requirements.
                  32.   Cancellation or refusal of import licence.
                  33.   Inspection by inspector.
                  34.   Packaging.
                  35.   Detention.
                  36.   Inspection certificate.
                  37.   Appeal against decision.
                  38.   Re-inspection.
                  39.   Result of re-inspection.
                  40.   Void certificate.
                  41.   Establishment certificate.
                  42.   Minister to issue certificate.
                  43.   Establishment inspection fee.
                  44.   Management of establishment.
                  45.   Cancellation and re-instatement of establishment certificate.
                  46.   Factory vessels.
                  47.   Frozen fish establishment.
                  48.   Fresh fish.
                  49.   Export of fish.
                  50.   Preservation of fish.
                  51.   Shellfish.
                  52.   Record of export.
                  53.   Canned fish.
                  54.   Size and weight of cans.
                  55.   Frozen fish.
                  56.   Salted fish.
                                                PART III
                 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS
                  57. General conditions.
                                                PART IV
                 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS
                  58. Canneries.


                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                   www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                Chap. 30:01               203
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                     [Subsidiary]

REGULATIONS


   59. Salted dried fish establishments.
   60. Fresh or frozen fish or semi-preserved processing establishments.
   61. Pickled, spiced and marinated fish establishments.
                                 PART V
      GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR
                ESTABLISHMENTS
   62. General requirements.
                                 PART VI
      SPECIFIC OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR
                 ESTABLISHMENTS
   63. Operating requirements in canneries.
   64. Salted or dried fish establishments.
   65. Fresh or frozen fish or semi-preserved processing establishments.
                                 PART VII
  REQUIREMENTS FOR VESSELS USED FOR FISHING
     OR TRANSPORTING FISH FOR PROCESSING
   66. Fish storage.
                                PART VIII
     REQUIREMENTS FOR STORING FROZEN FISH
   67. Frozen fish storing.
                                 PART IX
   REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
  USED FOR UNLOADING, HANDLING, HOLDING AND
    TRANSPORTING FRESH FISH FOR PROCESSING
   68. Requirements for vehicles and equipment.
                                 PART X
                         MISCELLANEOUS
   69. Offences.
   70. Penalty.

FIRST SCHEDULE.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
THIRD SCHEDULE.



                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

204               Chap. 30:01              Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]

220/1998.         FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS REGULATIONS

                                        made under section 25

Citation.             1. These Regulations may be cited as the Fish and Fishery
                  Products Regulations.

Interpretation.        2. In these Regulations—
                  “aquaculture products” means all fishery products born and
                      raised in controlled conditions until placed on the market as
                      a foodstuff. Seawater or freshwater fish or crustaceans
                      caught in their natural environment when juvenile and kept
                      until they reach the desired commercial size for human
                      consumption are also considered to be aquaculture products;
                  “certified establishment” means an establishment in respect of
                       which an operating licence is issued under regulation 9;
                  “competent authority” the Chemistry/Food and Drugs Division
                      of the Ministry of Health;
                  “container” a receptacle, package, wrapper or confining band
                      used in marketing fish;
                  “decomposed” means fish that has an offensive or objectionable
                      odour, flavour, colour, texture or substance associated with
                      spoilage;
                  “establishment” means any premises or place where fish or
                       fishery products are prepared, processed, chilled, frozen
                       packaged or stored;
                  “export” to send or convey fish to another country for the purpose
                      of marketing;
                  “factory vessel” means any vessel on which fishery products
                       undergo one or more of the following operations filleting,
                       slicing, skinning, mincing, freezing or processing, and
                       includes packaging;

                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             205
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                   [Subsidiary]


“fish” means all sea water or fresh water animals or parts thereof
     and includes: shellfish, crustaceans, marine animals and any
     parts of shellfish, crustaceans or marine animals; the eggs,
     sperm, spawn, larvae, spat and juvenile stages of fish, shellfish,
     crustaceans and marine animals; and fish products or by-
     products; but excluding turtles, aquatic mammals and frogs;
“grade name” means a prescribed name or designation for a
     category or class of fish;
“import” means to convey or bring into the country for the
     purpose of marketing;
“inspection mark” means a prescribed mark, stamp or seal
     applied to any fish or its container or to an inspection
     certificate;
“lot” or “batch” means a shipment or part of a shipment of fish
     that is of the same species, is processed in the same manner
     by the same producer, is packaged in the same size of
     container and bears the same label;
“marketing” means preparing, advertising, purchasing, conveying,
     distributing, trading in and selling fish and any other act
     necessary to make fish available for consumption or use;
“minister” means the Minister to whom the responsibility of
     Health is assigned;
“preparing” means processing, storing, inspecting, grading,
     assembling, packaging, pricing, marking, coding and labelling;
“preserved” means any fish that has been prepared by salting,
     smoking, drying or any combination thereof with a moisture
     content not greater than twenty-four per cent;
“processing” means cleaning, eviscerating, filleting, washing,
     shucking, chilling, icing, packing, canning, freezing,
     irradiating, pasteurizing, preserving, smoking, salting,
     cooking, pickling and drying;
“Regulations” means Regulations made under the Food and
     Drugs Act;

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                         www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

206              Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                       Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                 “sterilised” means fish that has been treated with heat to prevent
                      spoilage and to destroy all pathogenic organisms;
                 “tainted” means fish that is rancid or has an abnormal odour or
                      flavour;
                 “transport” means conveyance by any vessel, aircraft, motor
                      vehicle, cargo container, trailer or other means of
                      transportation of goods or fish;
                 “unwholesome” means fish that has in or upon it bacteria of
                      public health significance or substance toxic or aesthetically
                      offensive to man.

                                                 PART I

                                              GENERAL
Prohibition.          3. (1) No person shall import, export or prepare fish for
                 export without a licence and/or certificate issued under
                 regulation 10 or 11.
                         (2) No person shall import, export or have in possession
                 for export any fish that is tainted, decomposed or unwholesome,
                 as defined in these Regulations, or any containers that do not
                 meet the prescribed requirements.

Requirements         4. No person shall catch fish from a vessel for the purpose
for vessels.
                 of marketing, unless the vessel meets the prescribed requirements.

Transporting          5. No person shall import or export fish or convey it to or
fish.
                 from a certified establishment unless the means of transport and
                 equipment used for loading, unloading, handling, holding or
                 transporting the fish meet the prescribed requirements.

Restriction on         6. (1) No person who holds a licence issued under
export.
                 regulation 10 shall export or have in possession for export any
                 fish that does not meet the requirements of prescribed regulations.
                        (2) Each shipment prepared for export shall be
                 accompanied by an Export Health Certificate issued by the
                 competent authority wherever applicable.

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01              207
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                   [Subsidiary]


     7. No person shall market or have in possession to market Marketing
                                                               imported fish.
any fish that has been imported unless the fish meets the
requirements of prescribed Regulations.

     8. The Minister may issue to any person a certificate Certifying of
                                                                     establishment.
authorising the person to use an establishment for importing or
exporting fish or preparing it for export. The application for the
issue of a certificate shall be in the manner set out in Form A of Form     A, B.
                                                                     First Schedule.
the First Schedule and the certificate issued shall be in the manner
set out in Form B.

    9. No person shall operate a certified establishment unless it Operation of
                                                                   certified
meets the requirements of the prescribed Regulations.              establishment.


    10. The Minister may issue to any person who may not hold Export
                                                                    Licence.
a certified establishment licence, a licence to prepare for export
or to export fish prepared in a certified establishment. The
application for an export licence shall be set out in Form C of the Form C, D.
                                                                    First Schedule.
First Schedule and the licence issued shall be in the manner set
out in Form D of the First Schedule.

    11. The Minister may issue to any person a licence to import Import licence.
fish in the manner set out in Form E of the First Schedule. The Forms      C, E.
                                                                    First Schedule.
application for a licence to import fish shall be in the manner set
out in Form C of the First Schedule.

   12. A person who holds an import licence shall notify the Notification by
                                                                importer.
competent authority of each importation of fish in the form and
manner prescribed and shall not market the fish without the
competent authority’s approval.

    13. The Minister after consultation with the competent Conditions on
                                                                  licence.
authority may attach such conditions as he considers necessary to
any licence or exemption permit issued under the Regulations.

    14. It is a condition of every licence issued under regulation 8 Standard
                                                                       licence
or 10 that all fish in an establishment operated by the licence holder condition.
are deemed to be for export and are subject to the Regulations.

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

208             Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                      Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


Suspension or       15. The Minister may refuse to issue a new licence to a
revocation of
licence.        person, or may suspend or revoke a person’s licence or vary its
                terms and conditions, if such person contravenes—
                            (a) any condition of the licence;
                            (b) any provision of the Act, Regulations or an
                                Order issued.

Exemption           16. The Minister may issue a permit to any person or class of
permits.        persons exempting them from the application of any of the
                provisions of the Regulations, where the exemption is necessary
                in his opinion for,
                             (a) the production or marketing of experimental or
                                  test products or pharmaceuticals;
                             (b) the rework reconditioning, culling or salvage of
                                  fish to enable it to meet the requirements of the
                                  Regulations;
                             (c) the marketing, possession use of disposal of
                                  tainted, decomposed or unwholesome fish not
                                  intended for human consumption;
                             (d) the re-use of containers or the use of labels that
                                  do not meet the prescribed requirements;
                             (e) the labelling of products to accommodate
                                  particular cultural communities or foreign
                                  markets;
                              (f) the production and supply of food in an
                                  emergency or for international aid.
Performance          17. The competent authority may require any person to whom
bond.
                a licence is issued under these Regulations to post a performance
                bond or provide other security that is satisfactory to the competent
                authority as a guarantee that the person will comply with the
                Regulations and the terms and conditions of the licence.

Failure to         18. Where a person fails to comply with the Regulations or
comply.
                any conditions of the licence, the competent authority may
                enforce the performance bond or other security referred to in
                regulation 17 and forfeit the said bond or security to the State.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01               209
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                    [Subsidiary]


    19. Where the Minister believes that exported or imported Recall Order.
fish pose a danger to public health and safety, he may, by notice
served on any person importing, exporting or marketing the fish,
order the person to recall it and send it to a place designated by
the competent authority.

    20. The Minister may by Order fix or alter the fees to be paid Fees      for
                                                                       services or use
for a service or the use of a facility provided under the Regulations. of facilities.

    21. The Minister may—                                        Non-payment
                                                                 of fees.
            (a) withdraw or withhold a service, the use of a
                facility, product or the conferral of a right or
                privilege under the Regulations from any
                person; or
            (b) cancel, suspend or refuse to issue a licence, if
                the person fails to pay prescribed fee and if
                consistent with public health and safety.

    22. The Minister may enter into an offshore inspection Offshore
arrangement with one or more foreign governments, government inspection
                                                                     arrangements.
agencies or trade organisations where he is satisfied, based on
verification by the competent authority—
             (a) that the legal requirements, fish inspection
                  systems and infrastructure for preparing fish for
                  export in that country and that fish imported into
                  this country meets the requirements of the laws
                  of Trinidad and Tobago; or
             (b) that any establishments in that country meet the
                  requirements of the Regulations for certified
                  establishments and that fish exported from those
                  establishments to Trinidad and Tobago meets
                  those requirements.

    23. An offshore inspection arrangement may include Contents         of
                                                                arrangement.
authority for the Minister to—
             (a) issue foreign plant operating certificates to
                  persons operating establishments in the other
                  country for the purpose of exporting fish to
                  Trinidad and Tobago;

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                       L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

210              Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                        Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                               (b) inspect establishments in the other country and
                                    the fish prepared in those establishments;
                               (c) establish compliance, monitoring and inspection
                                    requirements for imports from the other country
                                    or from establishments in that country;
                               (d) recognise certificates of inspection issued by
                                    other countries;
                               (e) implement any programme or project related to
                                    fish inspection and make funding arrangements
                                    for that purpose including the sharing of revenues
                                    or the recovery of costs of the programme or
                                    project; or
                                (f) fix fees for foreign plant operating certificates
                                    or for the recovery of the costs of delivery of
                                    offshore inspection services.

Foreign              24. The Minister may rely on the results of inspections
government
inspections.     conducted by the inspection agency of a foreign government or
                 foreign trade organisation for the purposes of negotiating or
                 implementing an offshore inspection arrangement or of
                 determining whether fish imported pursuant to an arrangement
                 meet the requirements of the Regulations.
Designation of
methods and
                    25. The competent authority may designate methods and
equipment.       equipment to be used by inspectors in carrying out their duties
                 and functions under the Regulations.

Approved             26. The Minister may approve, or engage the services of an
laboratories.
                 approved laboratory or engage a standard organisation to approve
                 private or government laboratory or any other place for use in
                 grading, testing, analysis or experiments in science conducted for
                 the purpose of carrying out inspections under the Regulations.

                                                 PART II

                    SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR HANDLING FISH
Inspection/
re-inspection.
                     27. All fish shall be subject to inspection and an inspector may
                 take samples of fish free of charge for the purpose of inspection.

                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01              211
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                   [Subsidiary]


    28. The owner of fish or person acting on his behalf shall make Owner to assist
                                                                    inspection.
readily accessible to an inspector any fish or containers for which
inspection or re-inspection is required under the Regulations.

   29. No person shall import, export or process for import or Import/export.
export or attempt to import or export—
             (a) any fish that is tainted, decomposed,
                 unwholesome or contains in whole or in part any
                 parasites, or otherwise fails to meet the
                 requirements of the Regulations; or
             (b) any live oysters, clams, mussels or other
                 molluscs (except scallops) or raw products
                 derived therefrom, whether frozen or unfrozen,
                 unless the competent authority is satisfied on the
                 basis of information submitted that the waters
                 from which they are handled and processed are
                 of such a nature as will ensure that the shellfish
                 are wholesome.

    30. (1) No person shall import into Trinidad and Tobago or Requirements
                                                                     for importation.
attempt to import into Trinidad and Tobago any fish unless—
             (a) the identity of the establishment at which the
                 fish is packed and the day, month and year of
                 packing are legibly marked on one end of the
                 carton or case in which the containers of fish are
                 shipped;
             (b) in the case of canned fish, a list indicating the
                 establishment and the number of containers for
                 each production batch is provided to an inspector;
             (c) each container has a label on which the name of
                 the country of origin is clearly identified;
             (d) that person is the holder of an import licence; and
             (e) written notification of each shipment of fish to
                 be imported is provided to the competent
                 authority prior to the importation.

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

212              Chap. 30:01              Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                      Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                          (2) The notification referred to in subregulation (1)(e)
                 shall set out, in respect of each shipment of fish to be imported
                 into Trinidad and Tobago and each type of fish contained in that
                 shipment,
                               (a) the quantity;
                               (b) the producer;
                               (c) the country of origin; and
                               (d) the place where the fish will be held pending
                                   inspection or notification by an inspector
                                   pursuant to subregulation (3).
                         (3) No person shall move or attempt to move fish that
                 has been imported into Trinidad and Tobago from the place
                 indicated in the notification referred to in subregulation (1)(e)
                 unless the fish has been inspected and meets the requirements of
                 the Regulations.
                          (4) No person shall import into Trinidad and Tobago or
                 attempt to import into Trinidad and Tobago any canned fish
                 unless the fans are embossed or otherwise permanently marked in
                 a manner that identifies the name of the establishment and day,
                 month and year of processing.
Import licence
requirements.
                     31. (1) Subject to subregulation (2), the Minister may issue
                 an import licence on receiving an application and the applicant
                 paying a fee of one thousand five hundred dollars.
                         (2) An import licence is not assignable and is valid for
                 one year after the date of issue indicated on the licence.
                         (3) An importer of fish shall maintain, at an address in
                 Trinidad and Tobago and for not less than two years—
                              (a) the name and address of the person to whom each
                                  shipment of fish was shipped from the importer
                                  and the date on which the fish was shipped;
                              (b) all complaints that are received respecting the
                                  processing, storing, grading, packaging or
                                  marking of imported fish, and the evaluations
                                  conducted and any actions taken as a result of
                                  each complaint; and
                              (c) evidence of adequate processing of fish.

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             213
                  Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                  [Subsidiary]


    32. (1) The Minister may cancel or refuse to issue an import Cancellation or
                                                                  refusal of
licence where the holder of, or the applicant for the licence—    import licence.

            (a) has provided false information to the Minister
                for the purpose of obtaining a licence;
            (b) has failed to provide a written notification
                required pursuant to regulation 30(1)(e);
            (c) has provided false information to an inspector in
                a written notification required pursuant to
                regulation 30(1)(e).
       (2) Where a shipment of fish is imported into Trinidad
and Tobago, the importer shall pay an inspection service fee of—
            (a) where the fish is intended for further processing
                resulting in substantial transformation of the
                fish, three hundred dollars for each shipment of
                fish that is being delivered to an establishment
                that has a certificate; and
            (b) in any other case, subject to a maximum of one
                thousand dollars with respect to each shipment,
                one hundred dollars for each lot of fish.

    33. (1) Subject to subregulations (2) to (4), any fish Inspection by
                                                              inspector.
imported into Trinidad and Tobago may be subjected, on random
basis, to an inspection by an inspector.
        (2) Where a type of fish produced by a producer fails to
pass an inspection,
            (a) the type of fish, the name of the producer and the
                 date of inspection shall be recorded by the
                 inspector on the import alert list maintained by
                 the competent authority; and
            (b) shipments or lots of that type of fish that are
                 produced by that producer and subsequently
                 imported into Trinidad and Tobago shall undergo
                 the same type of inspection until four consecutive
                 shipments or lots have passed the inspection.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                        www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

214            Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                      Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                        (3) Where a type of fish that is produced by a producer
               fails to pass a label evaluation inspection, lots of that type of fish
               that are produced by that producer and subsequently imported
               into Trinidad and Tobago shall undergo a label inspection until
               one lot passes the inspection.
                      (4) Where a type of fish that is produced by a producer
               is imported into Trinidad and Tobago and that type of fish
               produced by that producer has not been imported into Trinidad
               and Tobago within the previous two years, that importation shall
               undergo every type of inspection applicable to that type of fish.
                       (5) Where a type of inspection is performed pursuant to
               any of subregulations (1) to (4), the importer shall pay the
               applicable fee set out in these Regulations.

Packaging.         34. Unless otherwise permitted by the competent authority,
               fish shall be packed in new, clean, sound containers.

Detention.         35. (1) For the purpose of preserving the identity of any
               fish, an inspector may detain the fish by attaching to any of the
               fish or any container thereof a numbered tag upon which shall be
               clearly written—
                            (a) the word “hold”;
                            (b) an identification number;
                             (c) a brief description of the lot detained;
                            (d) the date; and
                             (e) the signature of the inspector.
                        (2) Where any fish is detained pursuant to subregulation
               (1), the inspector shall deliver or mail to the owner or his agent a
               duly completed notice of detention.
                        (3) Where any fish is detained pursuant to subregulation (1),
               on premises owned by a person who is not the owner of the fish, a
               copy of the notice of detention shall be delivered or mailed to that
               person.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                 www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01              215
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                   [Subsidiary]


        (4) No person shall alter, deface or remove a tag attached
to any fish or container thereof pursuant to subregulation (1) or
move, sell or dispose of any such fish or container thereof unless
he has obtained a release from an inspector.
        (5) Notwithstanding subregulation (4), where it is
necessary for any fish or container thereof referred to in that
subregulation to be moved from one warehouse to another, or the
owner of the fish or container or his agent has made a reasonable
request for the fish or container to be moved under detention, an
inspector may permit such fish or container thereof to be moved
accordingly.
        (6) Where an inspector is satisfied that any fish detained
pursuant to subregulation (5), meets the requirements of the
Regulations, he shall prepare a notice of release and deliver or
mail one copy thereof to the owner of the fish or his agent and one
copy to the person, if any, on whose premises the fish was found.

    36. (1) Where a person requests an inspection certificate for Inspection
                                                                   certificate.
fish, an inspector shall,
             (a) where the person operates the establishment in
                  which the fish was processed, inspect the
                  processing record of the establishment to
                  determine whether an inspection of the fish is
                  required and, if required, inspect the fish; and
             (b) in any other case, inspect the fish.
         (2) An inspector shall issue an inspection certificate for
fish where the inspector determines, following an inspection of
the fish, that the fish meets the requirements of the Regulations.
         (3) A person who requests an inspection certificate for
fish shall pay an inspection service fee of one hundred dollars.

    37. (1) Where a person interested in a decision of an inspector Appeal   against
                                                                     decision.
in respect of any inspection, grading, marking or other matter under
the Regulations is not satisfied with that decision, the person may,
within thirty days after such decision, by notice in writing, appeal
against the decision to the Minister who may order a re-inspection.

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

216                 Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                          Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                             (2) Where a re-inspection is made pursuant to
                    subregulation (1) and the Minister makes a decision as a result
                    thereof, that decision shall be final.
                             (3) A person who appeals a decision under
                    subregulation (1), shall pay the applicable fee for re-inspection
                    that is ordered.

Re-inspection.          38. Where an inspector has reasonable grounds to believe
                    that fish has deteriorated after the date on which it was inspected
                    or that it otherwise fails to meet the requirements of the
                    prescribed Regulations, he may re-inspect such fish.

Result of               39. Where a re-inspection is made under regulation 38 and
re-inspection.
                    the fish is found not to be of the grade marked on the container,
                    any inspection marks and quality designations on the container
                    shall be removed or obliterated and any inspection certificate that
                    may have been issued for the fish shall be void.

Void                   40. No person shall use an inspection certificate if he is
certificate.
                    aware that the certificate is void.

Establishment           41. No person shall export, process for export or attempt to
certificate.
                    export or process for export any fish, unless all processing of that
                    fish is carried out in an establishment that has been certified.

Minister to issue       42. The Minister may issue a certificate in respect of an
certificate.
                    establishment where—
                                (a) the establishment meets the prescribed
                                    requirements;
                                (b) a quantity management programme has been
                                    developed for use in the establishment;
                                (c) the establishment’s quality management
                                    programme meets the requirements set out in
Third Schedule.                     the Third Schedule; and
                                (d) the applicant pays the non-refundable
                                    application fee.

                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                               UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             217
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                   [Subsidiary]


    43. Where a person who is the owner or operator of an Establishment
establishment or of facilities intended for use as an establishment inspection fee.
makes an application to determine whether the establishment or
the facility meets the prescribed requirements, the person shall
pay a fee of one thousand dollars.

    44. (1) Any operator of an establishment in respect of which Management of
a certificate has been issued and in which fish is processed for establishment.
export shall—
              (a) comply with the prescribed requirements;
              (b) implement and comply with the establishment’s
                   quality management programme;
              (c) ensure that the establishment’s quality
                   management programme meets the requirements
                   set out in the Schedule to these Regulations;     Schedule.
              (d) keep and make available for inspection by an
                   inspector for a period of not less than three
                   years, detailed records of the inspections and
                   evaluations conducted, or any actions taken
                   within the establishment pursuant to its quality
                   management programme;
              (e) keep up to date and make available to an
                   inspector or request all required information and
                   documentation; and
               (f) keep the certificate issued displayed in a
                   prominent manner.
         (2) A registration certificate is not assignable and is valid
for only one year after the date of issue indicated on the certificate.

    45. (1) The Minister may cancel the registration certificate Cancellation
                                                                 and re-
issued in respect of an establishment where—                     instatement of
                                                                 establishment
             (a) the establishment has serious contamination;    certificate.

             (b) the establishment is not in compliance with the
                 prescribed requirements;
             (c) the establishment’s quality management
                 programme is not being complied with;

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

218                Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                                 (d) the establishment’s quality management
                                      programme does not meet the requirements set
                                      out in the Schedule;
                                 (e) any required information or documentation is
                                      falsified; and
                                  (f) the records referred to in regulation 44(d) are
                                      falsified.
                            (2) Where the Minister has cancelled a certificate under
                   subregulation (1), the owner or operator of the establishment may
                   request an inspection to determine whether the registration
                   certificate may be re-instated.
                           (3) The owner or operator of an establishment who
                   requests an inspection under subregulation (2), shall pay a fee of
                   one thousand five hundred dollars for such inspection.

Factory vessels.      46. (1) Subject to subregulation (2), no person shall use a
                   vessel for fishing or for transporting fish for the purposes of
                   processing unless the vessel displays a certificate sticker that has
                   been placed thereon by an inspector, certifying that the vessel
                   meets the prescribed requirements.
                           (2) The certification sticker on a vessel may be removed
                   by an inspector where the vessel is not maintained or operated in
                   compliance with the prescribed requirements.

Frozen fish            47. No person shall operate an establishment for storing
establishment.
                   frozen fish unless the establishment meets the prescribed
                   requirements.

Fresh fish.            48. No person shall unload, handle, hold or transport fresh
                   fish intended for processing unless the unloading, handling,
                   holding or transportation meets the prescribed requirements.

Export of fish.       49. No person shall export, process for export or attempt to
                   process for export any fresh fish unless the unloading, handling,
                   holding and transportation of such fish have been conducted in
                   accordance with the prescribed requirements.

                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             219
                  Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                  [Subsidiary]


   50. (1) Processed fish shall be protected from contamination Preservation of
                                                                fish.
and the weather during loading, unloading and transportation.
        (2) Fresh fish and semi-preserves, while under the
control of a carrier, shall be kept properly chilled.
         (3) Frozen fish, while under the control of a carrier,
shall be kept refrigerated in such a manner that, when it is
delivered to its destination, the temperature of such fish will not
have increased more than 5.5˚C from the temperature at the time
it was loaded.

   51. No person shall—                                            Shellfish.

           (a) process crabs, lobsters, clams, oysters, mussels
               or whelks that are not alive; or
           (b) pack, sell, export or import clams, oyster, mussels
               or whelks in any form unless such molluscs are
               free from shellfish toxin when tested by a method
               approved by the competent authority.

    52. Every person who exports fish from an establishment shall Record of
                                                                  export.
keep a record of the name and address of the person to whom, and
the date on which, the fish is shipped from the establishment.

    53. (1) No person shall export or import or attempt to export Canned fish.
or import cans of fish that—
            (a) have not been properly sealed;
            (b) the tops or bottoms of which have been distorted
                outwards; or
            (c) are otherwise detective.
        (2) Canned fish shall be sterilised by a method approved
by the competent authority.
        (3) All canned fish shall have sufficient vacuum to
ensure that can ends do not bulge when the product is heated to a
temperature of 35˚C.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

220               Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                        Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


Size and weight      54. The Minister may, upon written request,
of cans.
                             (a) authorise the use of can sizes other than those
                                 approved by the competent authority; and
                             (b) establish the net weight and drained weight of
                                 the contents thereof.
Frozen fish.          55. (1) No person shall mark or label any frozen gutted fish
                  or any container thereof unless the fish conforms to the standard
                  prescribed for that specie.
                         (2) Frozen gutted fish shall be protected from oxidation
                  and dehydration by a glaze of ice or a tightly wrapped membrane.

Salted fish.          56. (1) Salted fish containing “pink” or “red” and having a
                  moisture content not exceeding twenty-four per cent at the time
                  of inspection or packing, whichever last occurs, shall not be
                  offered for human consumption.
                           (2) The moisture content of boneless or semi-boneless
                  salted fish shall not exceed fifty-four per cent.
                           (3) No container of boneless or semi-boneless salted
                  fish shall contain more than one species of fish.
                         (4) Boneless or semi-boneless salted fish shall be
                  packed in new, clean containers that are completely lined with
                  parchment or wax paper or are impervious to moisture.
                          (5) Boneless salted fish may be prepared as fibred fish
                  by separating the fibres and shredding the fish.
                          (6) Boneless salted fish shall have bones removed.
                          (7) Semi-boneless salted fish shall have all bones except
                  the pin bones removed.
                          (8) Salted fish for export from Trinidad and Tobago
                  shall be kench or pickle cured and shall be packed according to
                  moisture content.
                          (9) The classes of salted fish are “light salted”, semi-
                  preserved, having a salt content of six per cent to ten per cent and
                  “heavy salted”, preserved having a salt content of more than ten
                  per cent but not exceeding eighteen per cent.

                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             221
                  Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                  [Subsidiary]

                               PART III

  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS
    57. (1) The surface of floors in wet working areas where fish General
                                                                   conditions.
is received, held or processed shall be sloped for drainage
purposes and constructed of concrete or such other material as the
competent authority may approve.
        (2) Floors in dry working areas shall be properly
constructed of such material as the competent authority may
approve.
        (3) Drains shall be of a type and size sufficient to carry
off process effluents and water from cleaning operations and shall
be equipped with traps or other devices to preclude the entry of
gases or vermin into the building through the drains.
          (4) Inside surfaces of walls in wet working areas where
fish is received, held or processed shall be constructed of smooth,
waterproof, light coloured material that is acceptable to the
competent authority and that can be thoroughly washed up to a
height of not less than four feet.
        (5) Natural or mechanical ventilation systems shall
provide clean air, remove undesirable odours, steam and smoke
and prevent condensation in rooms where work is performed.
       (6) Toilet facilities of types and in numbers approved by
the competent authority shall be provided.
       (7) Rooms in which toilet facilities are located shall
have doors of a type approved by the competent authority.
         (8) Sanitary washbasins equipped with hot and cold
running water, liquid or powdered soap, hand sanitizers, foot
operated faucets and air dryers or single service towels, of types
shall be provided.
        (9) A foot bath shall be placed at each entrance to the
processing area and maintained with an adequate supply of an
appropriate sanitizer.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

222            Chap. 30:01              Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                    Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                       (10) An adequate supply of safe, sanitary water that has
               a residual chlorine level of 5 ppm and a zero coliform bacteria
               count, determined by the membrane filter method shall be
               provided under a minimum operating pressure of 20 pounds per
               square inch.
                        (11) An establishment may use water other than water
               referred to in subregulation (10) for fire protection, boilers or
               auxilliary services if there is no connection between the water
               systems providing water to the establishment.
                       (12) The frames and legs of all equipment on which fish
               is processed shall be constructed of metal or other material
               approved by the competent authority.
                       (13) Tables shall be so constructed that they and the
               areas beneath can be readily cleaned.
                       (14) Bins or receptacles in which offal is stored shall be
               watertight, constructed of metal or other material approved by the
               competent authority and, where necessary to prevent
               contamination of the establishment or any fish processed therein,
               be equipped with well-fitted covers.
                       (15) A concrete or other suitable surface, sloped for
               drainage purposes, shall be placed under elevated offal bins.
                        (16) Wood shall not be used for the construction of any
               part of a conveyor that comes in contact with fish.
                        (17) Flumes for conveying fish shall be constructed of
               non-corrodible material, other than wood, and in such a manner
               that they can be properly cleaned.
                        (18) A minimum illumination intensity of 215 lm/m2
               shall be provided on all working surfaces in processing rooms.
                       (19) Lights over processing areas shall be shatterproof
               or covered with protective shields particularly in areas where
               food is exposed at any stage of processing.

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             223
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                   [Subsidiary]

                                PART IV

   SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS
    58. (1) Rooms in which fish is processed shall have ceilings Canneries.
that are free from cracks, crevices and open joints, constructed of
smooth, washable, light coloured material and are of a height
acceptable to the competent authority.
        (2) There shall be no exposed pipes over any working
surface on which fish is processed.
        (3) Hot water shall be provided and maintained at a
minimum temperature of 43ºC in sufficient quantity for the
operations of the cannery.
        (4) Facilities shall be provided, at a convenient
location, for disinfecting the protective hand coverings used in
processing areas.
        (5) Cutting, filleting and skinning boards shall be made
of material that is smooth and without cracks and shall be
constructed in a manner approved by the competent authority.
       (6) Roller devices used for extracting lobster or crab
meat shall be constructed of non-corrodible material approved by
the competent authority.
          (7) Surfaces other than cutting, filleting boards, on which
fish is processed shall be made of non-corrodible materials, other than
wood, and all joint on such surfaces shall be smooth and watertight.
        (8) All receptacles, trays, containers and utensils used for
processing fish shall be of non-corrodible material, other than wood,
and shall have smooth surfaces free from cracks and crevices.
        (9) Boxes, carts, bins and other receptacles used in a
cannery for holding fish, other than live fish, before it is further
processed or shipped shall be constructed so as to provide drainage
and shall be of a material approved by the competent authority.
        (10) Conveyor belts that come in contact with fish, other
than canned fish, shall be fitted with a spray washer and, where
practical, a scraper.


                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

224               Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                          (11) Wire mesh utensils shall not be used in processing
                  except for the handling of shellfish and crustaceans in the shell.
                          (12) Enamelled utensils shall not be used in processing.
                           (13) An adequate supply of steam shall be maintained at
                  a sufficient pressure for the operations of the cannery.
                          (14) Every cannery shall be equipped with one or more—
                              (a) sealing machines of a type approved by the
                                  competent authority; and
                              (b) retorts equipped with properly installed:
                                     (i) mercury-in-glass thermometer;
                                    (ii) pressure gauge;
                                   (iii) steam spreader; and
                                   (iv) venting valves.
Salted or             59. (1) Inside surfaces of walls in dry working areas where
dried fish
establishments.   salted or dried fish is processed or stored shall be constructed of
                  light coloured material that is acceptable to the competent authority.
                           (2) Ceilings of working areas where fish is processed
                  shall be of a height and constructed of material acceptable to the
                  competent authority.
                          (3) Cutting surfaces on which fish is dressed or split
                  shall be made of material that is smooth and without cracks and
                  shall be constructed in a manner approved by the competent
                  authority.
                          (4) Table surfaces, other than cutting and cleaning
                  boards, on which fish is processed shall be made of non-
                  corrodible material, other than wood, and all joints on such
                  surfaces shall be smooth and watertight.
                          (5) All receptacles, trays and utensils used for holding
                  salted fish, other than packaged fish, shall be constructed of
                  material approved by the competent authority.
                          (6) Receptacles, trays and utensils in which pickled fish
                  is held shall be constructed in such a manner that the contents
                  thereof can drain.

                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             225
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                   [Subsidiary]


        (7) Containers used in the processing of fish shall be
constructed of material approved by the competent authority.

    60. (1) Rooms in which fish is processed shall have ceilings Fresh or frozen
that are free from cracks, crevices and open joints, constructed of fish or semi-
                                                                    preserved
smooth, washable, light coloured material and are of a height processing
                                                                    establishments.
acceptable to the competent authority.
        (2) Hot water shall be provided and maintained at a
minimum temperature of 43ºC in sufficient quantity for the
operations of the fresh or frozen fish establishment.
         (3) Facilities shall be provided at a convenient location, for
disinfecting the protective hand coverings used in processing areas.
        (4) Cutting, filleting and skinning board shall be made
of material that is smooth and without cracks and shall be
constructed in a manner approved by the competent authority.
         (5) Roller devices used for extracting lobster or crab meat
shall be constructed of a non-corrodible material approved by the
competent authority and shall be equipped with spray washers.
        (6) Surfaces, other than cutting, filleting and skinning
boards, on which fish is processed shall be made of non-
corrodible material, other than wood, and all joints on such
surfaces shall be smooth and watertight.
        (7) All receptacles, trays, containers and utensils used
for processing fresh fish, frozen fish or semi-preserves shall be of
non-corrodible material, other than wood, and shall have smooth
surfaces free from cracks and crevices.
         (8) Boxes, carts, bins and other receptacles used in a
fresh fish, frozen fish or semi-preserves establishment for holding
fish, other than live fish, before it is further processed or shipped
shall be constructed so as to provide drainage and shall be of a
material approved by the competent authority.
        (9) Conveyor belts that come in contact with fish, other
than packaged fish, shall be fitted with a spray washer and, where
practical, a scraper.

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                      L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

226               Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                        Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                          (10) Wire mesh utensils shall not be used in processing
                  except for handling shellfish and crustaceans in the shell.
                          (11) Enamelled utensils shall not be used in processing.
                          (12) Freezing facilities for processed fish shall be
                  capable of reducing the temperature at the centre of a 25 mm thick
                  block of unpackaged fillets to 18º C or less, in two hours or less.

Pickled, spiced       61. (1) Regulation 58(1) to (5), and regulation 58(7) to (12)
and marinated
fish              of these Regulations apply to pickled, spiced and marinated fish
establishments.   establishments.
                           (2) Inside surfaces of walls in dry working areas where
                  fish is processed shall be constructed of light coloured material
                  that is acceptable to the competent authority.
                          (3) Sufficient space, acceptable to the competent
                  authority, shall be provided for the storage of curing ingredients.
                           (4) Sufficient warehouse space shall be provided to
                  protect the product from freezing or overheating during curing.

                                                 PART V

                       GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR
                                 ESTABLISHMENTS

General
requirements.
                     62. (1) No person who—
                             (a) is known to be suffering from any
                                 communicable disease;
                             (b) is a known “carrier” of any disease; or
                             (c) has an infected wound or open lesion on any
                                 part of his body,
                  shall be employed in any working area of an establishment.
                          (2) Every person engaged in handling or processing fish
                  shall wash his hands immediately after each absence from duty.
                          (3) No person, who with their bare hands handle fish,
                  shall wear fingernail polish.

                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             227
                  Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                  [Subsidiary]


         (4) All waterproof garments shall be properly cleaned
after each work shift.
        (5) No person shall chew, eat, smoke or spit in a working
area of an establishment.
         (6) Toilet facilities shall be maintained in a manner
satisfactory to the competent authority and a supply of toilet
tissue shall be available in each toilet room.
        (7) Sewerage, including liquid waste from fish
processing operations and the water supply of the establishment
must be disposed in a manner acceptable to the competent
authority.
         (8) Offal and other refuse shall be removed from the
processing area at least once daily and be handled in manner
satisfactory to the competent authority.
        (9) Offal bins or receptacles shall be used only for offal.
        (10) Dogs, cats and other animals shall not be allowed in
an establishment.
        (11) A rodent and insect control programme satisfactory to
the competent authority shall be maintained in every establishment
and, where pesticides are used, the application thereof shall be made
under the supervision of a responsible operator using proper
equipment in a manner that prevents contamination of fish.
        (12) Pesticides referred to in subregulation (11) shall be
of a kind approved by the competent authority.
         (13) Unnecessary material or equipment shall not be
stored in a working area of an establishment.
         (14) The area surrounding and under the control of an
establishment shall be kept clean.
        (15) Brushes, brooms, hoses and other equipment and
material necessary for proper cleaning shall be available at all
times in an establishment and stored in a manner acceptable to the
competent authority.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

228               Chap. 30:01                Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                          (16) Every owner or operator of an establishment shall
                  keep a record of each delivery of fish to the establishment and the
                  record shall include:
                               (a) the common name of the fish;
                               (b) the quantity by weight of the fish;
                                (c) the location from which the fish were harvested;
                               (d) the date the fish were harvested;
                                (e) the name and address of the person who
                                    harvested the fish;
                                (f) the date the fish were received by the establishment;
                               (g) the manner in which and the date the fish were
                                    processed in the establishment; and
                               (h) the name and address of the person to whom and the
                                    date the fish were shipped from the establishment.
                           (17) The record required pursuant to subregulation (16)
                  shall be kept—
                               (a) in the case of fresh fish, for a period of not less
                                   than two years; or
                               (b) in the case of frozen fish, for a period of not less
                                   than three years.
                          (18) In fish and fishing products—
                              (a) the acceptable levels of chemicals, trace metals
                                  and pesticides for fish and fishery products must
Second                            correspond to the levels as set out in Table 1 in
Schedule.
Table 1.                          the Second Schedule;
                              (b) the list of tests and the maximum acceptable limits
                                  for the assessment of fish and fishery products shall
Second                            be as set out in Table 2 in the Second Schedule.
Schedule.
Table 2.
                                                  PART VI

                         SPECIFIC OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR
                                    ESTABLISHMENTS
Operating
requirements in
                      63. (1) A record of the sterilisation treatment used for each
canneries.        batch of fish shall be kept on file at a cannery for a period of not
                  less than twenty-four months.

                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             229
                  Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                  [Subsidiary]


        (2) Water used for cooling fish shall be chlorinated to
give a chlorine residual of at least two parts per million, except
where canned fish is cooled in a retort using a water supply
approved by the competent authority.
        (3) Fish shall be washed prior to canning.
       (4) When lobster meat has been shucked, it shall be
washed in cold running water before it is processed further.
       (5) Only clean ice made of water from a source
approved by the competent authority may be used in a cannery.
         (6) Containers in which shellfish or crustaceans are boiled
shall be drained and cleaned at intervals of two hours or at such
shorter intervals as may be deemed necessary by an inspector.
       (7) Shellfish and crustaceans shall be removed from the
cooking utensils immediately after they have been cooked.
         (8) When a batch of lobster, crab or shrimp has been
cooked, it shall be cooled immediately in clean, cold water and, if
further processing does not commence within one hour, it shall be:
             (a) rapidly chilled and stored at a temperature
                  between 0ºC and 2ºC and processed within
                  eighteen hours; or
             (b) frozen immediately and held at a temperature of
                  26ºC or lower until it is processed further.
        (9) Protective hand coverings worn by employees in any
processing area shall be disinfected immediately after each break
during the work shift.
        (10) Workers engaged in fish processing operations shall
wear coveralls, smocks or coats, and headgear of a type approved
by the competent authority.
        (11) Protective outer garments worn by employees in
fish processing operations shall be clean.
        (12) Utensils that come in contact with fish before it is
canned shall be cleaned and disinfected at least once during and
at the end of each work shift by a method approved by the
competent authority.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

230               Chap. 30:01                 Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                           (13) At the end of each working day the utensils referred to
                  in subregulation (12) shall be air-dried and stored in a sanitary manner.
                          (14) Equipment, including conveyor belts and tables,
                  that come in contact with fish before it is canned, shall be cleaned
                  and disinfected at the end of each work shift by a method
                  approved by the competent authority.
                           (15) Floors in wet working areas shall be kept clean and
                  shall be thoroughly washed and disinfected daily.
                          (16) Canneries and all equipment and utensils used in
                  the operations of a cannery shall be kept in good repair and in a
                  clean and sanitary condition.

Salted or dried
                     64. (1) Workers engaged in fish processing operations shall
fish              wear outer garments and headgear of a type approved by the
establishments.
                  competent authority.
                          (2) Workers in wet working areas shall wear waterproof
                  aprons, coats or pants.
                           (3) Floors in all working areas shall be kept clean at all times.
                          (4) Adequate storage space for packaging material for
                  salted or dried fish shall be provided.
                          (5) Salt used for curing fish shall be of food-grade quality
                  and stored in a location approved by the competent authority.
                          (6) Processed fish shall be stored in a location approved
                  by the competent authority.
                          (7) Salted or dried fish establishments and all equipment
                  and utensils used in the operations of such establishments shall
                  be kept in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.

Fresh or frozen       65. (1) It is mandatory that:
fish or semi-
preserved                     (a) before processing, all fish susceptible to
processing
establishments.                     parasitic infestation must be examined for same;
                              (b) where parasites are found, fish should not be
                                    permitted to further processing.

                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             231
                 Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                  [Subsidiary]


        (2) All fish shall be adequately washed prior to further
processing in running water before it is processed further.
        (3) Only clean ice made of water from a source
approved by the competent authority be used in a fresh fish,
frozen fish or semi-preserves establishment.
        (4) All processing establishments shall cause—
            (a) the containers in which shellfish or crustaceans
                are boiled to be drained and cleaned at intervals
                of two hours or at such shorter intervals as may
                be deemed necessary by an inspector;
            (b) shellfish and crustaceans to be removed from the
                cooking utensils immediately after they have
                been cooked.
         (5) When a batch of lobster, crab or shrimp has been
cooked, it shall be cooled immediately in clean, cold water and, if
further processing does not commence within one hour, it shall be—
             (a) rapidly chilled and stored at a temperature of
                  0ºC and 2ºC and processed within eighteen
                  hours; or
             (b) frozen immediately and held at a temperature of
                  26ºC or lower until it is processed further.
         (6) Protective hand coverings worn by employees in the
filleting and packaging areas shall be disinfected at each break
during the work shift.
        (7) Workers engaged in fish processing operations,
except filleters, skinners, scalers, handlers of round and dressed
fish and workers in frozen storage rooms shall wear clean
coveralls, smocks or coats, and headgear of a type approved by
the competent authority.
        (8) Filleters, skinners, scalers and handlers of round and
dressed fish shall wear clean outer garments, and handgear of a
type approved by the competent authority.
        (9) Workers in frozen storage rooms shall wear clean
outer garments.

                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                       www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

232             Chap. 30:01              Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                     Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                         (10) Floors in wet working areas shall be kept clean and
                shall be thoroughly washed and disinfected daily.
                        (11) Utensils that come in contact with fish that is being
                processed, other than packaged fish, shall be cleaned and
                disinfected at least once during and at the end of each work shift
                by a method approved by the competent authority.
                        (12) At the end of each working day, the utensils
                referred to in subsection (11) shall be air-dried and stored in a
                sanitary manner.
                        (13) Equipment, including filleting machines, conveyor
                belts and tables, that come in contact with fish that is being
                processed, other than packaged fish, shall be cleaned and
                disinfected at the end of each work shift by a method approved
                by the competent authority.
                         (14) Fresh fish, frozen fish and semi-preserve
                establishments and all equipment and utensils used in the
                operations of such establishments shall be kept in good repair and
                in a clean and sanitary condition.
                        (15) All curing ingredients shall be thoroughly mixed and
                evenly distributed throughout the fish at the time of preparation.
                        (16) Fish in the process of being cured shall be processed
                under conditions which would prevent its deterioration.

                                              PART VII

                  REQUIREMENTS FOR VESSELS USED FOR FISHING
                     OR TRANSPORTING FISH FOR PROCESSING
Fish storage.      66. (1) Areas where fish and ice are stored shall—
                           (a) have covers to protect the fish and ice from the
                               sun and weather;
                           (b) be provided with drainage to effectively
                               remove ice melt water and ensure that fish and
                               ice do not come into contact with bilge water or
                               other contamination;

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
              LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                          Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             233
                  Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                  [Subsidiary]


             (c) where it is necessary to prevent physical damage
                  to the fish, be divided into pens, which shall be
                  shelved vertically at intervals of 90 cm or less;
             (d) be insulated and any pipes/conduits passing
                  through the hold shall be sunken flush;
             (e) refrigerated sea water, refrigerated brine systems
                  should be designated to ensure adequate cooling
                  and permit ease of cleaning;
              (f) refrigerated sea water, refrigerated brine systems
                  or brine and ice mixtures should have adequate
                  circulation and be able to maintain the
                  temperature of the fish at—1ºC; and
             (g) be used exclusively for that purpose.
         (2) Subject to subregulation (3), fish and ice storage areas
shall be of non-absorbent, non-corrodible materials, other than
wood, and so constructed as to preclude physical damage to the
fish and facilitate cleaning and any surfaces that come into contact
with fish shall be smooth and free from cracks and crevices.
        (3) In the case of vessels having no below deck storage
areas, built-in fish and ice storage areas shall be so constructed as
to preclude physical damage to the fish and the surfaces should
be smooth, free from cracks and crevices and coated with a
durable, light coloured paint or coating of a type approved by the
competent authority.
        (4) Boxes for fish other than live shellfish shall be of
smooth, non-absorbent, non-corrodible material, other than
wood, free from cracks and crevices, and so constructed as to
provide drainage and protect the fish from damage by crushing
when the boxes are stacked.
        (5) Fresh fish storage areas shall be separated from engine
compartments and other heated areas of a vessel by watertight,
insulated bulkheads and wall surfaces; bulkheads and deckheads in
frozen storage areas of a vessel shall be well insulated.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                         UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                       www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

234            Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                     Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                       (6) Fish handling equipment, such as chutes, conveyors,
               fish washers, tables and utensils, shall be of smooth, non-
               absorbent, non-corrodible material, other than wood, free from
               cracks and crevices and so constructed as to facilitate cleaning.
                        (7) Forks, pumps, tools or other equipment and practices
               that pierce, tear, or otherwise damage or contaminate the edible
               portion of fish shall not be used.
                       (8) Fish, while on board a vessel used for fishing or
               transporting fish, shall be—
                            (a) preserved by the use of finely divided ice
                                 sufficient to reduce and hold the temperature at
                                 4ºC or lower, and such ice shall be made from
                                 potable water or clean sea water;
                            (b) preserved by such other methods as the
                                 competent authority may approve; and
                            (c) at the conclusion of each fishing trip all unused
                                 ice should be discarded before cleaning begins.
                       (9) Where chilled water systems are installed on a vessel,
               such systems shall be of materials approved by the competent
               authority and be constructed to facilitate proper cleaning and be
               capable of holding fish at—1ºC.
                        (10) Freezing facilities on a vessel shall be capable of
               freezing the daily catch of fish at a rate equivalent to at least the
               freezing rate of a 25 mm thick block of fish when the temperature
               of the thermal centre is reduced from 0ºC to—20º C in two hours
               or less.
                       (11) It is necessary that—
                           (a) fish on board a vessel shall be frozen at a
                                freezing rate not less than the rate prescribed by
                                subregulation (10);
                           (b) in the case of a packaged fish product on board
                                a vessel, the time required to reduce the thermal
                                centre of the packaged product to—20ºC shall
                                not exceed thirty-six hours.

                                 UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                  www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                           Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01               235
                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                     [Subsidiary]


         (12) In removing fish—
             (a) except for brine frozen fish, the thermal centre
                 of the fish on board a vessel shall be reduced to
                 a temperature of—18ºC or lower before the fish
                 can be removed from the freezer to the cold
                 storage area; and
             (b) in the case of brine frozen fish on board a vessel,
                 the thermal centre of the fish shall be reduced
                 to—12ºC before the fish can be removed from
                 the freezer to the cold storage area.
        (13) After freezing, fish on board a vessel shall be glazed
or packaged to protect it against dehydration and oxidation.
        (14) Storage areas in which frozen fish is held on board
a vessel shall be maintained at a temperature of—26ºC or lower.
        (15) At least once daily, fish receiving areas and all
equipment, containers and utensils used in the handling of fish on
board a vessel shall be thoroughly cleaned with water from a
potable water source and disinfected.
        (16) Following the discharge of fish from a vessel, all
equipment and utensils used in the handling of fish and the
storage areas, chilled water systems, fish containers, penboards
and shelfboards shall be forthwith thoroughly cleaned with water
from a potable water source and disinfected.
         (17) A storage record of the fish catch shall be kept on all
fishing vessels and the identity of each day’s catch shall be maintained.
        (18) Handwashing and marine type toilet facilities shall
be provided on vessels 13.7 m or more in overall length that have
sleeping accommodation and shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.

                                PART VIII

      REQUIREMENTS FOR STORING FROZEN FISH
   67. (1) Rooms in which frozen fish is stored shall be Frozen fish
                                                         storing.
maintained at a temperature of—30ºC or colder.

                                  UNOFFICIAL VERSION                        L.R.O.

                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

236                Chap. 30:01               Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                         Fish and Fishery Products Regulations


                           (2) For the purpose of measuring temperature—
                               (a) each storage room shall be equipped with an
                                   accurate thermometer or other temperature
                                   measuring device that is located in such a place
                                   that it indicates the average air temperature of
                                   the room; and
                               (b) temperatures in a storage room shall be read,
                                   recorded and dated at least once each day and a
                                   record of such temperatures shall be maintained
                                   for a period of not less than twelve months.
                           (3) Frozen fish shall be protected to minimise rises in
                   the temperature of the fish when it is outside a refrigerated area.
                           (4) No odoriferous substances shall be stored with fish
                   in holding or storage rooms.

                                                  PART IX

                     REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
                    USED FOR UNLOADING, HANDLING, HOLDING AND
                      TRANSPORTING FRESH FISH FOR PROCESSING
Requirements           68. (1) Forks, pumps, tools or other equipment and practices
for vehicles and
equipment.         that pierce, tear or otherwise damage or contaminate the edible
                   portion of fish shall not be used.
                           (2) Fish handling equipment, such as chutes, conveyors,
                   fish washers, tables and utensils, shall be of smooth, non-
                   absorbent, non-corrodible material, other than wood, free from
                   cracks and crevices and so constructed as to facilitate cleaning.
                           (3) In transporting fish—
                               (a) the fish shall be transported in covered
                                    containers approved by the competent authority
                                    or enclosed vehicle bodies; and
                               (b) the contact surfaces of fish storage areas in
                                    vehicles and of containers used for transporting
                                    fish shall be smooth, free from cracks and crevices
                                    and made of non-corrodible material.

                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                              UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
             LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS              www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                         Food and Drugs                  Chap. 30:01             237
                 Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                  [Subsidiary]


       (4) In the vehicles transporting fish—
           (a) the containers and vehicle bodies used to hold or
                transport fish shall be filled to a level no higher
                than 90 cm of its depth;
           (b) the body of a vehicle used for transporting fish
                in bulk shall be divided at intervals of 1 m along
                its length.
       (5) The fish—
           (a) held prior to being transported shall be iced or
               chilled after unloading from a vessel and be
               protected from the sun and weather and from
               contamination; and
           (b) shall be iced or chilled while being transported.
        (6) Water used for washing of vehicles and equipment
used in the unloading or transporting fish, shall be clean and
obtained from a potable water source and approved by a
competent authority.
       (7) Offal and other refuse shall be disposed of in a
manner acceptable to an inspector.
        (8) Areas where fish is landed or handled and all
surfaces that come into contact with fish during unloading,
handling, holding and transportation shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
                               PART X

                       MISCELLANEOUS
    69. Any person who breaches any of the Regulations Offences.
commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine
of three hundred dollars and to imprisonment for three months.

   70. Prosecution under regulation 69 may be instituted with Penalty.
twelve months from the date of the subject matter of the
prosecution arose.



                                UNOFFICIAL VERSION                     L.R.O.

                        UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

238             Chap. 30:01                                                  Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                               Fish and Fishery Products Regulations

                                                                      FIRST SCHEDULE
                                                                      MINISTRY OF HEALTH
                                                   REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Regulation 8.                                                                         FORM A
                                                            Chemistry/Food and Drugs Division

                                       APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATION OF
                                                ESTABLISHMENT
                                                             Food and Drugs Act, Chap. 30:01
                                                           Fish and Fishery Products Regulations
                Name of Applicant ................................................................................................................................
                                                                           (Surname first, if a person)

                Address of applicant .............................................................................................................................

                Address of Premises to be Certified ......................................................................................................

                ...............................................................................................................................................................

                I/We ........................................................................................................................................... (Being
                                                                                                                                                                 owners/
                .............................................................................................................................................. operators)
                hereby apply to the CHEMISTRY/FOOD AND DRUGS DIVISION for a certificate to use the
                above premises for the preparation and processing of Fish and Fishery Products in accordance with
                the Fish and Fishery Products Regulations.

                The receipt for the prescribed fee of ..................................................................................... dollars is

                submitted with this application .............................................................................................................


                Signed ......................................................                              ...............................................................
                                            Applicant                                                                                  Date

                                     FOR USE BY CHEMISTRY/FOOD AND DRUGS DIVISION,
                                                  MINISTRY OF HEALTH

                A certificate is hereby granted to .........................................................................................................

                ...............................................................................................................................................................

                to prepare and process fish and fishery products for a period of ........................................................

                ...............................................................................................................................................................


                Dated this .................. day of .......................................................... 20......


                .......................................................................
                Chief Chemist/Director of Food and Drugs                                                  (Stamp)




                                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                          UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                               LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                                                             www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                                        Food and Drugs                                                     Chap. 30:01                               239
                                        Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                                                                               [Subsidiary]

                                                                 FORM B                                                                                    Regulation 8.

      CERTIFICATE OF ESTABLISHMENT FOR FISH AND
                   FISHERY PRODUCTS
                                          Food and Drugs Act, Chap. 30:01
                                        Fish and Fishery Products Regulations
These premises situate at ..............................................................................................................

.....................................................................................................................................................

and owned/leased by .....................................................................................................................

are licensed as from .......................................................................................................................
for a period of one year (from the date of issue hereof) for the preparation and processing of Fish
and Fishery Products and as prescribed by the Food and Drugs Regulations.



Licence No. ........................................................                         ...........................................................
                                                                                                          Minister of Health



This certificate must be prominently displayed.




                                                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                                                     L.R.O.

                                                     UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                                  LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                                                     www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

240              Chap. 30:01                                                 Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                                Fish and Fishery Products Regulations

                                                                       MINISTRY OF HEALTH
                                                    REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Regulations 10                                                                        FORM C
and 11.
                                                             Chemistry/Food and Drugs Division

                 APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO IMPORT/EXPORT FISH
                                                              Food and Drugs Act, Chap. 30:01
                                                           Fish and Fishery Products Regulations.
                 Name of Applicant ...............................................................................................................................
                                                                                    (Surname first, if a person)
                 Address of Applicant ...........................................................................................................................
                 ...............................................................................................................................................................
                 ...............................................................................................................................................................
                 NATURE OF BUSINESS: (Tick where appropriate)
                          IMPORTER                                                                     WHOLESALER
                          EXPORTER                                                                     RESEARCH
                          PROCESSOR                                                                    OTHER ......................
                 I/We ......................................................................................................................................................
                 ...............................................................................................................................................................
                 hereby apply to the Chemistry/Food and Drugs Division for a licence to import/export Fish and
                 Fishery Products in accordance with the Fish and Fishery Products Regulations, of the Food and
                 Drugs Act, Chap. 30:01.
                 NAME OF ESTABLISHMENT .........................................................................................................
                 ...............................................................................................................................................................
                 ...............................................................................................................................................................
                 The receipt for the prescribed fee of ...................................................................................................
                 ...................................................................... dollars is submitted with this application.

                 Signed ........................................................                            ...............................................................
                                         Applicant                                                                                     Date


                         FOR USE BY THE CHEMISTRY/FOOD AND DRUGS DIVISION
                 A licence is hereby granted to .............................................................................................................
                 ...............................................................................................................................................................
                 to import/export fish and fishery products for a period of .................................................................
                 Licence No. ..........................................
                 Dated this ...................... day of ....................................................................................... 20......

                                                                                                        ......................................................................
                                                                                                        Chief Chemist /Director of Food and Drugs



                                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                           UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                           LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                                      www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                                Food and Drugs                                          Chap. 30:01                          241
                                  Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                                                             [Subsidiary]

                                           MINISTRY OF HEALTH
                            REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
                                                        FORM D                                                                     Regulation 10.
                                   Chemistry/Food and Drugs Division
                                             FORM OF LICENCE

 LICENCE TO EXPORT FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
                                     Food and Drugs Act, Chap. 30:01
                                  Fish and Fishery Products Regulations.

A licence is hereby granted to ..............................................................................

to export fish and fishery products for a period of ..............................................

Dated this ........................ day of .......................................................... 20...........

CONDITIONS SUBJECT TO WHICH LICENCE IS GRANTED ...................

................................................................................................................................

................................................................................................................................

OTHER INFORMATION ....................................................................................

................................................................................................................................

LICENCE NO. ........................................


                                                                        ........................................................
                                                                                    Minister of Health




                                                          UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                                       L.R.O.

                                             UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                            LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                                               www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

242              Chap. 30:01                                      Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                                        Fish and Fishery Products Regulations

                                                            MINISTRY OF HEALTH
                                             REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

Regulation 11.                                                           FORM E
                                                    Chemistry/Food and Drugs Division
                                                              FORM OF LICENCE

                  LICENCE TO IMPORT FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
                                                      Food and Drugs Act, Chap. 30:01
                                                   Fish and Fishery Products Regulations.

                 A licence is hereby granted to ..............................................................................

                 to export fish and fishery products for a period of ..............................................

                 Dated this ........................ day of .......................................................... 20...........

                 CONDITIONS SUBJECT TO WHICH LICENCE IS GRANTED ...................

                 ................................................................................................................................

                 ................................................................................................................................

                 OTHER INFORMATION ....................................................................................

                 ................................................................................................................................

                 LICENCE NO. ........................................


                                                                                         ........................................................
                                                                                                     Minister of Health




                                                   UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                                      UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                     LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                                           www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                                     Food and Drugs                              Chap. 30:01                        243
                          Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                                         [Subsidiary]

                                SECOND SCHEDULE
                                           TABLE 1                                                     Regulation
                                                                                                       62(18)(a).
ACCEPTED LEVELS OF TRACE METALS, PESTICIDES
AND CHEMICALS FOR FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
        (Food and Drugs Regulations and Fish and Fishery Products Regulations
                         Food and Drugs Act, Chap. 30:01)
The following lists the maximum permitted or guideline levels for the presence of Trace Metals,
Pesticides and Chemicals in Fish and Fishery Products in Trinidad and Tobago:

Metal                                                                            Maximum Value
                                                                                     (ppm)
     1.   Lead             …          …          …           …           …             2.0
     2.   Copper           …          …          …           …           …            20.0
     3.   Zinc             …          …          …           …           …            50.0
     4.   Methyl Mercury
          (a) All Fish except predatory fish     …           …           …             0.5
          (b) Predatory fish (such as shark, swordfish, tuna, pike and others)         1.0

Pesticides
     5. Insecticides     …             …           …          …           …
        Organo Chlorides               …           …          …           …
        Organo Phosphates              …           …          …           …            0.1
        Carbamates                     …           …          …           …
     6. Herbicides       …             …           …          …           …            0.5
     7. PCB, PCT         …             …           …          …           …            0.5

Chemicals
     8. Sodium bisulphite—150 mg/kg sulphite for crustaceans
     9. Tripolyphosphate in flesh of frozen fish—5 g/kg
    10. The Total Volatile Basic Nitrogen—25–30 milligrams of
          Nitrogen/100 grams of flesh of fish depending on
           species type
    11. Histamine—100 ppm.

                                            TABLE 2                                                    Regulation
                                                                                                       62(18)(b).
The following is a list of microbiological tests and their respective maximum acceptable limits used
for assessment of fish and fishery products for use for human consumption:

                              Aerobic
                                             Faecal          Staph                          V
          Product           Plate Count                                   Salmonella
                                            Coliforms        aureus                      Cholerae*
                               per g

Fresh and frozen fish      5x105/g             10/g         1.0x103/g          0             0
Fresh and frozen           1x106/g             10/g         1.0x103/g         0/g            0
   crustaceans
Smoked fish including     l.0x105/g             4/g         1.0x103/g         0/gg           0
   kippered herring
Frozen cooked crustaceans 5.0x105/g            10/g         1.0x103/g         0/g            0




                                             UNOFFICIAL VERSION                                        L.R.O.

                                   UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                            www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

244            Chap. 30:01                     Food and Drugs
[Subsidiary]                          Fish and Fishery Products Regulations

                                           THIRD SCHEDULE

                          REQUIREMENTS RESPECTING QUALITY
                             MANAGEMENT PROGRAMMES
                     1. The quality management programme of an establishment shall
               include the keeping of the following information and documentation:
                            (a) the name and title of the person responsible for the quality
                                management programme at that establishment;
                            (b) for each applicable control point set out in clause 2—
                                    (i) a description of the standards and monitoring
                                        procedures that are used during inspections;
                                   (ii) the frequency of monitoring;
                                  (iii) samples of the forms that are used during inspections
                                        and of the forms that are used to record actions taken
                                        to correct deficiencies; and
                                  (iv) a description of the plans developed for correcting
                                        deficiencies and maintaining compliance with the
                                        prescribed Regulations;
                            (c) in respect of ingredients added to fish during processing—
                                    (i) a list of all of the ingredients that are added to the fish;
                                   (ii) a description of the procedures for the preparation and
                                        use of those ingredients that, if not prepared or used
                                        correctly, could taint the fish or render it
                                        unwholesome; and
                                  (iii) documentation that clearly establishes that each
                                        ingredient meets all applicable requirements of Acts
                                        of Parliament and Regulations made thereunder, or the
                                        results of any tests done by or for the operator of the
                                        establishment that verify that the ingredient complies
                                        with those requirements;
                            (d) in respect of the packaging materials that are used to package
                                fish—
                                    (i) a list of all of the packaging materials; and
                                   (ii) documentation that clearly establishes that the
                                        packaging materials meet the requirements of
                                        prescribed Regulations;
                            (e) in respect of labels used on packaged fish, a description of the
                                approval process in the establishment with respect to labels;


                                     UNOFFICIAL VERSION

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
                 LAWS OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
MINISTRY OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND LEGAL AFFAIRS                          www.legalaffairs.gov.tt

                              Food and Drugs                      Chap. 30:01                 245
                     Fish and Fishery Products Regulations                            [Subsidiary]

              (f) in respect of all compounds used in the cleaning, sanitizing,
                  lubricating and maintenance of equipment and plant facilities
                  and in pest control:
                     (i) a list of the compounds that are used in the
                         establishment; and
                    (ii) documentation that clearly establishes that the
                         compounds have been approved by an agency of the
                         Government of Trinidad and Tobago for use in food
                         processing establishments;
             (g) in respect of fish shipped from the establishment, a description
                  of the system used to trace fish to their first destination;
             (h) in respect of retort operations, a description of the training of
                  the persons who supervise those operations; and
                     (i) in respect of general operations a written
                         documentation of good manufacturing practices and
                         sanitary standard operating procedures approved by
                         the competent authority.
          2. For the purposes of this Schedule, a control point is any one of
the following stages in the processing of fish at which the operator of an
establishment determines compliance with the prescribed Regulations:
             (a) the inspection of fish arriving at the establishment for
                  processing;
             (b) the inspection of ingredients prior to their addition to fish;
             (c) the inspection of fish packaging material prior to its use;
             (d) the inspection of labels prior to their application onto
                  packaged fish;
             (e) the inspection of cleaning agents, sanitizers, lubricants and
                  pesticides prior to use in the establishment;
              (f) the inspection of the construction and maintenance of
                  production facilities and processing equipment;
             (g) the inspection of the fish canning process;
             (h) the inspection of the retort operations;
              (i) the inspection of the cold storage of fish;
              (j) the inspection of any other process or operation in the
                  establishment; and
             (k) the inspection of fish prior to shipment from the establishment.




                                    UNOFFICIAL VERSION                               L.R.O.

                            UPDATED TO 31ST DECEMBER 2016
