24.

25.

26.

27,

(1) All deeds, instruments, contracts and other documents shall be duly executed by or on behalf
of the Service if sealed with the seal of the Service and a by the Director-General or any
other person not below the rank of a Director appointed by the Board for that purpose.

(2) A deed, instrument, contract or other document executed in accordance with subsection (1)
shall, subject to any objection that may be taken thereto on any round other than that of

competence of the party executing the same on behalf of the Service, be effectual in law to
bind the Service and its successors and may be varied or discharged in like manner as that in
which it was executed.

(1) No suit shall be instituted against the Service or its employees unless it is commenced:
(a) within three months after the act, neglect or default complained of; and

(b) in the case of continuation of damage or injury, within six months after
the damage or injury ceases.

(2) No suit shall commence against the Board, Director-General or any employee of the Service
before the expiration of a period of one month, after written notice of intention to commence
the suit shall have been served on the Service by the intending plaintiff or his agent.

(3) The notice referred to in subsection (2) shall clearly state the:

(a) cause of action;

(b) particulars of the claim;

(c) name and place of abode of the intending plantiff; and
(d) the relief which he claims.

The notice or other documents required or authorised to be served on the Service under this Act
or any other law may be served by:

(a) delivering the same to the office of the Director-General; or

(b) sending it by registered post addressed to the Director-General at the
Head Office of the Service.

In this Act:

*agricultural economy” means the relationship between agricultural production, trade and the
derivable revenue for the benefit of the country;

“authorised officer” means a quarantine inspector in the pre-entry and post-entry border post of
the Service;

"Board" means the Governing Board of the Service established by section 2 (1) of this Act;
"Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board;

"Director-General" means the Chief Executive of the Service and Chairman of the Management
Committee;

"Functions" includes powers and duties;

"Fund" means the account established under section 12 (1) of this Act;

‘International Conventions, Agreements and International Or; anisations’’ under this Act
includes the World Animal Health Organisation, International Plant Protection Convention,

Codex, Alimentations, Sanitary and Phytosanitary, International Office of Epizootics and the
World Trade Organisation;

Execution of
deeds.

Limitation of
suits against the
Service.

Service of
documents.

Interpretation.
