21.

22.

23.

(m) conduct ig ope and animal diseases surveillance of trade animals
which shall be accompanied with veterinary movement and loading
permit at the inter-state veterinary control posts; and

(n) exercise such other powers as the Service may delegate to the
authorised officer for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

It is an offence to:

(a) grow, rear, possess, sell, offer for sale, transport or distribute in =
manner any plant, plant product, animal, animal product, fish, fis
product or regulated article knowing them to be imported into Nigeria
contrary to this Act;

(b) assault, resist, threaten or wilfully obstruct any authorised officer from
exercising his lawful function under this Act;

(c) en to comply with any order or directive lawfully made or given under
this Act;

(d) import any plant, plant product, animal, animal product, fish, fish
product or regulated articles contrary to any requirements prescribed
under this Act;

(e) fail to allow a search or inspection authorised under this Act;

(f) knowingly or recklessly _— information which is false for the
purpose of obtaining any document under this Act; or

(g) alter, forge, deface or destroy any document issued under this Act.
(1) Any person who commits an offence under section 21 of this Act is:

(a) on a first conviction, liable to a term of imprisonment for one year or a
fine of 100% of the market value of the plants, plant products, animal
and animal products, aquatic resources and its products or regulated
articles or to both fine and imprisonment; and

(b) on a second conviction, liable to a term of imprisonment for a term of
two years or a fine of 200% of the market value of the Puts, lant
products, animal and animal products, aquatic resources and its products
or regulated articles or to both fine and imprisonment.

(2) In addition, in the case of a second summary conviction, the Service may suspend the rights
Ha the person temporarily to import as well as to carry on any activity accredited by the
ervice. *

(3) In all cases, all plants, plant products, animal and animal products, aquatic resources and its
products or regulated articles imported into Nigeria in contravention of this Act, rules, orders
or regulations made under this Act shall be subject to reshipment, confiscation and
destruction at owner’s cost.

PART VI - LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

A member, the Director-General or any employee of the Service shall be indemnified out of the
asset of the Service against any liability incurred by him in defending any proceeding, whether
civil or criminal, if such proceeding is brought against him in his capacity as a member, Director
General or employee of the Service.

Offences.

Penalties.

Indemnity.
