NATIONAL AGENCY FOR FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
AND CONTROL ACT Cap N.1 LFN 2004



ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

PART I

Establishment of the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and

Control and its Governing Council

1.    Establishment of the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration
      and Control.

2.    Establishment of the Governing Council.

3.    Tenure of office.

4.    Removal from office of members of the Council.

PART II

Functions and powers

5.    Functions of the Agency.

6.    Functions of the Council.

7.    Powers of the Council.

PART III

Structure of the Agency

8.    Structure of the Agency.

PART IV

Staff of the Agency
9.    Appointment of Director-General and other staff of the Agency.

10.   Pension.
11.   Removal and discipline of senior staff.

12.   Discipline of junior staff.

PART V

Financial provisions

13.   Fund of the Agency.

14.   Expenditure of the Agency.

15.   Exemption from income tax.

16.   Capital production income.

17.   Disposal of surplus funds.

18.   Annual estimates.

19.   Accounts and audit.

20.   Annual report.

PART VI

Miscellaneous

21.   Offices and premises.

22.   Power to borrow.

23.   Power to accept gifts.

24.   Power to enter the premises, etc.

25.   Offences.

26.   Conduct of proceedings.

27.   Legal proceedings.

28.   Power of Minister to give directives.

29.   Dissolution of Food and Drug Administration and Control Department.
30.   Power to make regulations.

31.   Interpretation.

32.   Short title.

SCHEDULES

FIRST SCHEDULE

Supplementary provisions relating to the Council and the Agency

SECOND SCHEDULE

Transitional provisions relating to the employees, assets and liabilities of the
Food and Drugs Administration and Control Department of the Federal
Ministry of Health



NATIONAL AGENCY FOR FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
AND CONTROL ACT

An Act to establish the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control with the functions, among others, to regulate and control the
importation, exportation, manufacture, advertisement, distribution, sale and use
of food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and chemicals.

[1st October, 1992] [Commencement.]

PART 1

Establishment of the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control and its Governing Council

1.    Establishment of the National Agency for Food and Drug
      Administration and Control

There is hereby established a body to be known as the National Agency for
Food and Drug Administration and Control (in this Act referred to as "the
Agency") which-

(a)   shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal;
      and
(b)   may sue and be sued in its corporate name.

2.    Establishment of the Governing Council
(1)   There is hereby established for the Agency, a Governing Council which
      shall consist of-

(a)   a chairman who shall be appointed by the President on the
      recommendation of the Minister;
(b)   the Permanent Secretary of the Federal Ministry of Health or his
      representative;
(c)   the Director and Chief Executive of the National Institute for
      Pharmaceutical Research and Development or his representative;

(d)   the Director-General of the Standards Organisation of Nigeria or his
      representative;
(e)   the chairman of the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency or his
      representative;

(f)   the chairman of the Pharmacists Board of Nigeria or his representative;
(g)   one person to represent the Pharmaceutical Group of the Manufacturers
      Association of Nigeria;

(h)   one person to represent the Food Beverages Group of the Manufacturers
      Association of Nigeria;
(i)   the Director-General of the Agency; and

(j)   three other persons to represent public interest to be appointed by the
      Minister.
(2)   A member of the Council, other than the chairman, shall be appointed by
      the Minister on the recommendation of the body, if any, he represents.

(3)   The members of the Council shall be paid such allowances as the Federal
      Government may, from time to time, approve.

(4)   The provisions of the First Schedule to this Act shall have effect with
      respect to the proceedings of the Council and the other matters mentioned
      therein.

3.    Tenure of office
(1)   A member of the Council appointed, otherwise than by office, shall hold
      office for a term of four years, and subject to the provisions of subsection
      (2) of this section, shall be eligible for reappointment for only one further
      term of four years.

(2)   The office of a member of the Council shall become vacant if-

(a)   he resigns as a member of the Council by notice in writing under his hand
      ad- dressed to the Minister; or

(b)   the Minister is satisfied that it is not in the interest of the Agency for the
      per- son appointed to continue in office and notifies the member in
      writing to that effect

4.    Removal from office of members of the Council
(1)   If it appears to the Council that a member of the Council, other than an
      ex-officio member, should be removed from office on the grounds of
      misconduct or inability to perform the functions of his office, the Council
      shall make a recommendation to the President
(2)   If the President, after making such inquiries as he considers necessary,
      approves the recommendation, the Minister shall, in writing, declare the
      office of such a member vacant
(3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, the
      President may remove any member of the Council if he is satisfied that it
      is in the public interest so to do.

PART II
Functions and powers

5.    Functions of the Agency
The Agency shall have the following functions, that is, to-
(a)   regulate and control the importation, exportation, manufacture,
      advertisement, distribution, sale and use of food, drugs, cosmetics,
      medical devices, bottled water and chemicals;
(b)   conduct appropriate tests and ensure compliance with standard
      specifications designated and approved by the Council for the effective
      control of the quality of food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled
      water and chemicals and their raw materials as well as their production
      processes in factories and other establishments;
(c)   undertake appropriate investigations into the production premises and raw
      materials for food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and
      chemicals and establish relevant quality assurance systems, including
      certificates of the production sites and of the regulated products;

(d)   undertake inspection of imported food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices,
      bottled water and chemicals and establish relevant quality assurance
      systems, including certification of the production sites and of the
      regulated products;

(e)   compile standard specifications and guidelines for the production,
      importation, exportation, sale and distribution of food, drug, cosmetics,
      medical devices, bottled water and chemicals;

(f)   undertake the registration of food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices,
      bottled water and chemicals;

(g)   control the exportation and issue quality certification of food, drugs,
      cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and chemicals intended for
      export;
(h)   establish and maintain relevant laboratories or other institutions in
      strategic areas of Nigeria as may be necessary for the performance of its
      functions under this Act;
(i)   pronounce on the quality and safety of food, drugs, cosmetics, medical
      devices, bottled water and chemicals after appropriate analysis;

(j)   undertake measures to ensure that the use of narcotic drugs and
      psychotropic substances are limited to medical and scientific purposes;

(k)   grant authorisation for the import and export of narcotic drugs and
      psycho- tropic substances as well as other controlled substances;

(l)   collaborate with the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency in
      measures to eradicate drug abuse in Nigeria;

(m)   advise Federal, State and local governments, the private sector and other
      interested bodies regarding the quality, safety, and regulatory provisions
      on food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and chemicals;

(n)   undertake and co-ordinate research programmes on the storage,
      adulteration, distribution and rational use of food, drugs, cosmetics,
      medical devices, bottled water and chemicals;
(o)   issue guidelines on, approve and monitor the advertisement of food,
      drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and chemicals;

(p)   compile and publish relevant data resulting from the performance of the
      functions of the Agency under this Act or from other sources;

(q)   sponsor such national and international conferences as it may consider
      appropriate;

(r)   liaise with relevant establishments within and outside Nigeria in
      pursuance of the functions of the Agency;

(s)   determine the suitability or otherwise of medicines, drugs, food products,
      cosmetics, medical devices or chemicals for human and animal use; and

(t)   carry out such activities as are necessary or expedient for the performance
      of its functions under this Act.
6.    Functions of the Council
The Council shall-

(a)   advise the Federal Government generally on the national policies on the
      control and quality specifications of food, drugs, cosmetics, medical
      devices, bottled water and chemicals;

(b)   designate, establish and approve quality specifications in respect of food,
      drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and chemicals, necessary
      for their certification;
(c)   establish the relevant guidelines and measures for quality control of food,
      drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and chemicals in
      conformity with the Agency's standard specifications;

(d)   appoint, promote and discipline employees necessary for the proper
      discharge of the functions of the Agency;

(e)   establish committees as may be expedient which shall be charged with
      specific functions delegated by the Council;
(j)   establish appropriate programmes for the quality, safety and rational use
      of the food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and
      chemicals;
(g)   encourage and promote activities related to this process, standard
      specifications, guidelines on importation, exportation, sale and
      distribution of food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water and
      chemicals;

(h)   utilise and promote the expansion of research, experiments, surveys and
      studies by public or private agencies, institutions and organisations
      concerning the quality, safety and use of food, drug, cosmetics, medical
      devices, bottled water and chemicals and such other matters related to this
      Act as the Agency may, from time to time, determine as necessary or
      useful;

(i)   establish, encourage and promote training programmes for the employees
      of the Agency and other appropriate persons from public or private
      organisations; and

(j)   carry out such other activities which are connected with its other
      functions.

7.    Powers of the Council
The Council shall have power-
(a)   to open and operate ordinary and domiciliary accounts for the Agency in
      recognised banking institutions in Nigeria;

(b)   subject to section 8 of this Act, to specify the management system of the
      Agency, including financial approval ceilings for officers of the agency;
(c)   to enter into agreement with public or private organisations and
      individuals to develop, utilise, co-ordinate and share such information as
      is determined to be appropriate by the Council for the performance of its
      functions under this Act; and

(d)   to do such other things as are necessary for the successful performance of
      its functions under this Act.



PART III

Structure of the Agency

8.    Structure of the Agency The Agency shall have-

(a)   an Administration and Finance Directorate to be headed by a Director,
      who shall serve as the secretary of the Agency;
(b)   a Planning, Research and Statistics Directorate to be headed by a
      Director;

(c)   a Narcotics and Controlled Substances Directorate to be headed by a
      Director;

(d)   a Regulatory and Registration Directorate to be headed by a Director;

(e)   an Inspectorate Directorate to be headed by a Director;
(j)   a Laboratory Services Directorate to be headed by a Director; and

(g)   such other Directorates as may be required for the proper performance of
      the functions of the Agency.

PART IV Staff of the Agency

9.    Appointment of Director-General and other staff of the Agency
(1)   There shall be appointed for the Agency by the President, on the
      recommendation of the Minister, a Director-General who shall be a
      person with good knowledge of pharmacy, food and drugs.
(2)   The Director-General shall be-

(a)   the chief executive of the Agency;
(b)   responsible for the day-to-day administration of the Agency and keep the
      books and records of the Agency; and
(c)   subject to the supervision and control of the chairman and the Council.

(3)   The Director-General shall hold office for a period of five years on such
      terms and conditions as may be specified in his letter of appointment and
      be eligible for re- appointment for another period of five years.

(4)   The Council may, from time to time, appoint such other persons as
      members of staff of the Agency as it may deem necessary, to assist the
      Agency in the performance of its functions under this Act.
(5)   The members of staff of the Agency appointed under subsection (4) of
      this section shall be appointed on such terms and conditions of service as
      the Council may, after consultation with the Federal Civil Service
      Commissions determine.

(6)   The members of staff of the Agency shall be public officers as defined in
      the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999.
10.    Pension
(1)    Service in the Agency shall be approved service for the purpose of the
       Pensions Act and, accordingly, officers and other persons employed in
       the Agency shall be entitled to pensions, gratuity and other benefits as are
       prescribed thereunder.

(2)    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, the
       Agency may appoint a person to any office on terms which preclude the
       grant of a pension, gratuity or other retirement benefits in respect of that
       office.

power exercisable thereunder by a Minister or other authority of the
Government of the Federation, other than the power to make regulations under
section 23 thereof, is hereby vested in and shall be exercisable by the Agency
and not by any other person or authority.

11.    Removal and discipline of senior staff
(1)    If it appears to the Council that there are reasons for believing that any
       person employed as a member of the senior staff of the Agency, other
       than the Director-General, should be removed from office on grounds of
       misconduct or inability to perform the functions of his office, the Council
       shall-
(a)    give notice of those reasons to the person concerned;
(b)    afford the person an opportunity of making representation on the matter
       to the Council in person;

(c)    if the person concerned or any three members of the Council so request
       within the period of one month beginning with the date of the notice,
       make arrangement-

(i)    for a committee of the Council to investigate the matter and to report on it
       to the Council; and

(ii)   for the person in question to be afforded an opportunity of appearing
       before and being heard by the investigating committee on the matter.

(2)    If the Council, after considering the report of the investigating committee,
       is satisfied that the person in question should be removed as aforesaid, the
       Council may remove the person concerned by an instrument in writing
       signed on the direction of the Council.
(3)   The Director-General of the Agency may, in a case of misconduct by a
      member of staff which in the opinion of the Director-General is
      prejudicial to the interest of the Council, suspend such member of staff
      and any such suspension shall forthwith be re- ported to the Council.

(4)   For good cause, any member of staff may be suspended from office or his
      appointment may be terminated by the Council and for the purposes of
      this subsection, "good cause" means-
(a)   any physical or mental incapacity which the Council, after obtaining
      medical advice, considers to render the person concerned unfit for the
      discharge of the functions of his office; or

(b)   conduct of a scandalous or other disgraceful nature which the Council
      considers to be such as to render the person concerned unfit to continue to
      hold his office; or

(c)   conduct which the Council considers to be such as to constitute failure or
      in- ability of the person concerned to discharge the functions of his office
      or to comply with the terms and condition of his service.
(5)   Any person suspended pursuant to this section shall be placed on half pay
      and the Council shall before the expiration of a period of three months
      after the date of such suspension consider the case against that person and
      come to a decision as to-
(a)   whether to continue such person's suspension and if so on what terms
      (including the portion of his emoluments to be paid to him); or
(b)   whether to reinstate such person to his office, in which case the Council
      shall restore his full emoluments to him with effect from the date of the
      suspension; or
(c)   whether to terminate the appointment of the person in question in which
      case such a person shall not be entitled to the portion of his emolument
      withheld during the period of the suspension; or

(d)   whether to take such lesser disciplinary action against such person
      (including the restoration of such portion of his emolument that might
      have been with- held) as the Council may determine.

(6)   In any case where the Council, pursuant to this section, decides to
      continue a per- son's suspension or decides to take further disciplinary
      action against a person, the Council shall, before the expiration of a
      period of three months from such decision, come to a final determination
      in respect of the case concerning that person.

(7)   It shall be the duty of any person who signed the instrument of removal
      by virtue of this section to serve or cause to be served on the person
      concerned, a copy of the instrument.

(8)   Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall prevent the
      Council from making such regulations for the discipline of other
      categories of staff and workers of the Council as it may think fit.

12.   Discipline of junior staff
(1)   If any junior member of the staff is accused of misconduct or
      inefficiency, the Di- rector-General may suspend him for not more than
      three months and forthwith shall direct the matter to the Junior Staff
      Appointment and Promotion Committee to-
(a)   consider the case; and
(b)   make recommendation as to the appropriate action to be taken by the
      Director- General.
(2)   In all cases under this section, the junior member of the staff shall be
      informed in writing of the charges against him and be given reasonable
      opportunity to defend himself.
(3)   The Director-General may, after considering the recommendation made
      pursuant to subsection (1) (b) of this section, dismiss, terminate, retire or
      downgrade the junior members of the staff concerned.

(4)   Any person aggrieved by the Director-General's decision under
      subsection (3) of this section may, within a period of 21 days from the
      date of receipt of the letter communicating the decision to him, address a
      petition to the Council to reconsider his case and the Council's decision
      thereon shall be final.

PART V
Financial provisions

13.   Fund of the Agency
(1)   The Agency shall establish a fund from which shall be defrayed all
      expenditure incurred by the Agency for the purposes of this Act.
(2)   There shall be paid and credited to the fund of the Agency-

(a)   fees charged for services rendered by the Agency;
(b)   all sums accruing to the Agency by way of gifts, endowments, bequests
      or other voluntary contributions by persons and organisations;

(c)   foreign aid and assistance from bilateral agencies; and

(d)   subventions and      extra-budgetary    allocations    from      the    Federal
      Government.

14.   Expenditure of the Agency
The Agency shall, from time to time, apply the funds at its disposal to-

(a)   the cost of establishing and maintaining the head office of the Agency at
      the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja and its other offices located in other
      places in Nigeria;
(b)   pay allowances and other benefits of members of the Council and of its
      committee;
(c)   pay the emoluments and entitlement of the Director-General and other
      members of staff of the Agency;
(d)   pay the personnel, overhead, allowances,              benefits    and     other
      administrative costs of the Agency;
(e)   the training of members of staff of the Agency;

(f)   provide scholarship and awards for specialised training of personnel;

(g)   publicise and promote the activities of the Agency;
(h)   support national and international scientific and professional
      organisations and pay annual and other contributions to such bodies;

(i)   undertake any other activity in connection with all or any of the functions
      of the Agency.

15.   Exemption from income tax

All income derived by the Agency from the sources specified in section 13 (2)
of this Act shall be exempt from income tax and all contributions to the fund of
the Agency shall be tax deductible.
16.   Capital production income

Subject to the approval of the Minister, the Agency may invest in the profitable
production of capital goods by joint-venture, partnership, shareholding or as
sole proprietor, as the case may be, and the net incomes so generated shall be
paid into the fund of the Agency.

17.   Disposal of surplus funds

The Council may invest any surplus funds in profit yielding ventures, and
notwithstanding that power, the Minister may issue to the Agency directives as
he may think necessary as to the disposal of any surplus funds of the Agency.

18.   Annual estimates

The Council shall submit to the Minister, not later than 31 October each year, its
programme of work and estimates of its income and expenditure for the
following year.

19.   Accounts and audit
(1)   The Council shall keep proper accounts of the Agency and proper records
      in relation to those accounts.
(2)   The accounts of the Agency shall be audited, not later than six months
      after the end of the year to which it relates, by auditors appointed by the
      Agency from the list and in accordance with the guidelines supplied by
      the Auditor-General for the Federation.

20.   Annual report

The Agency shall prepare and submit to the Minister, not later than 30 June in
each year, a report on the activities of the Agency during the immediately
proceeding year, and shall include in such report a copy of the audited accounts
of the Agency for that year and the auditor's report thereon.

PART VI

Miscellaneous

21.   Offices and premises
(1)   For the purpose of providing offices and premises necessary for the
      performance of its functions, the Agency may, subject to the Land Use
      Act-
(a)   purchase or take on lease any interest in land, building or property; and

(b)   build, equip and maintain offices and premises.
(2)   The Agency may, subject to the Land Use Act, sell or lease out any office
      or premises held by it, which is no longer required for the performance of
      its functions under this Act.

22.   Power to borrow
(1)   The Agency may, from time to time, borrow by overdraft or otherwise
      such sums as it may require for the performance of its functions under
      this Act.
(2)   The Agency shall not, without the approval of the Minister, borrow
      money which exceeds, at any time, the limit set by the Minister.

(3)   Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, where the sum to be
      borrowed is in foreign currency the Agency shall not borrow the sum
      without the prior approval of the Minister.

23.   Power to accept gifts
(1)   The Agency may accept gifts of land, money or other property, upon such
      terms and conditions, if any, as may be specified by the person or
      organisation making the gift.
(2)   The Agency shall not accept any gifts if the conditions attached by the
      person or organisation making the gift are inconsistent with the functions
      of the Agency.

24.   Power to enter the premises, etc.
(1)   An officer of the Agency may, in the course of his duty, at any reasonable
      time and on production of his certificate of designation if so required-

(a)   enter (if need be by force) any premises in which he reasonably believes
      that any article to which this Act or the regulations apply is
      manufactured, pre- pared, preserved, packaged, stored or sold;
(b)   examine any article in the premises which appears to him to be an article
      to which this Act or the regulations apply or anything in the premises
      which he reasonably believes is used or is capable of being used for the
      manufacture, preparation, preservation, packaging, storage or sale of any
      such article;
(c)   take a sample or specimen of any article to which this Act or the
      regulations apply or which he has power to examine under paragraph (b)
      of this subsection;
(d)   open and examine, while on the premises, any container or package
      which he reasonably believes may contain anything to which this Act or
      the regulations apply or which may help in his investigations;

(e)   examine any book, document or other record found on the premises
      which he reasonably believes may contain any information relevant to the
      enforcement of this Act or the regulations and make copies thereof or
      extracts therefrom; and

(j)   seize and detain for such time as may be necessary for the purpose of this
      Act, any article by means of or in relation to which he reasonably
      believes any pro- vision of this Act or regulations has been contravened.

(2)   The owner or person in charge of any premises entered by an officer of
      the Agency in pursuant of this section, and every person found thereon,
      shall give all reasonable assistance in their power to the officer and shall
      make available to the officer all such information as the officer may
      reasonably require for the purposes of this Act.

(3)   Any article seized under this Act shall be kept or stored in such a place as
      the officer of the Agency may direct and shall be returned to the owner or
      the person from whom it was seized if the article upon analysis or
      examination is found to conform with the requirements of this Act and
      regulations.

(4)   Any article seized by an officer of the Agency pursuant to this Act or the
      regulations may be submitted to an analyst for analysis or examination
      and the analyst upon making such analysis or examination shall issue a
      certificate or report in the prescribed form setting forth the result of such
      analysis or examination, and the officer of the Agency shall on demand
      deliver a copy of such certificate or report to the owner of the article if
      the article is to be the subject of a proceeding under this Act.

(5)   In this section, the expression "article to which this Act or the
      regulations apply" means-

(a)   any food, drug, cosmetics, medical devices, bottled water or chemical;

(b)   anything used for the manufacture, preparation, preservation, packaging
      or storage of any food, drug, cosmetics, medical device, bottled water or
      chemical; and
(c)   any labelling or advertising material relating to or for use in connection
      with any food, drug, cosmetics, medical device, bottled water or
      chemical, but does not include a live animal.

25.   Offences
(1)   A person who obstructs an officer of the Agency in the performance of
      his duties under section 24 of this Act shall be guilty of an offence and
      liable on conviction to a fine of N5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not
      exceeding two years or to both such fine and imprisonment.

(2)   Any person who contravenes the provisions of any regulations made
      under this Act is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to the
      penalties specified in the regulations.
(3)   Where no penalty has been specified, the person shall be liable to a fine
      of N50, 000 or imprisonment for a term of one year or to both such fine
      and imprisonment.
(4)   Where an offence under this Act which has been committed by a body
      corporate is proved to have been committed with the consent or
      connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of any
      director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate
      or any person purporting to act in any of those capacities, he, as well as
      the body corporate, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
      be liable on conviction to a fine of N 100,000.
(5)   The Federal High Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to try offences
      under this Act.

26.   Conduct of proceedings
(1)   Subject to the provisions of section 174 of the Constitution of the Federal
      Republic of Nigeria 1999 (which relates to the power of the Attorney-
      General of the Federation to institute, continue or discontinue criminal
      proceedings against any person in a court of law), any officer of the
      Agency may, with the consent of the Attorney-General of the Federation,
      conduct criminal proceedings in respect of offences under this Act or
      regulations made under this Act.

(2)   In a judicial proceeding for an offence under this Act or any regulation
      made under it, the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Act or depending
      on the venue, the Criminal Procedure Code shall, with such modifications
      as the circumstance may require, apply in respect of such matter to the
      same extent as they apply to the trial of offences generally.
27.   Legal proceedings
(1)   No suit shall be commenced against the Agency before the expiration of a
      period of one month after written notice of intention to commence the suit
      shall have been served on the Agency by the intending plaintiff or his
      agent and the notice clearly and explicitly states-

(a)   the cause of action;
(b)   the particulars of the claim;

(c)   the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff; and

(d)   the relief which he claims.
(2)   The notice referred to in subsection (1) of this section and any summons,
      notice or other document required or authorised to be served on the
      Agency under the provisions of this Act or any other enactment or law,
      may be served by-
(a)   delivering the same to the Director-General; or

(b)   sending it by registered post addressed to the Director-General at the head
      office of the Agency.
(3)   In any action or suit against the Agency, no execution or attachment or
      process in the nature thereof shall be issued against the Agency, but any
      sums of money which may, by the judgment of the court, be awarded
      against the Agency shall, subject to any directives given by the Agency,
      be paid from the fund of the Agency.

28.   Power of Minister to give directives

The Minister may give directives of a general or special character to the Agency
relating to the performance by the Agency of any or all of its functions under
this Act, and it shall be the duty of the Agency to comply and give effect to the
directives.

29.   Dissolution of Food and Drug Administration and Control
      Department
(1)   On the commencement of this Act, the Food and Drug Administration
      and Control Department of the Federal Ministry of Health (in this section
      referred to as "the Department") shall cease to exist.
(2)   Accordingly, the Department is hereby dissolved and the provision of the
      Second Schedule to this Act shall apply in relation to the employees in
      the Department, the assets and liabilities of the Department and the other
      matters connected with the Department set out therein.

30.   Power to make regulations
The Council may, with the approval of the Minister, make regulations-
(a)   to prescribe the methodologies for private sector payments into the fund
      of the Agency;
(b)   to prescribe the fees to be paid for services rendered by the Agency;

(c)   generally for the purposes of carrying out or giving full effect to the
      provisions of this Act

31.   Interpretation
In this Act-

"Agency" means the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control established by section 1 of this Act;

"Council" means the Governing Council of the Agency established by section 2
of this Act;

"cosmetic" includes any substance or mixture of substance intended to be
rubbed, poured, sprinkled or sprayed, introduced into or otherwise applied to the
human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting
attractiveness or altering the complexion, skin, hair or teeth and includes
deodorants and detergent powder;

"chairman" means the chairman of the Council;

"detergent powder" means a cleansing agent in powder or granulated form
used primarily for laundry purposes which-

(a)   contains suitable ionic and non-ionic surface-active agent; and

(b)   is produced from either sulphornation of suitable hydrocarbon or the
      sulphornation of various hydroxyl compounds;

"drug" includes any substance of vegetable, animal or mineral origin or any
preparation or admixture thereof manufactured, sold or advertised for use in-
(a)   the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease,
      disorder, abnormal physical state or the symptom thereof, in man or
      animal;
(b)   restoring, correcting or modifying organic functions in man or in animal;

(c)   disinfection or the control of vermin, insects or pests; or

(d)   contraception;

"medical device" means any instrument, apparatus or contrivance (including
components, parts and accessories thereof) manufactured, sold or advertised for
internal or external use in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of
any disease, disorder, abnormal physical state or the symptom thereof, in man
or in animal;

"member" means a member of the Council and includes the chairman;

"Minister" means the Minister charged with matters relating to health;

"President" means the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria;

"public service" has the meaning assigned to it in the Constitution of the
Federal Re- public of Nigeria 1999; and

"regulated products" means food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices,
detergents bottled water and chemicals.

32.   Short title

This Act may be cited as the National Agency for Food and Drug
Administration and Control Act.

SCHEDULES

FIRST SCHEDULE [Section 2 (4).]

Supplementary provisions relating to the Council and the Agency

Proceedings of the Council

1.    Subject to this Act and section 27 of the Interpretation Act, the Council
      may make standing orders regulating the proceedings of the Council and
      any committee thereof.
2.    Every meeting of the Council shall be presided over by the chairman and
      if the chairman is unable to attend a particular meeting, the members
      present at the meeting shall elect one of their number to preside at the
      meeting.

3.    The quorum at a meeting of the Council shall consist of the chairman (or
      in an appropriate case, the person presiding at the meeting pursuant to
      paragraph 2 of this Schedule) and six other members.
4.    The Council may on any special occasion, co-opt any person to be
      member of the Council for as many meetings as it may deem necessary,
      and that person while so co-opted shall have all the rights and privileges
      of a member, except that he shall not be entitled to vote or count towards
      a quorum.
Committees

5.    (1) Subject to its standing orders, the Council may appoint such
      number of standing and ad hoc committees as it thinks fit to consider and
      report on any matter with which the Agency is concerned.
(2)   Every committee appointed under the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of
      this paragraph shall be presided over by a member of the Council and
      shall be made up of such number of persons, not necessarily members of
      the Council, as the Council may determine in each case.
6.    The decision of a committee shall be of no effect until it is confirmed by
      the Agency.
Miscellaneous

7.    The fixing of the seal of the Agency shall be authenticated by the
      signature of the chairman and of the Director-General of the Agency or
      such other member authorised generally or specially by the Council to act
      for that purpose.

8.    Any contract or instrument, which, if made by a person not being a body
      corporate, would not be required to be under seal, may be made or
      executed on behalf of the Agency by the Director-General or by any other
      person authorised generally or specifically by the Council to act for that
      purpose.

9.    Any document purporting to be a contract, an instrument or other
      document signed or sealed on behalf of the Agency shall be received in
      evidence and, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed without further
      proof, to have been so signed or sealed.

10.   The validity of a proceeding of the Council or of a committee thereof
      shall not be adversely affected-

(a)   by any vacancy in the membership of the Council; or

(b)   by any defect in the appointment of a member of the Council; or
(c)   by reason that a person not entitled to do so took part in the proceeding.

11.   A member of the Council or committee who has a personal interest in any
      contract or arrangement entered into or proposed to be considered by the
      Council or committee shall forthwith disclose his interest to the Council
      or committee and shall not vote on any question relating to the contract or
      arrangement.
SECOND SCHEDULE [Section 29 (2).]

Transitional provisions relating to the employees, assets and liabilities of the
Food and

Drugs Administration and Control Department of the Federal Ministry of
Health
1.    By virtue of this Act, there shall be vested in the Agency immediately at
      the commencement of this Act, without further assurance, all assets,
      funds, resources and other movable or immovable property which
      immediately before the commencement of this Act were vested in the
      Food and Drugs Administration and Control Department of the Federal
      Ministry of Health (in this Schedule referred to as "the Department").

2.    As from the commencement of this Act-
(a)   all rights, interests, obligations and liabilities of the Department existing
      immediately before the commencement of this Act under any contract or
      instrument, or at law or in equity apart from any contract or instrument,
      shall by virtue of this Act be assigned to and vested in the Agency;

(b)   any contract or instrument as mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) of this
      paragraph shall be of the same force and effect against or in favour of the
      Agency and shall be enforceable as fully and effectively as if, instead of
      the Department, the Agency has been named therein or had been a part
      thereto; and
(c)   the Agency shall be subject to all obligations and liabilities to which the
      department was subject immediately before the commencement of this
      Act, and all other persons shall as from the commencement of this Act
      have the same rights, powers and remedies against the Agency as they
      had against the Department immediately before the commencement of
      this Act.

3.    Any proceeding or cause of action pending or existing immediately
      before the commencement of this Act by or against the Department in
      respect of any right, interest, obligation or liability of the Department
      may be commenced, continued or enforced by or against the Agency as if
      this Act had not been made.

4.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act but subject to such directions
      as may be issued by the Agency, any person who immediately before the
      date of commencement of this Act held office in the Department shall be
      deemed to have been transferred to the Agency on terms and conditions
      not less favourable than those obtaining immediately before the
      commencement of this Act, and service under the Department shall be
      deemed to be service under the Agency for purposes of pension.
5.    The Minister, if he thinks fit, may, within the twelve months after the
      commencement of this Act by order published in the Gazette, make
      additional or saving provisions for the better carrying out of the
      objectives of this Schedule.

CHAPTER N1

NATIONAL AGENCY FOR FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION AND
CONTROL ACT

SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION

List of Subsidiary Legislation

1.    National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control Tariff
      Charges Regulations.

2.    Drug Products Advertisement Regulations.
3.    Pre-Packaged Food (Labelling) Regulations.

4.    Bottled Water (Advertisement) Regulations.
5.    Cosmetic Product (Prohibition of Bleaching Agents, etc.) Regulations.
6.    Food Products Registration Regulations.

7.    Bottled Water (Labelling) Regulations.
8.    Pesticide Registration Regulations.

9.    Non-nutritive Sweeteners in Food Products Regulations.

10.   Non-nutritive Sweeteners in Drug Products (Prohibition) Regulations.
11.   Food Products (Advertisement) Regulations.

12.   Food Grade (Table or Cooking) Salt Regulations.
13.   Cosmetics and Medical Devices (Advertisement) Regulations.

14.   Bottled Water Registration Regulations.



NATIONAL AGENCY FOR FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
AND CONTROL TARIFF CHARGES REGULATIONS

[under section 29]

[1st November, 1993]           [Commencement.]

Tariff charges to be paid for services rendered by the Directorates of the
Agency

1.    Tariff charges

The following tariff charges are payable in respect of services rendered by the
Directorates of the Agency respectively set out as follows-

Narcotics and Controlled Substances Directorate

PART A                                                                       N

Import Permit for Psychotropic Substances                                    500

Dangerous Drugs Import Authorisation                                         500

Conditional Releases of Controlled Drugs (with incomplete documents)         1,000

Conditional Release of Controlled Drugs (without permit)                     20,000.
Application Form for Chemical Import Permit                                   250.

Chemical Import Permit                                                        3,500

PART B

Regulatory and Registration Directorate                                       N

Form for Product Registration                                                 250

(Food, medical devices and cosmetics)                                         500

(Drugs) Product Licences (Licence valid for 5 years)                          10,000

Forms for Product Advertisement                                               250

Advertisement Approval Letter                                                 5,000

Revalidation of Advertisement Approval                                        3,000

Renewal of Product Licence Registration                                       10,000

Application Form for Clinical Trials                                          500

Clinical Trials Permit                                                        20,000

PART (C)

Inspectorate Directorate

Pre-production Inspection of Drug Manufacturing Establishments                5,000

Inspection of establishment prior to product registration (included in charges 2,500
for registration)

Port Inspection per consignment                                               5,000

Certificate of Manufacture and Free Sale (per consignment)                    5,000

Radiation Certificate (including handling charges)                            7,500

Endorsement for the release of consignment through NIPOST                     5,000

Issuance of Clearance Certificate for Siting of Industries                    2,500

Ports Inspection of Chemicals                                                 3, 500
PART (D)

Laboratory Services Directorate

Special Chemical Analysis per samples                                 2,500

Special Biological Analysis per sample                                2,500

Use of physical instruments (per single use)

(a) U/V, IR, GLC, HPLC, etc.                                          1,000

(b) Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer                               1,500

(c) Gas Chromatograph, Mass Spectrometer N.M.R.                       2,500

Attachment to laboratory for training

(a) For one week                                                      1,000

(b) For one month                                                     2,500

(c) For 3 months                                                      5,000

(d) For 12 months                                                     10,000




2.    Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the National Agency for Food and Drug
Administration and Control Tariff Charges Regulations.

DRUG PRODUCTS ADVERTISEMENT REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.    Advertisement of registered product only.

2.    Clearance to be obtained before advertisement.

3.    Nature of advertisement.

4.    Non-referential advertisement.
5.    Application for the approval of advertisement.

6.    Particulars of application.

7.    Validity of approval.

8.    Alteration in approved script.

9.    Unacceptable advertisement.

10.   Appeal in case of withdrawal of approval within the one year speci fied.

11.   Advertisement to effect caution in drug usage.

12.   Drug advertisement not to state that a product is "safe", "non-toxic", etc.

13.   Restriction.

14.   Labelling advertisement.         Prescription   drugs   and   particulars   of
      prescription.
15.   Data comparison misrepresentation.

16.   Side effect and contra-indications.
17.   Contents of advertisements with specific therapeutic claims.
18.   Accurate interpretation of research findings.
19.   Claims and quotations from scientific literature to be mentioned.
20.   Scientific articles and literature to contain both positive features and
      negative findings.

21.   Restriction or selection of quotation.
22.   Prohibition of advertisement for certain diseases.

23.   Labelling particulars and information for over-the-counter drugs.
24.   Labelling of over-the-counter drugs.

25.   Advertisement to contain certain information.

26.   Restriction on use of advertisement.
27.   Advertisement of over-the-counter drugs in mass media.
28.   Interpretation.

29.   Citation.
SCHEDULE

DRUG PRODUCTS ADVERTISEMENT REGULATIONS
[S.1. 15 of 1995.]

[under sections 5 and 29]
[16th August, 1995]                    [Commencement.]

1.    Advertisement of registered product only
(1)   These Regulations apply to all advertisements or promotion of drug
      products (both single entity and compound) imported into Nigeria or
      locally manufactured, distributed or sold in Nigeria.

(2)   No person shall advertise any drug product unless it has been registered
      by the Agency.

2.    Clearance to be obtained before advertisement

No person shall advertise any drug product unless the advertisement has the pre-
clearance and approval of the Agency.

3.    Nature of advertisement

The advertisement in Nigeria of any drug product shall be accurate, complete,
clear and designed to promote credibility and trust by the general public and
health care practitioners, therefore statements or illustrations shall not mislead
directly or by implication.

4.    Non-referential advertisement

No advertisement of a drug product shall-

(a)   imitate the general layout, text, slogan or visual presentation of another
      drug product in a way likely to mislead or confuse the consumer; or

(b)   be framed in such a manner as to exploit any superstitions or be
      calculated to induce fear among consumers causing them to purchase the
      drug product being advertised.

5.    Application for the approval of advertisement
(1)   All advertisement materials including scripts, story-boards, art work,
      radio, video tapes, etc., shall be submitted under confidential cover along
      with an application, to the Director-General of the Agency.
(2)   Where advertisement materials are submitted through any of the State
      offices of the Agency, it shall still be subject to the approval of the
      Director-General of the Agency.

6.    Particulars of application
(1)   An application submitted by an advertisement agent, distributor,
      manufacturer or the sponsor of the advert shall contain the following
      information-

(a)   the brand name of the drug;

(b)   the generic name of drug;
(c)   the dosage form available where applicable;
(d)   the place of importation or local manufacturer;

(e)   the name and location address of the manufacturer;
(j)   the name and location address of the local distributor;
(g)   the name and location address of the advertising company;

(h)   the dale of first introduction of the drug to the Nigerian market;
(i)   any previous advertisement of the drug in Nigeria;

(j)   a copy of the old script (if any);
(k)   the proposed media for the advertisement;

(l)   a copy of the registration certificate of the drug;

(m)   a copy of the registration certificate of the premises of the sponsors;

(n)   scripts, art works, radio, video tapes and story-board of the advert; and

(o)   justification for any special claims on the drug.

(2)   The advertisement materials on the drug shall be authenticated by the
      superintendent pharmacist of the pharmaceutical company and the chief
      executive of the drug company sponsoring the drug.
7.    Validity of approval

The approval of an advert shall be valid for a period of one year beginning from
the date of the approval.

8.    Alteration in approved script

Any alteration in the format of the approved script, story-board, art work, radio
or video tapes without the approval of the Agency shall render the approval null
and void.

9.    Unacceptable advertisement

Where an advertisement is considered unacceptable by the Agency the words
"Unacceptable as presented" shall be stamped on it and it shall be returned to
the advertiser with the unacceptable information or illustration clearly
identified.

10.   Appeal in case of withdrawal of approval within the one year
      specified

If the approval of an advertisement is withdrawn during the one year period of
approval, an appeal shall be lodged within thirty days after the receipt of the
withdrawal to the Governing Council of the Agency in writing and
accompanied by supportive information.

11.   Advertisement to effect caution in drug usage

Drug advertisements shall reflect an overall attitude of the caution in respect to
the drug usage with emphasis on national drug therapy and shall also provide
sufficient and balanced information to permit assessment of risk or benefit.

12.   Drug advertisement not to state that a product is "safe", "non-toxic",
      etc.
(1)   No advertisement for over the counter drugs shall state or imply in
      absolute terms or by quotations taken out of context, that any
      pharmaceutical product is "safe" or has "guaranteed efficacy" or special
      status.
(2)   Any statement claiming or implying a superlative function such as "most
      effective", "least toxic", "least tolerated", or special status such as "the
      drug of choice", etc., for a product shall not be used unless it can be
      adequately substantiated.
13.   Restriction
No advertisement for any drug product shall contain-

(a)   any false or misleading information;
(b)   half-truths, inadequate qualification and limitations regarding safety or
      effectiveness of the drug;
(c)   vague, unsubstantiated statements, or suggestions of superiority over
      other competing drugs; or
(d)   any false impression that the advertised drug is for universal cure or
      should be regarded as a more effective and safer alternative to other
      related drugs.

Prescription drugs

14.   Labelling advertisement. Prescription drugs and particulars of
      prescription
(l)   No person shall advertise any prescription drug to the public and the drug
      shall be properly labelled with the following information on the package
      label-
(a)   the name of the pharmaceutical product, the brand name or chemical
      names whichever is applicable;
(b)   a quantitative listing of all the ingredients of the drug;

(c)   indication for which the drug is intended;
(d)   an accurate statement of dosage (per tablets, capsule, etc.);

(e)   the daily dose;

(j)   the frequency of administration;

(g)   the preparation for use (shaking, dilution, refrigeration, etc.);
(h)   the expiry date, date of manufacture, storage temperature requirement and
      lot or batch;

(i)   the route or method of administration;
(j)   adequate warning, where necessary, for the protection of the patient as
      provided in the drug labelling guidelines;
(k)   the name and location address of manufacturer or packer; and

(l)   if an imported drug, the name and address of the local packer or
      distributor shall appear on the label in such a manner as to identify the
      connection between the manufacturer and the local packer or distributor
      such as "manufactured for" .......................... "distributed by" .................. .

(2)   Prescribing information shall be legibly presented in a type face not
      smaller than six points and shall provide good contrast on the packaging.

(3)   The indications for use of any therapeutic agent shall conform to the
      product monograph and label indication approved by the Agency.

(4)   The main advertising message and the prescribing information shall be
      adjoining or page referenced in such a manner as to be liable to be read at
      the same time one after the other.

(5)   All labelling information shall be in English language.

15.   Data comparison misrepresentation
(1)   No comparison on a drug packaging shall mislead directly or by
      implication and any such comparison shall be supported by reliable
      current data.

(2)   Any reference to a competitive manufacturer or their specialities shall be
      restricted to factual comparisons without the use of identifiable products
      or brand names.
(3)   All data illustrations presented in the advertisement including charts,
      graphs, tables, etc., extracted from reference studies or other sources or
      reproduced by art work shall be accurate, complete and clear with their
      source specifically identified.

(4)   Data illustrations shall not be misleading or ambiguous or distort the
      originally intended meaning or interpretation either directly or by
      implication.

16.   Side effect and contra-indications
(1)   Advertisement for all drugs shall present information that is reasonably
      balanced, between indications, effectiveness, safety, side effects and
      contra-indications.
(2)   Advertisement of all drugs for use during pregnancy shall state any
      known effects of the drug on a pregnant woman, foetus and lactation.
17.   Contents of advertisements with specific therapeutic claims

Advertisement of drugs which contain specific therapeutic claims shall contain
within the advertisement-

(a)   the brand name and non-proprietary or general names of the
      pharmaceutical product;

(b)   the therapeutic classification of the pharmaceutical product;

(c)   a quantitative list of the actual medical ingredients contained in each dose
      or unit;

(d)   the indication for use;
(e)   the recommended dosage, methods of use and routes of administration for
      all stated indications;

(f)   a list of adverse reactions (with some indication or expected incidence if
      known) the precaution to be taken by any member of the health
      profession and the contra-indications and warning of the pharmaceutical
      product;
(g)   a statement that the product monograph or full prescribing information is
      readily available from a stated Nigerian address; and
(h)   the full name and location address of manufacturer and the Nigerian
      packer.

18.   Accurate interpretation of research findings

A copy of an advertisement shall be written in a manner which accurately
interprets valid and representative research findings, also statistics shall be
written in a manner which reflects only their true validity and significance.

19.   Claims and quotations from scientific literature to be mentioned
(1)   Claims and quotations from the scientific literature concerning the
      efficacy, safety and adverse reactions, use in very young children, use in
      pregnancy, etc., with the constraints of the accepted products monograph,
      shall specify the scientific source(s) of information.

(2)   Copies of all references cited shall be submitted to the Agency for
      verification.
20.   Scientific articles and literature to contain both positive features and
      negative findings
(1)   Claims based on, or quotations that have been selected from a scientific
      article or series of articles which emphasise only the positive features
      other than negative findings of the drug, shall not be acceptable.

(2)   Accordingly all claims and quotations shall contain both negative and
      positive findings and shall be verifiable by the Agency or its
      representative(s).

21.   Restriction or selection of quotation

No selected quotation shall refer to another brand of the same pharmaceutical
entity, or to a different formulation of the same active ingredients unless data of
accepted methodology are available to warrant "cross reference" between the
drugs.

22.   Prohibition of advertisement for certain diseases

No person shall advertise a drug as a treatment, prevention or cure for any
disease, disorder or abnormal physical state as speci tied in the Schedule to
these Regulations.

Over-the-counter drugs

23.   Labelling particulars and information for over-the-counter drugs

The advertisement of an over-the-counter drug in Nigeria shall be properly
labelled with the following information included on the package-

(a)   the generic and brand if applicable (names of the drug);

(b)   the generic and brand (if applicable) names shall be conspicuously placed
      one above the other with a prefix "Brand of" in between (where
      necessary);
(c)   a quantitative list of the ingredients of the drug;

(d)   the conditions, purpose of or use of the drug;
(e)   an accurate statement of the dosage strength (per tablet, capsule,
      teaspoon, etc.);

(j)   the daily dose;
(g)   the route or method of administration;

(h)   the preparation for use (shaking, dilution, refrigeration, etc.);
(i)   adequate warnings, when necessary for the protection of users such as
      "keep out of the reach of children";

(j)   the name and location address of manufacturer or packer;

(k)   if an imported drug, the name and location address of the local packer or
      distributor shall appear on the label in such a manner as to identify the
      connection between the manufacturer and the local packer or distributor
      such as "manufactured for. ......................... distributed by
      ..............................."; and

(l)   the date of manufacture, date of expiration, unless exempted, storage
      temperature and batch or lot number.

24.   Labelling of over-the-counter drugs
(1)   Over-the-counter drugs shall carry package leaflets with complete label
      information in addition to the contra-indications and the labelling shall
      not contain any statement which is false, misleading or exaggerated as to
      amount to a misrepresentation.

(2)   Where the bottle, jar or other "immediate container" of the drug has an
      outer wrapper or carton, such outer wrapper or carton shall bear all the
      information required to be specified on the label.

(3)   All labelling information shall be in English language.

25.   Advertisement to contain certain information

The advertisement of a drug which shall not carry any false or misleading
information shall contain the following information-

(a)   the name of the drug;

(b)   the pack size(s) being promoted and their corresponding prices;

(c)   the different forms in which the drug is available (if necessary); and

(d)   the name and location address of the sellers and manufacturer.

26.   Restriction on use of advertisement
No over-the-counter drugs advertisement shall-

(a)   contain such words as "magic", "miracle", or an exotic description such
      as "upper potency" or such other words as to induce the daily or
      continuous use of the drug;

(b)   imply that if the reader, viewer or listener is suffering from any ailment or
      disease he shall suffer more severely from the illness, ailment or disease
      on failure to use that particular drug;

(c)   over dramatise any symptoms by way of drawing a picture of a pregnant
      woman, patient with backache, or use throbbing sounds like heartbeats,
      coughing or agonising cries; and

(d)   denigrate or attack unfairly any competitive products, goods or services.

27.   Advertisement of over-the-counter drugs in mass media

No person shall advertise any drug unless such advertisement states clearly both
the generic and brand (if applicable) names of the drug.

28.   Interpretation

In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires-

"advertising" means the publicity of goods and description of all products
(which includes any form of notices in circulars, handouts, labels, wrappers,
catalogues and price lists, bill boards, posters, newspapers, magazines, and any
other documents) made orally or otherwise or by means of projected light and
sound recordings;

"Agency" means the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control;

"claim" means any representation which states, suggests or implies that the
drug has particular qualities relating to its origin, nutritional properties, nature,
processing, composition or any other quality;

"Director-General" means the Director-General of the Agency;

"justification" in respect of any claim shall be in the light of current
knowledge acceptable to the Agency;

"label" means a display of written, printed or graphic matter upon the
immediate containers to the drug;
"location address" means a place where the business of manufacture, sale,
distribution, storage and display of pharmaceutical products is carried out which
includes the house number, plot number, street name, town or city, state,
country, etc.;

"package labelling" includes the label on the immediate container of the drug
and all other printed matter such as outer wrapper, carton or leaflet associated
with the package;

"prescription drug" means a drug which can only be made available to a
patient through a written prescription signed by a duly qualified and registered
medical practitioner and dispensed by a registered and licensed pharmacist;
such drug shall not be made available or sold directly to the general public
without the said prescription and shall be identified by chemical or generic
name(s);

"pharmaceutical product" means a substance or mixture of substances
manufactured, sold or prescribed for in vivo use in the diagnosis, treatment,
mitigation or prevention of a disease, disorder, abnormal physical state of the
symptoms thereof, or in restoring, correcting or modifying organic function in
man or animals but excluding mechanical devices and cosmetics;

"rational drug therapy" means appropriate therapy recommended or
prescribed which logically may be expected to remedy or ameliorate a
disordered state of physical or mental health, and shall include logical use for a
diagnostic and prophylactic purpose to prevent or lower the incidence of illness;

"therapeutic classification of pharmaceutical product" means either the
accepted pharmacological classification (e.g. anxiolytic, diuretic, analgestic,
antibiotic, etc.) or the identity of the purpose(s) for which the pharmaceutical
product is intended (migraine, hypertension, etc.,) or both.

29.   Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Drug Products Advertisement
Regulations.

SCHEDULE [Regulation 22.]

Alcoholism Appendicitis Arteriosclerosis Asthma

Blood disorders Cancer Cataract Cholera Diabetes Diphtheria

Disorders of menstrual flow Disorders of prostate gland Dysentery
Encephalitis

Enteric fever

Epilepsy

Erysipelas

Filariasias

Gallstones, kidney stones and bladder stones Gangrene

Any genital or urinary diseases not mentioned elsewhere in the Schedule
Glaucoma

Goitre

Hay fever

Heart disease

Hernia

High blood pressure Infective hepatitis Influenza and flu Jaundice

Kidney disease Leprosy

Locomotor ataxis Loss of youth Measles

Meningitis

Mental conditions Mumps Nervousness Nutritional disorders Obesity
Onchocerciasis Paralysis

Plague

Pleurisy

Pneumonia Poliomyelitis

Rabies

Rheumatic fever Schistosomiasis

Sexual impotence, loss of virility or sterility Sleeping sickness
Small pox

Snake bite

Syphilis

Tetanus

Trachoma

Tuberculosis

Tumours

Typhoid fever

Undulant fever

Ulcers of the gastro-intestinal tract Venereal diseases

Yaws

Yellow fever



PRE-PACKAGED FOOD (LABELLING) REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.     Sale of unlabelled pre-packaged food prohibited.

2.     Pre-packaged food not to be described falsely, etc.

3.     Pre-packaged food to bear certain information.

4.     List of ingredients.

5.     Net content of pre-packaged food.

6.     Name, address and country of manufacturer, etc., to be declared.

7.     Clear prominent, etc., statements.
8.    Date marking instructions.

9.    Storage condition.

10.   Batch number.

11.   Trademark.

12.   Language.

13.   Particulars of physical condition of food and specific treatment.

14.   Ionising radiation.

15.   Frozen food.

16.   Directions for use.

17.   Nutritional labelling.

18.   Display of information, etc., not in conflict with mandatory requirement.
19.   Grade designation.

20.   Removal, etc., of label.
21.   Sanctions.
22.   Interpretation.

23.   Citation.
SCHEDULES

PRE-PACKAGED FOOD (LABELLING) REGULATIONS [S.I. 16
    of1995.]

[under sections 5 and 29]

[16th August, 1995]                   [Commencement.]



1.    Sale of unlabelled pre-packaged food prohibited

No person shall sell a pre-packaged food unless a label has been affixed thereto.
2.    Pre-packaged food not to be described falsely, etc.

A pre-packaged food shall not be described or presented on any label-

(a)   in a manner which is false, misleading, deceptive or is likely to create an
      erroneous impression regarding its character, quality, quantity and origin;
(b)   by words, pictorial or other means which refer to any other product or
      suggests either directly or indirectly, that the food is connected with such
      other product.

3.    Pre-packaged food to bear certain information

The label of a pre-packaged food shall be required to bear the following
information-

(a)   the name of the food item which shall indicate the accurate nature of the
      food;
(b)   where a name has been established for the food item it shall be the only
      name used by that food item;

(c)   where no name exists for a food item, an appropriate descriptive name
      shall be affixed thereto;
(d)   where a coined or fanciful name is used for the food item, the name shall
      not be misleading and shall be accompanied by an appropriate descriptive
      term.

4.    List of ingredients
(1)   A complete list of ingredients used in preparing the food item shall be
      declared on the label in descending order of their proportion, except in
      the case of a dehydrated food item intended to be reconstituted by the
      addition in order of proportion in the reconstituted product:

Provided that the list of ingredients shall be headed by a statement such as
ingredients when reconstituted.

(2)   Where the ingredients of a food item has more than one component the
      name of the components shall be included in the list of ingredients.

(3)   Every ingredient contained in such list other than the ingredients
      specified in Schedule I to these Regulations and substances falling within
      the classes specified in Schedule 2 to these Regulations, shall bear a
      specific name or the specific item written in parenthesis.
(4)   Any added water shall be declared in the list of ingredients if such a
      declaration would result in a better understanding of the food composition
      by the consumer, except when the water forms part of ingredients such
      as-

(a)   brine;

(b)   syrup; and
(c)   both are used in the compound food item.

5.    Net content of pre-packaged food
(1)   The average net content of every pre-packaged food item shall be
      declared in the metric system.

(2)   The declaration of the average net content of the food item shall be
      required to be made in the case of-
(a)   liquid food in volume;
(b)   solid food by weight and number or count (where applicable);
(c)   semi-solid or viscous food by weight or volume.

(3)   Any food pre-packaged in liquid form normally discarded before
      consumption, shall carry or a declaration of the drained weight of the
      food item.

6.    Name, address and country of manufacturer, etc., to be declared
(1)   The name and location address of the manufacturer, packer, distributor,
      importer or vendor of a pre-packaged food shall be specified on the label.
(2)   The country of the manufacturer of a pre-packaged food shall be
      specified on the label.

(3)   When a pre-packaged food item undergoes any processing which affects
      its con- tents in another country, such a country shall be considered as the
      country of manufacture for the purpose of labelling.

7.    Clear prominent, etc., statements
(1)   Any statement required to appear on the label of a food item shall be
      clear, prominent and legible to the consumer and be of contrasting colour
      to that of the background.
(2)   No information shall be obscured by design or by other written, printed or
      graphic matter contained on the label.

(3)   The letters of the name of the food item and the net content shall be of a
      size reasonably related to the most printed matter on the label.

(4)   Where a pre-packaged food container is covered by a wrapper, the
      wrapper shall carry the required information and the label shall be readily
      legible through the outer wrapper and not be obscured by it.

8.    Date marking instructions
(1)   For any pre-packaged food item, the date of minimum durability shall be
      specified and legibly displayed.

(2)   Where the date of minimum durability is specified, it shall be preceded
      by the words "best before", "use by" or "expiry" and shall be legibly
      displayed as required by the Agency.
(3)   Unless otherwise specified for pre-packaged food items the day, month
      and year of manufacture shall to be stated in an uncoded chronological
      order on the label.

9.    Storage condition
The required special storage conditions shall be specified on the label.

10.   Batch number
The batch number shall be indicated on the label of all pre-packaged food.

11.   Trademark

The trademark (if any) shall be displayed on the label such that the trademark
shall not give a wrong impression of the nature, quality or substance of the food
item.

12.   Language

Any declaration required to be made under these Regulations shall be in English
language.

13.   Particulars of physical condition of food and specific treatment
Any special treatment which a particular pre-packaged food item has
undergone, shall be indicated in all cases where an omission of such
information may create confusion in the mind of the consumer.

14.   Ionising radiation

A pre-packaged food item, which has been treated with ionising radiation, shall
be so declared and the nature of the ionising radiation shall be stated on the
label.

15.   Frozen food

The form of freezing of a pre-packaged food item shall be indicated on the
label.

16.   Directions for use

Directions for use, including reconstitution, where applicable, shall be included
on the label to ensure correct utilisation of the food item.

17.   Nutritional labelling

(1)   Any nutritional claim shall be justified expressly on the label.

(2)   A nutrient labelling shall be mandatory for any pre-packaged food item
      for which a nutrition claim is made by the manufacturer.
(3)   Where nutrient declaration is applied, the declaration of the following
      shall be mandatory-
(a)   energy value;

(b)   the amounts of protein available, carbohydrate (excluding dietary fibre)
      and fat; and

(c)   the amount of any other nutrient for which a nutrient claim is made.
(4)   When nutrient labelling is applied, the amount of vitamins and minerals
      considered to be of negligible importance may not be listed.

(5)   The list of ingredients and the specification of the quantities of certain
      nutrients on the label as required by the Act or of any Regulations made
      thereunder shall not constitute a claim.

18.   Display of information, etc., not in conflict with mandatory
      requirement
Any information required to be displayed on a label which misleads or deserves
a consumer in any way shall constitute an offence under these Regulations.

19.   Grade designation

Where a grade designation is used, it shall be readily understandable and not be
misleading or deceptive in anyway.

20.   Removal, etc., of label

No person shall remove, add to, alter, deface or render illegible any statement
upon a label printed on or attached to a wrapper or container in pursuance of
these Regulations.

21.   Sanctions

If any person fails to comply with the provisions of these Regulations, the
Agency may prohibit that person from carrying on the importation, exportation,
manufacture, distribution, sale of or use of the pre-packaged food item either
absolutely or for such a period of time as the Agency may declare, in addition to
the payment of a fine of N50,000.00.

22.   Interpretation

In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires-

"Act" means National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control
Act;

"Agency" means the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control;

"container" means any form of packaging of food for sale as a single item
whether by completely or partially enclosing the food and includes wrappers,
but does not include leaves traditionally used as food wrappers;

''food'' means any article manufactured, sold or advertised for use as food or
drink and includes drinking water, chewing gum, and such other ingredients as
may be mixed with food for any purpose whatsoever including supplements
processed for addition to animal and poultry feeds;

''food additives" means any substance not usually consumed as food by itself
but used as an ingredient of that food, whether or not it has nutritive value;

"ingredient" includes additives used in the manufacture of preparation of food;
"label" includes any writing, printed or graphic matter relating to and
accompanying the food item;

"location address" means a place where the business of manufacture sale,
distribution, storage and display of pre-packaged food item is carried out which
includes the house number, plot number, street name, town/city, state, country,
etc.;

"pre-packaged" means packed or made in advance ready for retail sale in a
wrapper or container.

23.      Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Pre-packaged Food (Labelling)
Regulations.

SCHEDULES

SCHEDULE I [Regulation 4 (3).]

Class names

"Oil" together with either the term "vegetable" or "animal" qualified by the term
"hydrogenated" or "partially hydrogenated" as appropriate;

"fat" together with either the term "vegetable or animal" as appropriate:

"Starch"

"Fish"

"Poultry meat"

"Cheese"

"Spice", "Spices" or "Mixed spices" as appropriate

"Herbs" or "mixed herbs" as appropriate

"Gum base"

"Sugar"

"Dextrose" or "Glucose"
"Caseinates"

"Cocoa butter"

"Crystallized fruit"



SCHEDULE 2 [Section 4 (3).]

Class names

Anti-caking agents(s) Anti-oxidant(s) Colour(s)

Emulsifier(s)

Flavour enhancer(s)

Glazing agents(s)

Preservative(s)

Stabiliser (s)

Thickener(s)

Gelling agent(s)

Anti-foaming agent(s)

Flour treatment agent(s)

Artificial sweetener(s)

Acidity regulator(s)

Propellant(s)

BOTTLED WATER (ADVERTISEMENT) REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS



REGULATION
1.    Advertisement of registered product only.

2.    Clearance to be obtained before advertisement.

3.    Nature of advertisement.

4.    Non-referential advertisement.

5.    Application for the approval of advertisement.

6.    Particulars of application.

7.    Validity of approval.

8.    Alteration in approved script.

9.    Unacceptable advertisement.

10.   Appeal in case of withdrawal of approval within the one year specified.

11.   Restriction.

12.   Data comparison misrepresentation.

13.   Accurate interpretation of research findings.

14.   Sanctions

15. Interpretation.

16. Citation.



BOTTLED WATER (ADVERTISEMENT) REGULATIONS [S.l. 17 of
l995.]

under sections 5 and 29

[16th August, 1995]                          [Commencement.]

1.    Advertisement of registered product only

No person shall advertise any bottled water imported into Nigeria or locally
manufactured unless the bottled water has been registered by the Agency.
2.    Clearance to be obtained before advertisement

No person shall advertise any bottled water unless the advert has the pre-
clearance and approval of the Agency.

3.    Nature of advertisement

All advertisements of bottled water in Nigeria shall be accurate, complete, clear
and designed to promote credibility and trust by the general public and health
care practitioners, accordingly statements or illustrations on the bottled water
shall not mislead directly or by implication.

4.    Non-referential advertisement

No advert bottled water shall-

(a)   make reference directly or indirectly to any member of the health care
      profession, hospitals, clinic or pharmacy, etc.;
(b)   imitate the general layout, text, slogan or visual presentation of devices of
      any other bottled water in a way likely to mislead or confuse the
      consumer;
(c)   be framed in such a manner as to exploit any superstitions or be
      calculated to induce fear among consumers causing them to purchase the
      bottled water being advertised.

5.    Application for the approval of advertisement
(1)   All advertisement materials including scripts, story-board, art work,
      radio, video tapes, etc., shall be submitted under confidential cover along
      with than application to the Director-General of the Agency.
(2)   Where advertisement materials are submitted through any of the State
      offices of the Agency, it shall be subject to the approval of the Director-
      General of the Agency.

6.    Particulars of application
(1)   An application submitted by an advertising agent, distributor,
      manufacturer or the sponsor of the advert shall contain the following, that
      is-

(a)   the brand name of the bottled water;
(b)   the generic name of the bottled water;
(c)   whether the bottled water is imported or locally manufactured (country of
      manufacture);

(d)   the name and location address of the manufacturer;
(e)   the name and location address of the local distributor;

(f)   the name and location address of the advertising company;

(g)   the date of first introduction of the bottled water to the Nigerian market;

(h)   information about any previous advertisement of the bottled water in
      Nigeria;
(i)   a copy of the old script (if any);

(j)   the proposed media for the advertisement;

(k)   a copy of the registration certificate of the bottled water;
(l)   justification for any special claims on the bottled water;

(m)   the scripts, story-board, art works, radio and video tapes of the advert;
      and

(n)   such other materials as may be required by the Agency from time to time.

7.    Validity of approval

The approval of an advertisement shall be valid for a period of one year
beginning from the date of the approval.

8.    Alteration in approved script

Any alteration in the format of the approved script, story-board, art work, radio
or video tapes without the approval of the Agency shall render the approval null
and void.

9.    Unacceptable advertisement

Where an advertisement is considered unacceptable by the Agency, the words
"Unacceptable as presented" shall be stamped on it and it shall be returned to
the advertiser with the unacceptable information or illustration clearly
identified.

10.   Appeal in case of withdrawal of approval within the one year
      specified
If the approval for an advertisement is withdrawn during the one-year period of
approval, an appeal shall be lodged within thirty days after the receipt of the
withdrawal directed to the Governing Council of the Agency in writing and
accompanied by supportive information.

11.   Restriction

No advertisement for a bottled water shall contain-

(a)   any false or misleading information;

(b)   half-truths, inadequate qualification and limitations regarding safety or
      effectiveness of the bottled water;

(c)   vague, unsubstantiated statements, suggestions of superiority over other
      competing bottled water;
(d)   any false impression that the advertised bottled water is for universal cure
      or should be regarded as a more effective and safer alternative to other
      related products.

12.   Data comparison misrepresentation
(1)   No comparison shall mislead directly or by implication and any such
      comparison shall be supported by reliable current scientific data.

(2)   Any reference to competitive manufacturer or their specialities shall be
      restricted to factual comparisons without the use of identifiable product(s)
      or brand name(s).
(3)   All data illustrations presented in an advertisement including charts,
      graphs, tables, etc., extracted from reference studies or other source or
      reproduced by art work shall be accurate, complete and clear with their
      source specifically identified.
(4)   Data illustrations shall not be misleading or ambiguous or distort the
      original in- tended meaning or interpretation either directly or by
      implication.

13.   Accurate interpretation of research findings

Any copy of an advertisement shall be written in a manner which accurately
interprets valid and representative research findings and statistics on the bottled
water and shall be written in a manner which reflects only their true validity and
significance.
14.   Sanctions

If any person fails to comply with the provisions of these Regulations, the
Agency may prohibit that person from carrying on the importation, exportation,
manufacture, distribution, sale of or use of the bottled water either absolutely or
for such period of time as the Agency may declare in addition to the payment of
a fine of N5,000.

15.   Interpretation

In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires-

"advertising" means the publicity of goods and description of all products
(which includes any form of notice in circulars, handouts, labels, wrappers,
catalogues and price lists, bill boards, posters, newspapers, magazines and any
other document made orally or otherwise or by means of projected light and
sound recordings);

"Agency" means the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control;

"appropriate authority" means the Director-General of the Agency;

"bottled water" means any form of processed water packed for drinking
purpose and enclosed in any form of container;

"claim" means any representation which states, suggests or implies that the
bottled water has particular qualities relating to its origin, nutritional properties,
nature, processing, composition or any other quality;

"Director-General" means the Director-General of the Agency;

"justification" in respect of any claim shall be in the light of current nutritional
scientific knowledge acceptable to the Agency;

"label" means a display of written, printed or graphic matter upon the
immediate bottled water container;

"location and address" means a place where the business of manufacture, sale,
distribution, storage and display of bottled water is carried out which includes
the house number, plot number, street name, town or city, state, country, etc.;

"package labelling" includes the label on the immediate bottled water
container and all other printed matter such as outer wrapper or carton or leaflet
associated with the package.
16.   Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Bottled Water (Advertisement)
Regulations.



COSMETIC PRODUCT (PROHIBITION OF BLEACHING AGENTS,
ETC.) REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.    Sale of adulterated cosmetic products.

2.    Meaning of adulterated cosmetic products.

3.    Citation.

SCHEDULE

COSMETIC PRODUCT (PROHIBITION OF BLEACHING AGENTS,
ETC.) REGULATIONS [under sections 5 and 29]

[11th August, 1995] [Commencement.]

1.    Sale of adulterated cosmetic products
(1)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any cosmetic product which is
      adulterated or which contains any substance which when used according
      to the directions on the label accompanying the cosmetic product is likely
      to cause injury to the health of the user.

(2)   No person shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale, distribute or cause to be
      distributed any cosmetic product which contains any of the skin bleaching
      agents listed in the Schedule to these Regulations.

(3)   A person who contravenes the provisions of paragraph (1) or (2) of this
      regulation is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a fine of
      N5,OOO or imprisonment for a term of six months or to both such fine
      and imprisonment.

2.    Meaning of adulterated cosmetic products
A cosmetic product shall be regarded as adulterated if it-
(a)   contains more than a trace of mercury or any mercury salt which under
      normal condition of manufacturing practice is unavoidable; or

(b)   contains more than a trace of mercury or any mercury salt calculated as
      the metal or preservative; or

(c)   contains hydroquinone; or

(d)   bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance as to render it
      injurious to a user under the conditions prescribed in its labelling or under
      such conditions of use as are customary or usual for the cosmetic product;
      or
(e)   has been prepared, packed or held under insanitary conditions thereby
      rendering it likely to be injurious to health; or

(j)   the container in which it is packed is composed in whole or part of
      poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents
      injurious to health; or
(g)   contains more than the permissible limit of an ingredient.

3.    Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Cosmetic Products (Prohibition of
Bleaching Agents, etc.) Regulations.

SCHEDULE [Paragraph I (2).]

Skin bleaching agents

1.    Hydroquinone.

2.    Corticosteroids.

3.    Mercury and mercury compounds.

FOOD PRODUCTS REGISTRATION REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.    Registration of every food manufactured, etc.

2.    Application for registration.
3.    Issuance of certificate of registration.

4.    Validity of approval.

5.    Invalidation of certificate of registration.

6.    Demand for the certificate of registration.

REGULATION

7.    Penalty.

8.    Application.

9.    Interpretation.

10.   Citation.



FOOD PRODUCTS REGISTRATION REGULATIONS

[under sections 5 and 29]

[2nd January, 1996]              [Commencement.]

1.    Registration of every food manufactured, etc.
(1)   Every food manufactured, imported, exported, advertised, sold or
      distributed in Nigeria shall be registered in accordance with the
      provisions of these Regulations.
(2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of this regulation,
      the manufacture or importation of any food product as a sample for
      registration shall be under- taken with the approval of the Agency.

2.    Application for registration
(1)   The application for registration of any food product shall be made in such
      form as may be prescribed from time to time by the Agency.

(2)   An application shall be accompanied by-
(a)   a non-refundable fee as may be prescribed by the Agency;

(b)   adequate samples of the food product;
(c)   the original certificate of analysis of the food product;

(d)   samples of the labels of the food product;
(e)   evidence of any special labelling claims of the character, quality and
      safety of the food product;

(f)   the original certificate of manufacture and free sale for the imported food
      product from the statutory body in charge in the country of origin
      responsible for the safety of the food product;

(g)   the radio-active test certificate where demanded by the Agency;
(h)   the power of attorney or an agreement from the manufacturer to register
      the food product in Nigeria if it is an imported food product and an
      undertaking that every advertisement of the food product shall be
      submitted to the Agency for approval before publication:

Provided that any person given a power of attorney shall be required to satisfy
the Agency that he has the resources and facilities to execute an effective recall
of the food product if the need arises.

3.    Issuance of certificate of registration
(1)   Where the Agency is satisfied that an application for registration has been
      made in the prescribed form and contains all the information as required
      under paragraph (2) of these Regulations, the food product shall be issued
      with a registration certificate and registration number.

(2)   Where an application is unsatisfactory the applicant shall be notified and
      the defects specified.

4.    Validity of approval

The certificate of registration of food product shall be valid for a period of five
years.

5.    Invalidation of certificate of registration

The Agency may suspend, withdraw or cancel the certificate of registration of a
food product if-
(a)     the grounds on which the food product was registered were found to be
       false or incomplete; or
(b)    the circumstances under which the food product was registered no longer
       exist; or

(c)    any of the conditions or undertaking under which the food product was
       registered has been contravened; or

(d)    the standard of quality, safety or efficacy as prescribed in the
       documentation for registration is not being complied with; or

(e)    the premises in which the food product is imported, processed,
       manufactured or stored by or on behalf of the holder of the certificate of
       registration are un- suitable for the importation, processing,
       manufacturing or storage of the food product.

6.     Demand for the certificate of registration

A manufacturer or importer of a food product shall produce the original
certificate of registration in respect of any food product manufactured or
imported by him within 48 hours of its demand by any person duly authorised
by the Agency.

7.    Penalty

If any person contravenes any of the requirements of these Regulations, the
Agency shall prohibit that person from carrying on the importation, exportation,
manufacture, distribution, sale or use of the food product either absolutely or for
such a period of time as the Agency may declare, in addition to a fine of
NSO,OOO.

8.    Application

The provisions of these Regulations shall be applicable to food products
manufactured in an approved establishment.

9.    Interpretation

For the purposes of these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires-

"Agency" means the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control;

"Director-General" means Director-General of the Agency;

"establishment" means any place, building and any forecourt or yard where
any operation for the purpose of manufacturing a food product is carried out;
"label" in relation to any food product or food product as packaged includes
any leg- end, word or mark attached to, included in, belonging to or
accompanying that food product or a package of it.

10.   Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Food Products Registration Regulations.



BOTTLED WATER (LABELLING) REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.    Labelling of bottled water.

2.    Name.

3.    Net content of pre-packaged bottled water.

4.    Name and address of manufacturer.

5.    Country of manufacturer.

6.    Information on labels.

7.    Date marking instructions.

8.    Batch number.

9.    Specific information.

10.   Trade mark.

11.   Language.

12.   Particulars on physical condition of bottled water and specific treatment.

13.   Instructions for use.
14.   Misleading information on label.

15.   Grade designation.
16.   Penalty.

17.   Interpretation.
18.   Citation.



BOTTLED WATER (LABELLING) REGULATIONS [S.l. 8 of 1996.]
[under sections 5 and 29]

[2nd January, 1996]                   [Commencement.]

1.    Labelling of bottled water
(1)   No person shall under these Regulations sell bottled water unless a label
      has been affixed to it.

(2)   Such label shall not describe or present bottled water-
(a)   in a manner that is false, misleading or deceptive or is likely to create
      erroneous impression regarding the character, quality, quantity and origin
      of a bottled water;

(b)   by words, pictorial or other means as to refer to any other product or to
      suggest either directly or indirectly, that the bottled water is connected
      with such other product.

2.    Name
(1)   Every bottled water shall have a name and such name shall indicate the
      accurate nature of the content of the bottled water.
(2)   Where a name has been established for a bottled water in these
      Regulations, such a name only shall be used.

(3)   Where no common name for a bottled water exists, an appropriate
      descriptive name shall be used.
(4)   A coined or fanciful name may be used provided the name is not
      misleading and is accompanied by an appropriate descriptive term.

3.    Net content of pre-packaged bottled water
(1)   Every average net content of pre-packaged bottled water shall be declared
      in a metric system of measurement.
(2)   The declaration required to be made under sub-paragraph (1) of this
      regulations shall be made, in the case of a bottled water, in volume.

4.    Name and address of manufacturer

The name and location address of the manufacturer, packer, distributor,
importer or vendor of a bottled water shall be declared on the label of every
bottled water.

5.    Country of manufacturer

The country of manufacture of a bottled water shall be declared on every bottled
water.

6.    Information on labels
(1)   All statements on the label of every bottled water shall be clear,
      prominent and legible to a consumer and shall have a contrasting colour
      to that of the background.

(2)   No information shall be obscured by design or by other written, printed or
      graphic matter.

(3)   No person shall remove, add to, alter, deface or render illegible any
      statement upon a label printed on or attached to a wrapper or container of
      a bottled water in pursuance of these Regulations.
(4)   Every label shall be firm and not easily detachable or defaceable.

7.    Date marking instructions
(1)   The date of minimum durability of every bottled water shall be specified
      and legibly displayed and shall be preceded by the words "best before",
      "use by" or "expiry" as required for the product by the Agency.

(2)   Unless otherwise specified in any commodity regulations, the following
      shall apply for bottled water-

(a)   the day, month and the year of expiry shall be stated in an uncoded
      chronological order;

(b)   the date of manufacture, where applicable, shall be stated on the bottled
      water.

8.    Batch number
The batch numbering shall be indicated on all bottled water.

9.    Specific information

Every label of bottled water shall bear the information required by paragraphs
4,5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of these Regulations.

10.   Trade mark

The trade mark (if any) shall be displayed on all bottled water and such trade
mark shall not give a wrong impression of the nature, quality or substance of the
bottled water.

11.   Language

All declarations required to be made under paragraphs 4 and 5 of these
Regulations shall be in English.

12.   Particulars on physical condition of bottled water and specific
      treatment

Any special treatment which a bottled water has undergone, shall be indicated
in all cases where omission of such information may create confusion in the
mind of the consumer.

13.   Instructions for use

The directions for use, including reconstitulion where applicable, shall be
included in the label to ensure correct utilisation of such bottled water.

14. Misleading information on label

Any information required to be displayed on a label of a bottled water which is
misleading in any way shall constitute an offence under these Regulations.

15.   Grade designation

Any grade designation used on a bottled water shall be readily understandable
and shall not be misleading or deceptive in any way.

16.   Penalty

If any person contravenes the requirements of these Regulations, the Agency
may prohibit that person from carrying on the importation, exportation,
manufacture, distribution, sale or use of the bottled water either absolutely or
for such period of time as the Agency may declare, in addition to the payment
of a fine of N50,OOO.

17.   Interpretation

For the purposes these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires-

"bottled water" means any form of processed water packaged for drinking
purposes enclosed in any container;

"label" includes any writing, printed or graphic matter relating to and
accompanying the bottled water or a package of it.

18.   Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Bottled Water (LabelIing) Regulations.

PESTICIDE REGISTRATION REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.    Prohibition.

2.    Application for the registration of pesticide.

3.    Submission of application.

4.    Issuance of certificate of registration.

5.    Registration fee.

6.    Validity of approval.

7.    Invalidation of certificate of registration.

8.    Offences and penalty.

9.    Interpretation.

10.   Citation.

PESTICIDE REGISTRATION REGULATIONS [1993 No. 15. S.l. 10 of
1996.]
[2nd January, 1996]                [Commencement.]



1.      Prohibition

As from the commencement of these Regulations—

(i)     no pesticide shall be manufactured, formulated, imported, exported,
        advertised, sold or distributed in Nigeria unless it has been registered in
        accordance with the provisions of these Regulations;

(ii)    notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this regulation the
        manufacture, formulation or importation of any pesticide as sample for
        registration shall be undertaken with the approval of the Agency.

2.      Application for the registration of pesticide
(1)     No person shall submit application for the registration of any pesticide
        unless such pesticide was manufactured or formulated in an establishment
        acceptable and approved by the Agency.

(2)     The application for pesticide registration shall be made on a prescribed
        application form obtainable from the Agency.
(3)     Each application form for the registration shall be accompanied by a non-
        refundable fee as prescribed in the current tariff of the Agency.

3.      Submission of application
(a)     The completed application form shall be submitted with the following—

(i)     adequate samples of the pesticide product as determined by the Agency;

(ii)    original certificate of analysis of the pesticide product;
(iii)   certificate of manufacture and free sale of pesticide product if imported
        from the statutory body responsible for the safety of the product in the
        country of origin;

(iv)    radio-active test certificate where demanded by the Agency;
(v)     power of attorney or an agreement from the manufacturer to register the
        pesticide product in Nigeria if it is an imported pesticide;

(vi)    an undertaking in writing that every advertisement of the pesticide shall
        be submitted to the Agency for approval before publication;
(vii) specimen labels of the pesticide product;

(viii) evidence for any special labelling claims on the character, quality and
       safety of the pesticide product.
(b)     Product chemistry-

An application submitted to the Agency shall state—

(i)     the product composition, normal concentration, physical and chemical
        characteristics; and

(ii)    standard laboratory analytical methods for each active ingredient,
        impurity or inert ingredient that is toxicologically significant.

(c)     Other studies—

The study conducted in respect of pesticide product shall include-- (i)
environmental fate;

(ii)    degradation;
(iii)   metabolism of plant and animals; (iv) mobility, that is, the stability
        thereof; (v) accumulation;

(vi)    hazards to human or domestic animals;
(vii) toxicity whether by oral, dermal and or inhalation; (viii) teratogenicity or
      reproductive studies;

(ix)    mutagenicity;

(x)     hazard to non-target organisms including birds and fishes; (xi) product
        performance including efficacy trials in Nigeria.

(d)     Residue level-

Company should state the residue level for the pesticide in all its intended usage
in the country. This will be compared with the tolerance level as may be
determined by the Agency.

(e)     Use of the pesticide product—

(i)     dosage and direction for use; (ii) fields of application;

(iii)   methods of application.
(f)   Storage conditions.

(g)   Method of disposal of containers. (h) Precautions including first-aid. (i)
      Note to physician.

4.    Issuance of certificate of registration
(1)   Where the Agency is satisfied with the submissions in respect of the
      pesticide, the product shall be issued with a registration certificate.

(2)   Where the submissions are unsatisfactory, the applicant shall be informed
      with reasons in writing.

5.    Registration fee

The applicant shall pay a registration fee as may from time to time be prescribed
in the approved tariff of the Agency.

6.    Validity of approval

The registration of any pesticide product shall be valid for a period of five
years.

7.    Invalidation of certificate of registration

The Agency may suspend, withdraw or cancel the certificate of registration if-
(a)   the grounds on which the pesticide product was registered were later
      found to be false or incomplete; or
(b)   the circumstances under which the pesticide product was registered no
      longer exist; or
(c)   any of the conditions or undertaking under which the pesticide product
      was registered has been contravened; or

(d)   the standard of quality, safety or efficacy as prescribed in the
      documentation for registration are not being complied with; or

(e)   the premises in which the pesticide product is imported, processed,
      manufactured, formulated or stored by or on behalf of the holder of the
      certificate of registration are unsuitable for the importation, processing,
      manufacturing, formulation or storage of the pesticide product.

8.    Offences and penalty
If any person makes default in complying with the requirements of these
Regulations, the Agency may prohibit that person from carrying on the
importation, exportation, manufacture, distribution, sale or use of the pesticide
either absolutely or for such time the Agency declares, in addition to a fine of N
100,000.00.

9.    Interpretation

For the purposes of these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—

"Agency" means the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control;

"Director-General" means the Director-General of the Agency;

"growth regulator" means any substance or mixture of substances intended
through physiological action for accelerating or retarding the growth and
development of organ- isms.

"pest" means any insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form of
plant or animal or virus or bacteria or other micro-organisms which the
Director-General de- clares to be a pest;

"pesticide" means any chemical substance or mixture of substances intended
for pre- venting, destroying, repelling or mitigating the effect of any pest of
plants and animal and shall include herbicides insecticides, rodenticides,
fungicides, molluscides, nematocides, repellants, attractants, insect growth
regulators used in agriculture, public health, horticulture, food storage or a
chemical substance used for similar purpose;

"residue" means the amount of pesticides that may remain in or on food,
animal feed and the environment;

"tolerance level" means the maximum permissible amount of pesticides that
may remain in or on food and animal feed.

10.   Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Pesticide Registration Regulations.



NON-NUTRITIVE            SWEETENERS             IN     FOOD        PRODUCTS
REGULATIONS
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATONS

REGULATION

1.    Prohibition of use of non-nutritive sweeteners in food/beverages.

2.    Conditions for use of non-nutritive sweeteners.
3.    Declaration on label for foods/beverages containing non-nutritive
      sweetener.

4.    Offence.
5.    Interpretation.

6.    Citation.

NON-NUTRITIVE SWEETENERS IN FOOD PRODUCTS REGULA
TIONS [S.l. 11 of 1996.)

[2nd January, 1996]      [Commencement.]

1.    Prohibition of use of non-nutritive sweeteners in food/beverages
(1)   No person shall manufacture, import, export, advertise, sell or present any
      food item or beverage containing a non-nutritive sweetener for human
      consumption, except as provided for in these Regulations.

(2)   Non-nutritive sweeteners shall not be used for foods/beverages presented
      for infants and children consumption.

2.    Conditions for use of non-nutritive sweeteners

Non-nutritive sweeteners may only be used in special dietary foods/beverages
such as energy reduced foods or low calories foods/beverages. The use of non-
nutritive sweeten- ers in foods shall be as authorised by the Agency.

3.    Declaration on label for foods / beverages containing non-nutritive
      sweetener

Where the Agency permits the use, a declaration as to the identity and quantity
of the sweetener shall be made on the labels of such food products/beverages.

4.    Offence
(1)   A person who contravenes a provision of these Regulations shall be liable
      on conviction to a fine of N l00, 000 or one year imprisonment or to both
      such fine and imprisonment.
(2)   The Agency shall have the power to seize, confiscate, destroy or dispose
      of in any manner whatsoever the product containing the non-nutritive
      sweeteners in respect of which an offence has been committed.

5.    Interpretation
In these Regulations unless the context otherwise requires—

"Agency" means National Agency for Foods and Drug Administration and
Control;

"non-nutritive sweetener" means any substance having non-nutritive
properties, which when added to food is capable of imparting sweetness to the
food.

6.    Citation

These Regulations may be cited as Non-nutritive Sweetener in Food Products
Regulations.



NON-NUTRITIVE    SWEETENERS                    IN       DRUG      PRODUCTS
(PROHIBITION) REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.    Prohibition of use of non-nutritive sweeteners in drugs products.

2.    Adulterated products.

3.    Conditions for use of non-nutritive sweeteners.

4.    Offence.

5.    Interpretation.

6.    Citation.
NON-NUTRITIVE    SWEETENERS                    IN      DRUG        PRODUCTS
(PROHIBITION) REGULATIONS

[S.1. 12 of 1996.]

[2nd January, 1996]             [Commencement.]

1.    Prohibition of use of non-nutritive sweeteners in drugs products



(1)   No person shall manufacture, import, export, advertise, sell, distribute or
      cause to be distributed any drug product which contains non-nutritive
      sweeteners.

2.    Adulterated products

A drug product shall be regarded as adulterated and hazardous to health if it
contains nun-nutritive sweeteners.

3.    Conditions for use of non-nutritive sweeteners

Without prejudice to section I of these Regulations, the Agency may authorise
the manufacture, importation, exportation, sale, distribution, advertisement and
use of a registered/permitted non-nutritive sweetener for special dietary
requirements and or a formulation.

4.    Offence
(1)   A person who contravenes a provision of these Regulations is guilty of an
      offence and liable on conviction to a fine of N I00,000 or one year
      imprisonment or to both such fine and imprisonment.

(2)   The Agency shall have the power to seize, confiscate, destroy or dispose
      of in any manner whatsoever the product containing the non-nutritive
      sweeteners in respect of which an offence has been committed.

5.    Interpretation

In these Regulations unless the context otherwise requires--

"adulterated drug" means a drug product which bears or contains non-
nutritive sweeteners;
"Agency" means National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control;

"drug product" means any formulation of a drug used for the diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease disorder, abnormal physical
state or the symptoms thereof, in man or in animals; disinfection or the control
of vermin, insects or pests, or contraception;

"non-nutritive sweetener" means any substance having non-nutritive
properties, which when added to a drug product is capable of imparting
sweetness to the drug product.

6.    Citation

These Regulations may be cited as Non-nutritive Sweetener in Drug Products
(Prohibition) Regulations.



FOOD PRODUCTS (ADVERTISEMENT) REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.    Application of Regulations.

2.    Advertisement of unregistered products: Prohibition.

3.    Clearance to be obtained before advertisement.

4.    Nature of advertisement.

5.    Non-referential advertisement.

6.    Application for the approval of advertisements.

7.    Particulars of application.

8.    Validity of approval.

9.    Alteration in approved script.

10.   Unacceptable advertisement.
11.   Appeal in case of withdrawal of approval within the one year specified.

12.   Restriction.

13.   Data comparison misrepresentation.

14.   Accurate interpretation of research findings.

15.   Prohibition of misleading statements in advertisement.

16.   Energy intake in food product for adults and children.

17.   Ambiguous inference to tonic properties.

18.   Protein intake in food product.

19.   Penalties.

20.   Interpretation.

21.   Citation.



FOOD PRODUCTS (ADVERTISEMENT) REGULATIONS [1994 No. 15.
S.1. 13 of 1996.]

[2nd January, 1996]                     [Commencement.]

1.    Application of Regulations



(1)   The provisions of these Regulations shall apply to all advertisements of
      food products (both single entity or compound) imported into Nigeria or
      locally manufactured, distributed or sold in Nigeria.

2.    Advertisement of unregistered products: Prohibition

No person shall advertise any food product unless it has been registered by the
Agency.

3.    Clearance to be obtained before advertisement

No person shall advertise any food product unless the advertisement has the pre-
clearance and approval of the Agency.
4.    Nature of advertisement

All advertisements of food products in Nigeria shall be accurate, complete, clear
and designed to promote credibility and trust by the general public and health
care practitioners and such statements or illustrations contained on the
packaging shall not mislead directly or by implication.

5.    Non-referential advertisement

No advertisement of any food product shall-

(a)   make reference directly or indirectly to any member of the health care
      profession, hospitals, clinic or pharmacy, etc.;

(b)   imitate the general layout, text, slogan or visual presentation or devices of
      other food products in a way likely to mislead or confuse the consumer;
      or
(c)   be framed in such a manner as to make reference directly or indirectly to
      the medical or any of its allied professions.

6.    Application for the approval of advertisements
(1)   All advertisement materials including scripts, story-board, art work,
      radio, video tapes, etc., shall be submitted under confidential cover along
      with an application to the Director-General of the Agency.
(2)   Where the advertisement materials are submitted through any of the State
      offices of the Agency, it shall be subject to the approval of the Director-
      General of the Agency.

7.    Particulars of application

An application submitted by an advertising agent, distributor, manufacturer or
the sponsor of the advert shall contain the following, that is--

(a)   the brand name of the food product;

(b)   place of importation or local manufacture;

(c)   the name and location address of the manufacturer;

(d)   the name and address of the local distributor;

(e)   the name and location address of the advertising company;
(f)   the date of first introduction of the food product to the Nigerian market;

(g)   information about any previous advertisement of the food product in
      Nigeria;

(h)   a copy of the old script;

(i)   the proposed media for the advertisement;

(j)   a copy of the registration certificate of the food product;

(k)   a justification for any special claims on the food product;

(l)   scripts, story-board, art works, radio and video tapes of the advert; and

(m)   such other materials as may be required by the Agency from time to time.

8.    Validity of approval

The approval of an advertisement shall be valid for a period of one year
beginning from the date of the approval.

9.    Alteration in approved script

Any alteration in the format of the approved script, story-board, art work, radio
or videos tapes without the approval of the Agency shall render the approval
null and void.

10.   Unacceptable advertisement

Where an advertisement is considered unacceptable by the Agency, the words
"Unacceptable as presented" shall be stamped on it and it shall be returned to
the advertiser with the unacceptable information or illustration clearly
identified.

11.   Appeal in case of withdrawal of approval within the one year
      specified
(1)   If the approval for an advertisement is withdrawn during the one-year
      period of approval, an appeal shall be lodged within thirty days after the
      receipt of the withdrawal to the Governing Council in writing and
      accompanied by supportive information.

12.   Restriction

No advertisement for a food product shall contain--
(a)   any false or misleading information;

(b)   half-truths, inadequate qualification and limitations regarding safety or
      effectiveness of the food product;

(c)   vague, unsubstantiated statements, suggestions or superiority over other
      competing food products;

(d)   any false impression that the advertised food product is for universal cure
      or should be regarded as a more effective and safer alternative to other
      related food products.

13.   Data comparison misrepresentation
(1)   No comparison shall mislead directly or by implication and any such
      comparison shall be supported by reliable current data.

(2)   Any reference to competitive manufacturer or their specialties shall be
      restricted to factual comparisons without the use of identifiable product(s)
      or brand name(s).
(3)   All data illustrations presented in an advertisement including charts,
      graphs, tables extracted from reference studies or other source or
      reproduced by art work shall be accurate, complete and clear with their
      source specifically identified.

(4)   Data illustrations shall not be misleading or ambiguous or distort the
      original in- tended meaning or interpretation either directly or by
      implication.

14.   Accurate interpretation of research findings

Any copy of an advertisement shall be written in a manner which accurately
interprets valid and representative research findings and relevant statistics on
the food product shall be written in a manner which reflects only their true
validity and significance.

15.   Prohibition of misleading statements in advertisement No person
      shall-

(a)   display, screen or otherwise present an advertisement of a food product
      unless in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations; or

(b)   give to a food product a name which is capable of giving a false
      impression of the nutritional properties of the food product; or
(c)   make any claim to assert, imply or otherwise convey the impression as to
      the suitability of the food product for use in the prevention, alleviation,
      management, treatment or cure of a disease, disorder or physiological
      condition; or

(d)   make a claim that the food product contains a particular value when that
      value is not wholly contributed by the food products, but is partly
      contributed by other food products with which it may be consumed.
(2)   All nutritional claims shall comply with Regulations of the Prepackaged
      Food (Labelling) Regulation 1995.

16.   Energy intake in food product for adults and children

A person shall in advertising a food product or on a label of such food product,
state—

(a)    that the food product is a "source" or "dietary source" of energy if a
      reasonable daily intake of that food product by a person would result in
      the daily intake of not less than 450 kilo calories of energy;

(b)    that the food product is a "good source" or "a good dietary source" of
      energy if a reasonable daily intake of that food product by a person would
      result in an intake of not less than 1,200 kilo calories of energy; and
(c)   that the food product is "an excellent source" or "an excellent dietary
      source" of energy if a reasonable daily intake of that food product by a
      person would result in daily intake of not less than 2,250 kilo calories of
      energy.

(2)   No person shall sell a food product for which an energy claim is made
      and represented as being solely for use in the feeding of children under
      two years of age, unless a reasonable daily intake of that food product by
      a child under two years of age would result in the total daily intake by the
      child of not less than 1,360 kilo calories of energy.

17.   Ambiguous inference to tonic properties

No person shall advertise for the sale or have in his possession for the sale any
food product which is described by a name or words calculated to indicate
either directly or by ambiguity, commission or inference that the food product
has tonic properties by reason only that such food product contains--

(a)   alcohol; or
(b)   protein or substances prepared from the hydrolysis of protein; or

(c)   caffeine or purine derivatives.

18.   Protein intake in food product

A person shall in advertising a food product or on a label of such food product,
state—
(a)   that the food product is “Ha source" or “Ha dietary source" of protein if a
      reason- able daily intake of that food product by a person would result in
      the daily in- take by that person of not less than 9 grams of protein;
(b)   that the food product is Ha good source" or "a good dietary source" of
      protein if a reasonable daily intake of that food product by a person
      would result in an intake of not less than 24 grams of protein; and
(c)    that the food product is "an excellent source" or "an excellent dietary
      source" of protein if a reasonable daily intake of that food product by a
      person would result in daily intake by that person of not less than 45
      grams of protein.

19.   Penalties

If any person defaults in complying with the requirements of these Regulations,
the Agency shall prohibit that person from carrying on the advertisement of
food products either absolutely or for such period of time as the Agency may
determine, in addition to a fine of N50,000.

20.   Interpretation

In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires--

"advertising" means the publicity of goods and description of all products
(which includes any form of notices in circulars, handouts, labels, wrappers,
catalogues and price lists, bill boards, posters, newspapers, magazines, and any
other documents) made orally or otherwise or by means of projected light and
sound recordings;

"Agency" means the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
Control;

"Director-General" means Director-General of the Agency;
"food" means any article manufactured, sold or advertised for use as food or
drink for man, chewing gum, and any ingredient that may be mixed with food
for any purpose whatever, but does not include live animals, birds or fish,
fodder or feeding stuff for animals, birds or fish other than supplements
produced for addition to animal and poultry food stuff;

"food establishment" means any registered place where any operation for the
purpose of manufacturing food is being carried on;

"label" means a display of written, printed or graphic matter upon the
immediate containers;

"package labelling" includes the label on the immediate container and all other
printed matter such as outer wrapper, carton or leaflet associated with the
package.

21.   Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Food Products (Advertisement)
Regulations.



FOOD GRADE (TABLE OR COOKING) SALT REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

REGULATION

1.    Application.

2.    Standard for food grade salt.

3.    Maximum limits of contaminants in food grade salt.

4.    Hygiene of food grade salt.

5.    Labelling of food grade salt.

6.    Interpretation.

7.    Citation.
SCHEDULES



FOOD GRADE (TABLE OR COOKING) SALT REGULATIONS [1993
No. 15. S.1. 14 of 1996.]

[2nd January, 1996]             [Commencement.]

1.     Application
(1)    Any salt used as an ingredient of food for direct use to consumer, food
       manufacture or as a carrier of food additive shall meet the standard
       requirement for food grade salt as set out in this regulation.

(2)    Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of this regulation,
       the requirement applies only to salt which is not a by-product of chemical
       industries.

2.     Standard for food grade salt (1) All food grade salt shall--

(a)    be crystalline product consisting predominantly of sodium chloride;

(b)    be obtained from the sea, from underground rock salt deposits or from
       natural brine;
(c)    contain not less than 97,0% of sodium chloride on a dry matter basis
       exclusive of additives and not more than 0.2% of matter insoluble in
       water.
(2)    (a) The remainder may comprise natural secondary products which are
       present in varying amounts depending on the origin and the method of
       production of the salt which shall compose mainly of calcium, potassium,
       magnesium, sodium sulphate, carbonates, bromides and of calcium,
       potassium and magnesium chlorides.

(b)    Food grade salt may also contain natural contaminants, present in
       amounts varying with the origin and the method of production of the salt
       such that-
(i)    the sulphate content shall not be more than (5g/kg) or (0.5%) expressed
       as S04;

(ii)   the magnesium contents shall not be more than 3g/kg or 0.3% expressed
       as Mg;
(iii)   the calcium content shall not be more than 3g/kg or 0.3% expressed as
        Ca.

(c)     Food grade/salt shall be the fine grained, refined, white crystalline salt
        with the addition of anti-caking agents and other additives the use and
        limits for which shall be as prescribed in Schedule A to these
        Regulations.

(d)     The minimum level of iodine ex-factory and at the port of entry shall be
        50 mg/kg. The minimum level of iodine at all retail outlets (markets,
        supermarkets, etc.) shall be 30 mg/kg.

3.      Maximum limits of contaminants in food grade salt

Food grade salt shall not contain contaminants in amount and in such a form
that shall be harmful to the health of the consumer: The maximum limits
prescribed in Schedule B to these Regulations shall not be exceeded.

4.      Hygiene of food grade salt

The method of production, packaging, storage and transportation of food salt
shall be in accordance with the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practice
(GMP).

5.      Labelling of food grade salt

Notwithstanding the requirements of Prepackaged Food (Labelling) Regulations
of 1995, the following specific provisions shall apply-

(a)     the name of the product as declared on the label shall be "salt";

(b)     the name "salt" shall have a prefix of "food grade" or "Table";

(c)     where the salt contains one or more ferrocyanide salts added to the brine
        during the crystallisation step, the term "dendritic" shall be included to
        accompany the name;

(d)     when the salt is used as a carrier of one or more nutrients and sold as such
        for public health reasons, the name (the product shall be declared
        properly on the label; for example, "Salt fluoridated", "Salt fortified with
        iron", "Salt fortified with vitamins" and so on as appropriate);

(e)     sail (sodium chloride) meant for industrial use shall be labelled boldly in
        red:
"INDUSTRIAL SALT NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION".

6.    Interpretation

For the purpose of this Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires-

"component" means any substance which forms part of an ingredient;

"container" means any form of packaging of salt for sale as a single item
whether by completely or partially enclosing the salt and includes wrappers;

"ingredient" means any substance, including a food additive used in the
manufacture or preparation of salt and present in the final product;

"label" includes any tag, brand, mark, pictorial or other descriptive written,
printed, stencilled, marked, embossed or impressed on or attached to a container
of salt;

"labelling" includes the label and any written, printed or graphic matter
relating to and accompanying the salt;

"prepackaged" means packaged or made up in advance ready for retail sale in
a container.

7.    Citation

These Regulations may be cited as the Food Grade (Table or Cooking) Salt
Regulations.

SCHEDULES

SCHEDULE A

Permitted food additives and their maximum levels in food grade (table or
cooking) salt

1. ANTICAKlNG AGENTS

(a)   Coating Agents

Carbonates (Calcium and/or Magnesium) 20 g/kg singly or in combination
Magnesium Oxide, Phosphate (tricalcium), Silicon 20 g/kg singly or in
combination dioxide

(b)   Coating Hydrophilic Agents

Aluminium, calcium, magnesium, potassium or 20 g/kg singly or in
combination sodium salts of myristic, palmitic or stearic acids

(c)   Crystal Modifiers

Ferrocyanides, calcium potassium or sodium* 10 mg/kg singly or in
combination or expressed as (Fe (CN) 6)

2.    EMULSIFIERS Polysorbate 80 10 mg/kg

3.    PROCESSING AID

Dimethylpoly-silo-xane 10 mg of residue/kg
*Sodium and potassium ferrocyanides maximum level may be 20 mg/kg
when used in the preparation of "dendritic" salt.

SCHEDULE B

[Regulation 3.]
1.                 Arsenic           0.5 mg/kg     expressed as As
2.                 Copper            2 mg/kg       expressed as Cu

3.                 Lead              2 mg/kg       expressed as Pb

4.                 Cadmium           0.1 mg/kg     expressed as Cd
5.                 Mercury           0.1 mg/kg     expressed as Hg
