             Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

GOVERNMENT NOTICE No. 681 Published On. 24/9/2021

                            THE STANDARDS ACT,

                                   (CAP. 130)
                                  ___________

                               REGULATIONS
                                  ___________

                       (Made under section 36(1) and (3)(f))
                                   _________

     THE STANDARDS (IMPORTS REGISTRATION AND BATCH CERTIFICATION)
                          REGULATIONS, 2021

                   ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

Regulation      Title

                                 PART I
                         PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
    1. Citation.
    2. Interpretation.
                          PART II
      REGISTRATION OF IMPORTED PRE-PACKED FOODAND
                        COSMETICS

                                (a) Pre-Packed Food

    3.  Registration of importation of food.
    4.  Application for registration.
    5.  Evaluation of application.
    6.  Certificate of registration.
                                   (b) Cosmetics
    7. Registration of imported cosmetics.
    8. Application for registration.
    9. Evaluation of application.
    10. Certificate of registration.



                                         1
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)




                               PART III
                         BATCH CERTIFICATION

    11. Batch certification.
    12. Evaluation of application.
    13. Inspection.
    14. Low risk commodities and products.
    15. Motor vehicle certification.
    16. Pre-shipment verification approval.
    17. Conditions for pre-shipment verification.
    18. Import clearance permit.
    19. Import standard mark.

                              PART IV
                         GENERAL PROVISIONS

    20. Register.
    21. Notification of change.
    22. Suspension or cancelation.
    23. Procedure for suspension or cancelation.
    24. Removal from register.
    25. Reinstatement.
    26. Disposal of samples.
    27. Sub-standard commodities or products.
    28. Time frame for handling of application
    29. Appeal.
    30. Offences and penalty.
    31. Revocation and savings.

                                      __________


                                      SCHEDULES
                                      __________




                                       2
                 Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)


                              THE STANDARDS ACT,
                                    (CAP. 130)
                                   __________

                                  REGULATIONS
                                      __________

                        (Made under section 36(1) and (3)(f))
                                    ________

      THE STANDARDS (IMPORTS REGISTRATION AND BATCH CERTIFICATION)
                           REGULATIONS, 2021

                                   PART I
                           PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

Citation                   1. These Regulations may be cited as the Standards
                      (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
                      Regulations, 2021.

Interpretation                2. In these Regulations, unless the context requires
  Cap. 130
                     otherwise-
                     “Act” means the Standards Act;
                     “advertisement” means and includes every form of
                     presentation, whether in         publication, or by the display
                     of any notice or by means of any        catalogue, price list,
                     letter, whether circular or addressed to a particular person
                     or by the exhibition of a photograph or a cinematograph
                     film, or         by way of sound recording, sound
                     broadcasting, or television or any      means                of
                     communication;
                     “batch certification” means collection of samples of the
                     imported commodity or            product from a consignment
                     either at the port of entry into the Tanzania Mainland or at
                     agreed premises by the Bureau's inspectors or some other
                              Bureau's authorised, followed by subsequent testing
                     and issuance of a test certificate testifying the clearance of
                     the import for entry and sale into      Tanzania Mainland;
                     “Bureau” means the Tanzania Bureau of Standards
                     established by section 3 of the Act;
                                             3
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                “certificate of conformity (CoC)” means a certificate issued
                by a competent           contractor appointed by the Bureau
                certifying or attesting that a particular      export
                consignment or shipment of the commodity destined to
                Tanzania        Mainland as sampled and tested conforms to
                the specified Tanzania          Standard or International or
                Foreign Standard recognised by the Bureau;
                “cosmetic” means any article intended to be used by means
                of rubbing, pouring, steaming, sprinkling, spraying on or
                otherwise applied to the human body            or any part
                thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness
                or      altering the appearance and includes any article
                intended for use as a component of a cosmetic, but
                excludes articles intended for use in the      diagnosis,
                treatment or prevention of diseases and those intended to
                affect the structure or any function of the body;
                “conditional release” means a clearance issued by the
                Bureau to the importer          allowing release of the
                imported goods from the customs custody after
                        compliance with the requirements prescribed by the
                Bureau while awaiting issuance of the batch certificate or
                directives from the Bureau;
                “clearance permit” means a clearance issued by the Bureau
                to the importer          allowing release of the imported
                goods from the customs custody after           compliance
                with the requirements prescribed by the Bureau;
                “commodity” means all article or thing which is the subject
                of industry, trade or business;
                “Director General” means Director General appointed
                under section 7 of the Act;
                “emergency food” means food required in times of shortage
                as a results of drought, flood which lead to famine, war,
                economic disaster or population displacement;
                “food” means any substance whether processed, semi-
                processed or raw which is       intended      for      human
                consumption, and includes drinks, chewing gum and
                        any substance which has been used in the
                manufacture, preparation or treatment of food but does

                                       4
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                not include cosmetics, tobacco or substance used only as
                drugs;
                “inspector” means an inspector appointed under section 23
                of the Act;
                “importation” means to bring goods from another country
                into Tanzania Mainland and subjecting into use, sell or
                distribution after compliance with the proper clearance
                procedures;
                “infant” means a person of not more than twelve months of
                age;
                “Import Standards Mark” means a mark issued by a Bureau
                to be instituted to a product       or    commodity       after
                compliance with the applicable standard for the purpose of
                identification during market surveillance;
                "label " means any tag, brand, mark, pictorial or other
                descriptive matter, written, printed, stenciled, marked,
                embossed or impressed on or attached to a container of
                any product;
                “non pre-packaged foods” means all farm food produce
                such as cereals, pulses, roots and tubers, fruits, vegetables,
                nuts and oil seeds, spices, raw meat and fish, eggs, raw
                milk which are used as raw materials or for direct human
                consumption;
                “occasional food or cosmetics” means product or
                commodity occasionally imported for special purpose;
                “premises” includes land, buildings, structures, basements
                and vessels and-
                    (a) in relation to any building includes a part of a
                        building and any cartilage, forecourt, yard or place
                        of storage used in connection with building or part
                        of that building;
                    (b) in relation to ''vessel'', means ship, boat, air craft,
                        vehicle and includes a carriage or receptacle of any
                        kind, whether open or closed;




                                       5
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                “Pre-shipment Verification of Conformity to standards ”
                means a conformity assessment process used to verify
                that products to be imported into       Tanzania Mainland
                are in conformity with the applicable Tanzania
                        standards or foreign or international standards
                recognized by the Bureau        before shipment;
                “pre-packaged food” means food that is processed to
                extend its shelf life, packaged, labeled, and complying
                with specified standards ready for offer to the consumer
                and includes food supplements;
                “product” means goods and services designed to be
                released or launched in a       market;
                "standard" means set of rules or conditions prescribing,
                recommending or         relating to the state of being of a
                matter or thing as universally recognised      for common
                and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for
                        activities or their results, aimed at achieving an
                optimum degree of order         in a given context including
                other recommendations made by the Bureau,
                        relating to or governing the specification, code of
                practice, safety, trade description, sampling method, testing
                method or any other aspect, quality, nature       or  matter
                relating to or connected with-
                    (a) the production or marketing of any commodity or
                        services; or
                    (b) any component, raw material, machinery,
                        instrument, apparatus or other thing used directly or
                        indirectly, in the production or marketing of any
                        commodity or service, and includes, in relation to
                        metrology, provisions approved or prescribed by the
                        Bureau relating to the fundamental unit or physical
                        constant and the testing of instruments and
                        apparatus used for the determination of weights and
                        measures; and
                “young child” means a person from the age of more than
                twelve months up to the         age of three years.

                                   PART II

                                       6
                Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

      REGISTRATION OF IMPORTED PRE-PACKED FOOD AND
                         COSMETICS
                       (a) pre- packed food

Registration of             3.-(1) A person shall not carry on the business of
importation of
food
                    importation of pre-packed food unless is registered by the
                    Bureau.
                            (2) Subject to subregulation (1), the registration of
                    food shall not apply to emergency food, food donation,
                    occasional food and any category of food as the Bureau
                    may determine.
                            (3) The proposed food intended to be imported
                    under subregulation (1) shall comply with the following:
                        (a) the composition of the food proposed to be
                            imported is not of a quality below the specification;
                        (b) importation and consumption of the food proposed
                            would enhance or contribute in any other way to
                            the national effort to improve the nutritional status
                            of the people of Tanzania; or
                        (c) the food or its product and practices related thereto
                            does not in any way contravene the provisions of
                            these Regulations.
                            (4) Registration of food shall be categorised into
                    three groups as follows:
                            (a) high risk foods for special nutritional purposes;
                            (b) high risk foods for general purpose; and
                            (c) low risk foods.
                            (5) The description of groups of food under
                    subregulation (4) shall be as set out in the First Schedule to
                    these Regulations.

 Application for            4.-(1) A person who intends to carry on a business
 registration       of importation of food shall apply to the Bureau for
                    registration by submitting an application in Form No. 1 set
                    out in the Second Schedule to these Regulations.
                            (2) The application form under subregulation (1)
                    shall be addressed to the Director General accompanied
                                           7
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                 and complied with the following documents in Kiswahili
                 or English:
                     (a) in case of high risk food for special nutritional
                         purposes:
                            (i) sample of the food;
                            (ii) business license;
                            (iii) brief description of the product (typical
                                 ingredients, additives and their proportions);
                            (iv) authoritative health certificate or certificate
                                 of free sale;
                            (v) copy of certificate of good manufacturing
                                 practice or hazard analysis critical control
                                 point compliance certificate;
                            (vi) certificate of analysis;
                            (vii) material safety data sheet;
                            (viii) manufacturing site master file;
                            (ix) manufacturing plants shall be subjected to
                                 good manufacturing practice inspection prior
                                 to grant of registration and effect payment
                                 of fees as will be prescribed during the
                                 submission of the application;
                            (x) for infant formula, follow-up formula and
                                 formula for special medical purposes
                                 intended for infants and young children,
                                 labeling shall be in Kiswahili and English;
                                 and
                            (xi) any other requirement as the Bureau may
                                 determine.
                     (b) for high risk foods for general purpose-
                            (i) sample of the product
                            (ii) certificate of analysis;
                            (iii) material safety datasheet;
                            (iv) business license;
                            (v) statement        of authorization from the
                                 manufacturer if any;
                            (vi) in addition to fulfill the general requirement
                                 submit any of the following:
                                  (A) health certificate or certificate of free
                                      sale;
                                  (B) copy      of    certificate    of    good
                                       8
                Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                         manufacturing practice or hazard
                                         analysis      critical   control  point
                                         compliance certificate; or
                                     (C) permit from the Vice President’s Office
                                         - Environment for genetically modified
                                         foods or foods containing genetically
                                         modified ingredients; and
                               (vii) any other requirement as the Bureau may
                                    determine;
                        (c) for low risk foods:
                               (i) sample of the food;
                               (ii) business license;
                               (iii) certificate of analysis;
                               (iv) statement of authorisation from the
                                    manufacturer if any; and
                    any other requirement as the Bureau may determine.
                            (3) Upon receipt of an application for registration,
                    the Director General shall as soon as practicable proceed to
                    consider the application and grant registration if he is
                    satisfied that-
                             (a) the food importer has registered his food
                                  premises in accordance to the requirements
                                  prescribed in the Standards (Registration of
                                  Premises and Certification of Products)
                                  Regulations, 2021;
                             (b) the intended food to be imported has been
                                  registered; and
                             (c) any other requirement as the Bureau may
                                  determine.
                            (4) The Director General upon receipt of the
                    application and being satisfied that, the requirement under
                    subregulations (2) and (3) have been complied with, shall
                    instruct the applicant to pay a non-refundable fees as may
                    be prescribed by the Minister before evaluation process is
                    carried out.

Evaluation of              5.-(1) The Director General upon receipt of the
application         application shall evaluate the same to determine whether
                                           9
                 Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                     the food comply with safety and quality requirement.
                              (2) Subject to subregulation (1), evaluation process
                     shall include:
                             (a) relevance of submitted documents;
                             (b) laboratory analysis;
                             (c) ingredients and food additives;
                             (d) labeling information; and
                             (e) packaging material.
                              (3) The Director General, after evaluation of the
                     application and being satisfied may-
                             (a) approve and issue a certificate of registration to
                                  the applicant; or
                             (b) reject the application and inform the applicant
                                  within fourteen days stating the reason for such
                                  decision.

Certificate of               6.-(1) The certificate of registration shall be in
registration
                     Form No. 2 set out in the Second Schedule to these
                     Regulations and contains such conditions as the Director
                     General may impose.
                             (2) The certificate of registration shall be valid for
                     a period of five years from the date it was issued and
                     subject to renewal.
                             (3) The application for renewal shall be made at
                     least sixty days before expiry of the existing registration
                     and during evaluation of application the Director General
                     may require the applicant to rectify the observed
                     shortcomings as deemed necessary.

                                     Cosmetics
Registration of             7.-(1) A person shall not carry on the business of
imported             importation of cosmetics unless is registered by the
cosmetics            Bureau.
                            (2) Subject to subregulation (1), the registration of
                     cosmetics shall not apply to donated cosmetics, occasional
                     cosmetics and any category of cosmetics as the Bureau
                     may determine.

                                           10
              Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                         (3) The proposed cosmetics intended to be
                  imported under subregulation (1) shall not-
                     (a) contain poisonous or harmful substance that might
                         injure users under normal conditions;
                     (b) be counterfeit cosmetics; and
                     (c) be contrary to the required standards and
                         provisions of these Regulations.
Application for            8.-(1) A person who intends to carry on a business
registration
                  of importation of cosmetics shall apply to the Director
                  General for registration by submitting an application in
                  Form No. 3 set out in the Second Schedule to these
                  Regulations.
                           (2) The application form under subregulation (1)
                  shall be addressed to the Director General and
                  accompanied by the following documents in Kiswahili or
                  English:
                          (a) sample of the cosmetics;
                          (b) business license;
                          (c) certificate of analysis;
                          (d) material safety data sheet;
                          (e) product information leaflet where applicable;
                          (f) statement        of authorisation from the
                               manufacturer, if any; and
                          (g) any other requirement as the Bureau may
                               determine.
                           (3) Upon receipt of an application for registration,
                  the Director General shall as soon as practicable proceed
                  to consider the application and grant registration if he is
                  satisfied that-
                      (a) the importer of cosmetics has registered his
                           cosmetics premises in accordance to the
                           requirements prescribed in the Standards
                           (Registration of Premises and Certification of
                           Products) Regulations, 2021;
                      (b) the intended cosmetics to be imported has been
                           registered; and
                      (c) any other requirement as the Bureau may
                           determine.
                           (4) The Director General shall, upon receipt of the
                  application and being satisfied that the requirement under
                                         11
                 Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                     subregulations (2) and (3) have been complied with,
                     instruct the applicant to pay a non-refundable fees as may
                     be prescribed by the Minister before evaluation process is
                     carried out.
Evaluation of                 9.-(1) The Director General shall, upon receipt of
application
                      the application, evaluate the same to determine whether
                      the cosmetics comply with safety and quality requirement.
                              (2) Subject to subregulation (1), evaluation process
                      shall include:
                               (a) relevance of submitted documents;
                               (b) laboratory analysis;
                               (c) ingredients;
                               (d) labeling information; and
                               (e) packaging material.
                              (3) The Director General may, after evaluation of
                      the application-
                          (a) approve and issue a certificate of registration to the
                              applicant; or
                          (b) reject the application and inform the applicant
                              within fourteen days stating the reason for such
                              decision.

Certificate of               10.-(1) The certificate of registration shall be in
Registration
                     Form No. 4 set out in the Second Schedule to these
                     Regulations and contains such conditions as the Director
                     General may impose.
                             (2) The certificate of registration shall be valid for
                     a period of five years from the date it was issued and
                     subject to renewal.
                             (3) The application for renewal shall be made at
                     least sixty days before expiry of the existing registration
                     and during evaluation of application the Director General
                     may require the applicant to rectify the observed
                     shortcomings as may be necessary.


                                       PART III
                              BATCH CERTIFICATION
                                      12
                Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)


Batch                           11.-(1) A person shall not sell, grant, donate,
Certification
                    distribute, expose for sale, provide as gift, offer for sale or
                    in any way release or launch in a market any imported
                    commodity or product, unless it is approved and certified
                    by the Bureau.
                                (2) Subject to subregulation (1), an importer
                    shall at least within seven days before the arrival of the
                    imported consignment, apply to the Bureau for the Batch
                    Certification.
                             (3) An application made under subregulation (2)
                    shall be in Form No. 5 set out in the Second Schedule to
                    these Regulations and accompanied by the followings:
                            (a) bill of lading or airway bill, or road
                                 consignment note;
                            (b) commercial invoice;
                            (c) packing list;
                            (d) tax assessment document;
                            (e) test certificate or certificate of analysis from the
                                 country of origin or export as issued by the
                                 National Standards Body thereof; or its
                                 recognised testing authority in that country
                                 establishing conformity of the imported
                                 consignment, if any;
                            (f) proof of premise registration for food and
                                 cosmetics except for occasional food and
                                 cosmetics; and
                            (g) any other requirement as may be prescribed by
                                 the Bureau.

Evaluation of              12.-(1) The Director General shall, upon receipt of
application
                    the application, evaluate the same based on the submitted
                    documents and harmonised standards code to determine
                    whether the consignment is within the Bureau’s mandate.
                           (2) Subject to subregulation (1), the harmonised
                    standards code shall be as prescribed by a Director General
                    and reviewed from time to time.
                           (3) The Director General shall, upon evaluation of
                                         13
             Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                 the application and being satisfied that the requirement
                 under subregulation (1) have been complied with, instruct
                 the applicant to pay a non-refundable fee as may be
                 prescribed by the Minister prior to inspection of the
                 consignment.

Inspection                13.-(1) The Bureau shall conduct the inspection of
                 the consignment after its arrival upon being notified by the
                 importer.
                          (2) Subject to subregulation (1), the Bureau, after
                 being notified, shall assign an inspector to conduct
                 inspection of the consignment by examining physical
                 condition of the consignment and may draw samples
                 where applicable depending on the nature of the
                 consignment as per declared standard.
                          (3) The inspector after conducting inspection shall
                 fill in the inspection form set out as Form No. 6 in the
                 Second Schedule to these Regulations and the form shall
                 contain the details and findings of the inspected
                 consignment and be signed by both inspector and importer.
                          (4) The form filled under subregulation (3), shall
                 be submitted to the Director General together with sample
                 collected if any for evaluation to determine whether they
                 have complied with the requirements as prescribed under
                 these Regulations.
                          (5) The Director General, after evaluation made
                 under subregulation (4) and upon being satisfied that-
                             (a) the requirements have been complied with,
                                 may approve and issue a batch certificate; or
                             (b) the requirements have not been complied
                                 with, may reject the consignment and inform
                                 the importer within seven days stating the
                                 reason for such decision.
                          (6) The Batch Certificate shall be in Form No. 7 set
                 out in the Second Schedule to these Regulations and
                 specific to the respective consignment as revealed on the
                 bill of lading, airway bill or road consignment note.

                                       14
                Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

Low risk                    14. Where the commodities and products rated as
commodities and
products
                    low risk are imported accompanied by test report or
                    certificate of analysis issued by accredited Laboratory
                    recognised by the Bureau from the country of origin or
                    export, the Director General may inspect and issue a Batch
                    Certificate Type B in Form No. 8 set out in the Second
                    Schedule to these Regulations upon satisfaction that the
                    same conforms to the standards requirements.

Motor vehicle                15.-(1) Certification of imported motor vehicle,
certification
                    shall be carried out after the Bureau has conducted the
                    inspection as per the standard requirements recognised by
                    the Bureau.
                             (2) The Director General, after being satisfied that-
                            (a) the requirements have been complied with may
                                 approve and issue           a   certificate of
                                 roadworthiness in Form No. 9 set out in Second
                                 Schedule of these Regulations; or
                            (b) the requirements have not been complied with,
                                 the motor vehicle may be released with
                                 condition to rectify the observed defect within
                                 twenty-one days.
                             (3) The motor vehicle released after rectification of
                    the observed defect, shall be retested for conformity to the
                    respective standard and if complied shall be issued with
                    certificate of roadworthiness.

Pre-shipment               16.-(1) The Bureau shall have a system of
verification
                    conformity assessment before shipment to verify that, the
approval
                    commodities and products imported in Tanzania are in
                    conformity with the applicable national standards or
                    foreign or international standards recognised by the
                    Bureau.
                           (2) Subject to subregulation (1), the Director
                    General shall prepare and submit to the Board a list of
                    commodities and products that may require mandatory
                    pre-shipment verification of conformity to Standards for
                    recommendations.
                                        15
                 Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                             (3) The Board shall, after scrutinizing the
                     submission made under subregulation (2), submit a list of
                     commodities and products together with their
                     recommendations to the Minister for approval.
                             (4) Subject to subregulation (3), the Minister shall,
                     after approval, direct the Bureau to publish the approved
                     list of commodities and products in the widely circulated
                     newspaper and in the Bureau’s website.

Conditions for               17.-(1) An importer shall, before shipment of
pre-shipment
                     commodities and products, ensure the commodities and
verification
                     products are in the list approved by the Minister under
                     regulation 16.
                             (2) Subject to subregulation (1), the importer shall
                     inspect and test commodities and products from
                     government accredited laboratory of the country of export
                     recognised by the Bureau.
                             (3) The importer shall, in two weeks before the
                     arrival of the consignment, submit to the Bureau the
                     following documents:
                            (a) test report or certificate of analysis issued by
                                government accredited laboratory;
                            (b) custom documents including bill of lading or
                                airway bill or road consignment note;
                            (c) invoice;
                            (d) tax assessment document;
                            (e) packing list; and
                            (f) any other documents as the Bureau may require.
                             (4) The Bureau shall review the submitted
                     documents to verify the authenticity and inspect the
                     consignment.
                             (5) Subject to subregulation (4), the Bureau shall,
                     after being satisfied that the documents and consignment
                     complied with requirements as prescribed and upon
                     payment of prescribed fee, issue a batch certificate in Form
                     No. 7 set out in the Second Schedule to these Regulations.



                                           16
             Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

Import clearance            18.-(1) Import clearance permit may be issued by
permit
                   the Bureau in Form No. 10 set out in the Second Schedule
                   to these Regulations to the importer of the consignment
                   where in the opinion of the Bureau-
                           (a) the importer has complied with customs
                                requirements and there are pending clearance
                                procedures that will take more than seven days
                                to be addressed;
                           (b) the consignment is in small quantity and has
                                undergone physical verification;
                           (c) the manufacturing facility of the imported
                                commodities or products have undergone Good
                                Manufacturing Practice Inspection; and
                           (d) the products or commodities have been
                                manufactured by foreign companies licenced to
                                use Bureau’s standards mark.
                            (2) Subject to subregulation (1), the permit may be
                   issued with or without conditions as the Bureau may deem
                   fit depending on circumstances pertaining to the clearance
                   of the consignment.
                            (3) The consignment may be released with
                   conditions upon the written request to the Director General
                   made by the importer as a commitment to abide with the
                   conditions therein.
                            (4) Subject to subregulation (3), the Director
                   General may, after receiving and being satisfied with the
                   written request from the importer, issue a conditional
                   release declaration form set out as Form No. 11 in the
                   Second Schedule to these Regulations.
                            (5) The Director General shall, upon evaluation of
                   the conditional release declaration form and being
                   satisfied that, the conditions set out in the form have been
                   complied with, issue import clearance permit.
                            (6) Where the permit has been issued with
                   conditions, the importer shall not unload, distribute, sell,
                   use or transfer the consignment either in part or whole to
                   any person or any place other than to the address specified
                   in the conditional release declaration form pending the

                                       17
              Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                  issuance of the batch certificate or any other directives as
                  may be provided by the Bureau.

Use of imports             19.-(1) The batch certificates issued under these
standards mark
                  Regulations shall form the basis for the importer to use
                  import standard mark in respect of commodities and
                  products detailed on the particular bill of lading or airway
                  bill, or road consignment note.
                           (2) The import standard mark shall be in a manner
                  as may be prescribed by the Bureau and shall be used for
                  verification of authenticity of commodity and products
                  during market surveillance inspections.
                           (3) Subject to subregulation (1), the Bureau shall
                  issue an authorisation letter together with the import
                  standard mark stickers to the importer to be used for
                  labeling the products or commodities as detailed on the
                  bill of lading or airway bill, or road consignment
                  note.

                                PART IV
                           GENERAL PROVISIONS

Register
                         20. The Bureau shall cause to be kept and
                  maintained a register of imported commodities and
                  products which shall contain the following information:
                        (a) the name of registered importer;
                        (b) quantity of imported consignment;
                        (c) the kind of commodities or products in respect
                            of which is registered;
                        (d) country of export;
                        (e) the date of registration;
                        (f) the date of importation; and
                        (g) such other particulars as the Bureau may
                            prescribe.

Notification of           21. A person registered under these Regulations
change of
                                        18
                 Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

information          who intends to alter any matter related to a registered food
                     or cosmetics shall before marketing the changed product,
                     notify the alteration and obtain approval from the Bureau
                     by giving reasons and the extent of such alteration thereon
                     submit samples of the registered and changed product.

Suspension or                 22.-(1) The Director General may suspend or
cancelation of
certificate
                     cancel the certificate issued under these regulations when
                     satisfied that the terms and conditions have been violated.
                              (2) The certificate may be suspended when the
                     holder-
                             (a) fails to observe the imposed terms and
                                  conditions; or
                             (b) contravenes any provisions of the Act or these
                                  Regulations.
                              (3) The Director General may cancel any certificate
                     issued where-
                             (a) it is discovered that, was obtained based on
                                  false information; or
                             (b) it is reasonably suspected that, the item
                                  specified therein is likely to cause health, safety
                                  and environment hazards to consumers.

Procedure for                23.-(1) The Director General after being satisfied
suspension or
cancelation of
                     that, the holder of certificate has violated the terms and
certificate.         conditions, shall notify the holder in writing specifying the
                     nature of default.
                             (2) Upon receipt of the notice under subregulation
                     (1), the holder of certificate as the case may be, shall make
                     representation in writing to the Director General on the
                     rectification of the default within a period of fourteen days
                     after receiving notification.
                             (3) Where the holder of certificate fails to rectify
                     the default within the time specified in the notice or fails to
                     make representation satisfactorily, the Director General
                     shall cancel or suspend the certificate.
                                           19
                Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                            (4) Subject to subregulation (3) the Director
                    General shall notify in writing the person whose certificate
                    has been cancelled or suspended and remove the name of
                    the person from the register.

Removal from                24.-(1) A person whose name has been removed
register
                    from the register shall, within fourteen days of the
                    notification of such removal, surrender to the Director
                    General any certificate issued.
                            (2) A person who fails to surrender the certificate
                    within the period prescribed under subregulation (1)
                    commits an offence.

Reinstatement               25. A person whose name has been removed from
                    the register and intends to be reinstated shall be required to
                    start the process of obtaining a certificate afresh as
                    prescribed in these Regulations.

Disposal of                 26.-(1) The Bureau shall, for a period of fourteen
samples
                    days after the issuance of test report, retain remaining
                    samples drawn from a consignment.
                            (2) Save for samples that have undergone
                    destructive test or non-conforming samples, the importer
                    shall be required to collect the samples from the Bureau
                    within fourteen days from the date of issuance of test
                    report.
                            (3) Subject to subregulation (2), the samples that
                    have not been collected within the specified time shall be
                    disposed off as per procedures prescribed by the Bureau.

Sub-standard                27.- (1) A person shall not in any manner import,
commodities or
products
                    unload, sell, distribute or supply         commodities or
                    products not in conformity with the standards recognised
                    by the Bureau.
                          (2) Subject to subregulation (1), the commodities or
                    products which do not conform to the standards recognised
                    by the Bureau, shall be-
                                         20
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                         (a) re-exported to its country of origin or export; or
                         (b) disposed off within the Tanzania Mainland.
                          (3) The importer of the commodities or products
                 who has been ordered to re-export to the country of export
                 or dispose pursuant to the provision of subregulation (2)
                 shall adhere to the following requirements-
                         (a) keep separately unfit products and commodities;
                         (b) demarcate an area for keeping unfit products
                             which shall be labeled conspicuously in red ink
                             with words in English “Unfit for intended use”
                             or in Kiswahili “Hazifai kwa matumizi
                             yaliyokusudiwa”; and
                         (c) maintain safe custody of unfit products in
                             premises mutually agreed until they are
                             disposed off or re-exported.
                          (4) The disposal of the commodities and product
                 shall be carried out as prescribed by the Bureau.
                          (5) The importer whose commodities or products
                 are subject to re-exportation or disposal shall bear the costs
                 for the same as the case may be.

Time frame for           28. Handling of any application whose time frame
handling of
                 is not specifically provided for under these Regulations
application
                 shall be set out in the Bureau’s client’s services charter.

Appeal                   29.-(1) A person who is aggrieved by the decision
                 of Director General may appeal to the Minister within
                 fourteen days after receiving the decision.
                         (2) An appeal under subregulation (1) shall be in
                 writing stating the grounds for such appeal supported by
                 sufficient evidence if any and signed by the appellant.
                         (3) The Minister after receiving the appeal shall
                 within ninety days from the date of receipt of appeal make
                 decision.
                         (4) The appellant may, at any time prior the
                 Minister’s decision, lodge a notice with intention to
                 withdraw an appeal and upon receipt of the notice, the
                 Minister shall mark the appeal officially withdrawn.



                                      21
               Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

Offences and               30.-(1) A person who contravenes the provisions of
penalty
                   these Regulations commits an offence and on conviction,
                   shall be liable to imprisonment for a term of not less than
                   two years or to a fine of not less than fifty million shillings
                   and not exceeding one hundred million shillings or to both.
                           (2) On a second or subsequent conviction of any
                   person for an offence committed under these regulations,
                   that person shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not
                   less than three years or to a fine not less than fifty million
                   shillings and not exceeding one hundred million shillings.
                           (3) In convicting a person for an offence under
                   these Regulations, the court may, in addition to any other
                   penalty which may be imposed, order the confiscation of
                   all or any part of any goods in respect of which the offence
                   was committed, and all goods so confiscated shall be
                   disposed off in the manner as the court may direct.

Revocation and             31.-(1) The Standards (Compulsory Batch
savings
GN. No.            Certification of Imports) Regulations, 2009 are hereby
 405 of 2009       revoked.
                           (2) Notwithstanding      the provisions of
                   subregulation (1), any decision made, permit, licence,
                   order or any documents issued by the Bureau pursuant to
                   the revoked Regulations shall be deemed to be made or
                   issued under these Regulations.




                                         22
             Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                       ________
                                   FIRST SCHEDULE
                                     _____________

                              (Made under regulation 3(5))

                                  GROUPS OF FOOD

    (a) High risk foods for special nutritional purposes

Food products under this group shall include food for special nutritional purpose whose
intrinsic properties have the potential of being contaminated with pathogens and or
chemical toxins causing high health risks to vulnerable groups who due to their
physiological conditions are targets for these products. Such food products include:
                        (a)          Infant formulae and Follow-up formulae;
                        (b)          Complementary foods for infants and young children;
                        (c)          Foods intended for special medical purposes;
                        (d)          Formula foods for use in weight control diets;
                        (e)          Food supplements which include:
                                     (i) Vitamins and Minerals;
                                     (ii) Amino acids;
                                     (iii) Essential Fatty acids;
                                     (iv) Plant, Plant extracts, and other herbal based
                                           supplement;
                                     (v) Enzymes and other metabolites;
                                     (vi) Prebiotics;
                                     (vii) Probiotics;
                                     (viii)    Animal products and animal extracts;
                                     (ix) Protein Concentrates.

    (b) High risk foods for general purpose

Foods in this group are classified as such because of their high possibility of being
contaminated or have intrinsic properties which can support growth of pathogenic micro-
organisms or chemical toxins. Such food products include:
                  (a) milk and milk products;
                  (b) meat and meat products, including poultry and game;
                  (c) fish and fish products, including molluscs, crustaceans and
                       echinoderms;
                  (d) eggs and egg products;
                  (e) spices, soups, sauces, salads and protein products;
                  (f) processed vegetables and vegetable products (including
                       mushrooms and fungi, roots and tubers, pulses and legumes, and
                       aloe vera), seaweeds, and nuts and seeds, dried vegetables
                       (including in grounded form), vegetables in vinegar, oil, brine, or


                                            23
             Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                      soy sauce; fermented vegetable products and cooked, blanched or
                      fried vegetables;
                  (g) ready-to-eat savories (processed nuts and nuts products, including
                      coated nuts and nut mixtures;
                  (h) composite foods - foods that could not be categorised in other
                      groups;
                  (i) potable water; and
                  (j) herbal tea/ infusions excluding sliming tea.
    (c)       Low risk foods

This group shall include pre-packaged foods, the risk of which is relatively lower than
food products categorized in group one and two above. These foods include-
             (a) fats and oils, and fat emulsions;
             (b) edible ices, including sherbet and sorbet;
             (c) processed fruits and fruits products;
             (d) confectionaries e.g. hard and soft candy;
             (e) coffee, tea, cocoa and their products;
             (f) cereals and cereal products, including products derived from cereal
                  grains, from roots and tubers, pulses and legumes;
             (g) bakery wares;
             (h) sweeteners, including honey;
             (i) non alcoholic beverages, excluding dairy products;
             (j) alcoholic beverages, including alcohol-free and low-alcoholic
                  counterparts;
             (k) salt and salt substitutes; and
             (l) vinegars.




                                            24
                  Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                                              _____________

                                                        SECOND SCHEDULE
                                                          _____________

                                                                      FORMS
                                                                                                                                      FORM NO. 1
                                                   (Made under regulation 4(1))


            APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION OF FOOD AND FOOD IMPORTER

 A. Particulars of Importer/Applicant:

   1.1 Name of applicant ...................................................................................................................................... ……………………
   1.2 Address applicant.................................................................................................................
   1.3 Telephone Number................................................................................................................
   1.4 Street or Village.................................................................................... .................................

    B. Particulars of product:

     1.1 Brand                                                                                                                                     Name:
              ..............................................................................................

     1.2 Common name: .............................................................................
              .....................................................

     1.3 Brief description of the physical characteristics of the food (form, colour etc)
     .......................................................................................................... ............................................
     ......................................................................................................... .............................................
     .......................................................................................................... ............................................
     ......................................................

     1.4 Brief description of the use of the food (for direct human consumption/food raw
     material);
     .......................................................................................................... ............................................
     ......................................................................................................................................................
     ..........
     1.5 Intended end user (infants, young, children, pregnant women, immune compromised,
     old age, diabetic, general population. State any other conditions or contraindications if any)


     1.6 Type
           of materials                                 for       the       packaging             container           and        liner        if      any
     …………………………….

     1.7 Type
           of materials                                       for          cap/crown/closure                    and          liner          if        any
     …………………………………


                                                                        25
                  Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

     1.8 Type of seal (limper proof/non temper proof) ....................................................................
     1.9 Retail                     packaging                    unit               in              weight                   or       volume:
             ........................................................................
     1.10 Shelf                         life                  after                     opening                     of               container:
             ................................................................................
     1.11 Instruction                                                                                                                       for
     use:.................................................................................................................
     1.12 Recommended                           storage            conditions                   before        and            after     opening
     ..............................................

     1.13 Attach a scientific description on how the shelf life was established.


     2.0 Particulars of applicant
     2.1 Name (company/person): ... .... .............................................. ..........
      2.2 Name                     of            the            country                 where            the             company           was
      incorporated.......................................................................................
      2.3 Physical address
      (plot/blockNo./street/village/district/region):............................................

      2.4 Postal                  Address:                   Physical                    address              (country,              town/city,
      street)...............................................

      2.5 Telephone: ......................................... ..... ........................
      2.6 Fax: ...................................................................................
      2.7 E-Mail:..............................................................................
      2.8 Name of local food manufacturer, or importer: ................


      3.0 Particulars of manufacturer
      3.1 Name (company/person): ................... ...............................
      3.2 Name of the country where the company was incorporated......................................
      3.3 Postal Address: ... .........................................................................................................

      3.4 Physical address (country, town/city, street):
      3.4 Phone: ………………………………………..……….. ................
      3.5 Fax: ..........................
      3.6 E-mail: .....................

                                                                        26
                    Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)



        4.0 In case of imported food provide the following:
        4.1 Product health certificate from competent Bureau.
        4.2 Document from relevant recognised organization indicating that the manufacturing
                  facility complies with GMP, HACCP or other quality assurance systems.

        4.3 Documentary evidence indicating that the product has been approved in the country of
                  origin or country of dispatch.
        5.0      Ingredients used

                List ingredient in descending order of proportion quantities per unit of
                measurement of the product and reason of inclusion.

        5.1      Main ingredients

  S/N          Name                                                       Proportion (e-g. %, ml/1., ml/kg units)




                  5.2 Food additives
                                 Name (Specific,                                  Levels (eg. %,
                  S                                                                                                                  Purpose of
                  /                 common,                                       ml/L or mg/kg,
                  N                 chemical,                                                                                           Use
                                                                                       units
                                 technical) or E-
                                     number




6.0 Verification by the applicant


   The ...................................... ... ... ................................ (position in the company) and a dully
   authorized representative of ... ... ................................ do hereby certify that all the information
   filled in this form and all the accompanying documents are true and correct to the best of my
   knowledge and confirm that the information referred to in this application is available for proof.
   Signature: ............................................. .......................................................... ............................

   Date......................... ........ ...........................................................................................................

   Official Stamp/Seal:,... .................................................................................................................

   N.B. The Applicant shall be accountable to all information supplied in support of his

                                                                        27
                 Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

   application and any false declaration constitutes an offence.


        C: For official use only

             1. Name of receiving officer:.............................................Date...........................................



             2.Registration of .............................................................is hereby granted as food

             importer for the year........................................................to import the following food

             products (attached list products).


             ...................................                 ................................                 ............. ...................
             ............................
           Quality Assurance officer                  Designation                                                                  Signature
    Date

   ..........................          ...................... ..............................        ..................................
       Director General                Designation                     Signature                            Date




                                                                   28
               Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)


                                                                                       FORM NO. 2

                                   (Made under regulation 6 (1))

                           PRODUCT REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE

                              Certification No. ……………………….



This is to certify that the Food Product described below has been registered in Tanzania subject to
conditions indicated.
Product/Common Name …………………………………….
Brand/Trade Name ………………………………………….
Name and Address of registrant ………………………………
Name and Address of Manufacturer………………………….

VALID FROM: ……………………………………

TO:………………………………………………..


……………………………..                                                    …………………………….
Date                                                    Signature of Director General and Stamp



                               CONDITIONS OF REGISTRATION

1.This certificate can be revoked, suspended, cancelled or cease to operate immediately after the
expiry time.

2.Registered products cannot be advertised without written approval of advertisement from Bureau.

3.The product shall comply with all relevant provisions of these Regulations.

4.The certificate holder shall comply with all Tanzanian labeling requirements at all times.

5.The certificate holder shall ensure that the manufacturing facilities where a registered product is
produced comply at all times with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) requirements.

6.The certificate holder shall ensure that application for renewal of registration is made sixty days
before expiry of registration.

7. The Bureau shall be notified prior to any alteration made on the products.

8. The Bureau reserves the right to withdrawal this certificate when conditions 1 to 7 are
contravened and when the risks of the product outweighs the benefits or it is in public interest to do
so.




                                                 29
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)


                                                                                    FORM NO. 3
                                 (Made under regulation 8(1))

                 APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION OF COSMETICS


             ATTACHMENTS

             Please attach/enclose-
                  (a) CD containing a dully fill in application form in soft form in text format
                        on excel;
                  (b) a copy of certificate of incorporation for companies or registration of the
                        other forms of ownership of the Business in Tanzania;
                  (c) a copy of free sale certificate and or certificate of observance to good
                        manufacturing practice for imported cosmetics;
                  (d) art work of immediate package, outer package and product information
                        leaflet; and
                  (e) authorisation letter permitting an importer to apply on behalf of his
                        principal.
             1.0 Product Particulars:
             1.1 Name of
             cosmetic:_____________________________________________________
             1.2 Form of cosmetic: (see explanatory
             note_______________________________________
             1.3 Physical description of a
             cosmetic_____________________________________________
             1.4 Intended use: (see explanatory notes) -
             _________________________________________
             1.5 Method of
             use____________________________________________________________
             1.6 Pack size(s): ________________________________________
             1.7 Formula of a cosmetic:_______________________________


    S/N     INCI name           Chemical name         % proportion            Reason for
                                                                             inclusion




             Note:
             If the formula is considered to be confidential seal in an envelope and mark
             confidential and then attach.



                                              30
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

             1.8 Brief description of the type and properties of packaging material and the seal
             and its liner if any and provide justification for the suitability of the packaging
             material          and          the        seal         and          its        liner
             used___________________________________________

             1.9 Brief description of the method used for the determination of shelf
             ___________________
             1.10 Recommended storage conditions (where applicable) including any relevant
             information after the product is opened for use or reconstituted:
             ________________________________
             1.11                          Recommended                               shelf-
             life:_________________________________________________
             2.0 Particulars of Registrant
             (a) Name: __________________________________________________________

             Physical Address: _______________________________________________
             _________________________________________________________________
             Postal Address: _________________________________________________
             Country: _______________________________________________________
             Phone: _____________ Fax: _______________Email: _________________
             (b) Status of applicant (tick where appropriate)

             Manufacturer _____________ Importer _____________


             3.0 Particulars of manufacturer:
             Name: _________________________________________________________
             Physical address: ______________________________________________
             Postal address: _________________________________________________
             Country: _______________________________________________________

             4.0 Particulars of local agent or importer:
             Name: _________________________________________________________
             Physical address: ______________________________________________
             Postal address: _________________________________________________
             Country: _______________________________________________________
             Phone: ________________Fax: ________________E-mail: ____________
             Phone: ________________Fax: ________________E-mail: ____________

             5.0 Declaration by the registrant:
             I, the undersigned certify that all the information in this form and accompanying
             documentation is correct and true to the best of my knowledge. I also declare that
             the product does not contain substances from the prohibited list and/ or substances
             that exceeds the level permitted.
             Name:
             _________________________________________________________________


                                             31
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

             Position:
             ______________________________________________________________
             Signature: ____________________
             Official stamp:
             Date: ________________________
             N.B. The Applicant shall be accountable to all information supplied in support of
             his application and any false declaration constitutes an offence.

             6.0 Fees/charges payment (For official use only)
             Fee to be paid…………………………………………………………..
             Name and signature of authorised officer……………………………………..
             Name and signature of cashier……………………..………………………….…
             Receipt number……………………………………………………………………
             Date and stamp………………………………………………………………………

             NB: Cashier should attach copy of receipt

             EXPLANATORY NOTES
             1. FORMS OF COSMETICS
             Aerosol - All types, already pressurized e.g., some hair sprays, perfumes
             Capsule/Tablet - e.g., bath oil capsules
             Clear Non-oily Liquid - e.g., solutions, some lotions
             Clear Oil - e.g., mineral oil
             Cream - Viscous liquid or semi-solid emulsion (e.g., some hair grooming products,
             makeup.
             Gel - Viscous, usually clear, jelly-like semi-solids (e.g., some hair grooming
             products, dentifrices.
             Granules - e.g., bath pellets, crystals, pearls, etc
             Kit - If the product consists of two or more components of different forms which are
             mixed before use, then insert “Kit” and write in brackets the forms of the various
             components.
             Liquid Suspension - Solid in liquid (e.g., some moisturizers. Lotion - Liquid
             emulsion e.g., some moisturizers, makeup.
             Ointment - A semisolid preparation based on a fatty material (e.g., lanolin)
             Paste - Concentrate of absorptive powders usually dispersed in semisolid base (e.g.,
             dentifrice.)
             Pencil - e.g., eyebrow pencil
             Powder – Loose: e.g., dusting powder, makeup, talcum
             Powder – Pressed: e.g., blush, eye makeup Pressed
             Cake - e.g., soap, bath bar
             Pump Spray - e.g., atomizers, some hair sprays
             Stick - e.g., lipsticks, some deodorants
             Other (Please Specify) - Product which does not fall into one of the general
             categories above. Please provide the rationale as to why the form is unique.

             2. INTENDED USE
             Ant wrinkle Preparation:

                                             32
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

             Product applied as a makeup or moisturizer generally to the face to mask or reduce
             the appearance of fine lines or wrinkles. (See also, Eye Lotion and Eye Makeup).
             Baby Product:
             Product labeled for use on infants 2 years old or less.
             Barrier Cream:
             Product which protects the hands from dirt, grease, solvents, etc.
             Bath Preparation:
             Product added to the bath water. Includes bath oils, tablets, salts, bubble baths, etc.
             Body Makeup:
             Product applied as makeup to the body excluding the hair, eyes or face. Includes leg
             and body paints. (See also, Eye Makeup and Face makeup.)
             Dentifrice:
             Product which cleans and/or polishes the teeth.
             Deodorant:
             Product which modifies, reduces, or prevents the development of body odors.
             Excludes genital deodorants and products which claim to reduce perspiration.
             Douche:
             Product used for personal feminine hygiene. (See also, Genital Deodorant.)
             Eye Lotion:
             Non-makeup product specifically indicated for use in the area of the eye. Includes
             lotions and moisturizers.
             Eye Makeup:
             Product specifically indicated for use in the area of the eye. Includes eyebrow
             pencils, eyeliners, eye shadows, eye makeup removers, mascara, etc.
             Face Makeup:
             Product for use in the area of the face. Includes blushes, face powders, foundations,
             rouges, makeup fixatives, etc. (See also, Antiwrinkle Preparation, Eye Lotion, Eye
             Makeup, Lipstick and Skin Moisturizer.)
             Fragrance:
             Includes perfumes, colognes, toilet water, dusting and talcum powders.
             Genital Deodorant:
             Deodorant/Cleanser intended for use in the genital area. (Includes nondouche
             feminine hygiene products.)
             Genital Lubricant:
             Product for use as a lubricant in the genital area.
             Hair Bleach:
             Product which bleaches the hair. Excludes hair lighteners with colours.
             Hair Conditioner:
             Non-shampoo product which increases the suppleness or body of the hair, facilitates
             combing, adds gloss or texture to the hair, etc. (See also, Hair Shampoo.)
             Hair Dye:
             Product which changes the colour of the hair.
             Hair Grooming:
             Product which improves the appearance or is used to shape/style the hair. Includes
             mousses, gels, pomades, sprays etc. (See also, Hair Straightener and Hair Waving
             Preparation).)
             Hair Removal:
                                              33
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

             Depilatory/epilatory product which facilitates the removal of hair by chemical or
             mechanical means. Includes wax treatments. (See also, Shaving Preparation.)
             Hair Shampoo:
             Product which cleanses and conditions the hair. Product is washed off after use.
             Hair Straightener:
             Product which contain agents which chemically soften the hair to facilitate
             straightening of the hair.
             Nail lacquer (Nail polish)
             Products which changes the colour of the nail.
             Nail polish remover
             Products which removes the colour from the nail.




                                            34
              Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                                                                      FORM NO. 4

                                  (Made under regulation 10 (1))

                          PRODUCT REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE

                           Certification No…………………………….



This is to certify that the Cosmetic Product described below has been registered in Tanzania subject
to conditions indicated.
Product/Common Name …………………………………….
Brand/Trade Name ………………………………………….
Name and Address of registrant ………………………………
Name and Address of Manufacturer………………………….

VALID FROM: ……………………………………

TO:………………………………………………..


……………………………….                                                 ……………………………………
    Date                                                        Signature of Director General and
Stamp




                                                35
               Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                               CONDITIONS OF REGISTRATION

1.This certificate can be revoked, suspended, cancelled or cease to operate immediately after the
expiry time.

2.Registered products cannot be advertised without prior approval of advertisement from Bureau.

3.The product shall comply with all relevant provisions of these Regulations.

4.The certificate holder shall comply with all Tanzanian labeling requirements at all times.

5.The certificate holder shall ensure that the manufacturing facilities where a registered product is
produced comply at all times Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) requirements.

6.The certificate holder shall ensure that application for renewal of registration is made 60 days
before expiry of registration.

7.The Bureau reserves the right to withdrawal this certificate when conditions 1 to 6 are
contravened and when the risks of the product outweighs the benefits or it is in public interest to do
so.




                                                 36
              Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                                                                       FORM NO. 5

                                  (Made under regulation 11(3))


                    APPLICATION FORM FOR IMPORT BATCH CERTIFICATE
                               (Please print or write in capital letters)

       1.Point of entry
       (code):……………………………………………………………………………
 2. Name and address of importer: ……………………………………………………………...
     …………………………………………………………………………………………......
     Physical location: ....…………………............……………………………………………….
     Importer Reg. No…………………………....……………………………………………………..
 3. Name and address of supplier:……………………………………………………………….
     ……………………………………………………………………………………………………
   4.Name and address of clearing agent: ………………………………………………………….
       Physical location: …………………………………………….…………….
       Clearing agent Reg. No……………………………………………………...
         5. Total No. of containers: …………………………………………………..
      Shipping marks and numbers: …………………………………………..……
      Location
      …….........…………………………………………………………………………………….
      6.        Description        of   goods/products (include   brand name)
     …………………………………....................….
     …………………………………………………………………………………………………….
     Country       of     origin:……………………………………………              Product  code:
     ……………………
     7. Reference
     standard:……………………………………………………………………………
           Title:
     ……………………………………………………………………………………………...
  8. Quantity: ………………………………………………………………………………..............
  9. Value (C+F):……………………………………………………………………………………
  10. Remarks: ….....…………………………………………………………………………………….
      …………………………………………………………………………………………………..

 11.Attach copies of the following documents:
           (a)     Packing list;
             (b) Invoice;
           (c)     Bill of lading or airway bill;
            (d)    Tanzania Revenue Authority single bill of entry;
           (e)     Cleanreportoffindingsfromcompetentauthorityoftheexpor
           tingcountry,ifavailable;
          (f)      Test certificate from the country of origin or export as issued by the
          national standards body thereof or an accredited testing authority in that country
          establishing conformity of the import shipment to the requirements of the
          Tanzania Standards, or relevant International Standard; and
           (g)     A conformity certificate (incase of food or food products) indicating that
           such foods are consumable in the country of origin.

                                                  37
               Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

        N.B. The Applicant shall be accountable to all information supplied in support of his
        application and any false declaration constitutes an offence.

                                                                                FORM NO. 6
                                                      (Made under regulation 13(3))



                              BATCH CERTIFICATION INSPECTION FORM

         1.     Name of Importer:……………...................…………………….............................…
         2.     Address of Importer:....................................................................................................
         3.     Product (s):....................................................................................................................
         4.     Inspection Point:...........................................................................................................
         5.     Quantity (Metric tones):................................................................................................
         6.     Identification Marks......................................................................................................
         7.     Pre-Shipment Inspection Certificate? (Yes or No):...................................................
         8.     Parking List (Yes or No):.............................................................................................
         9.     Has Client Paid for the Service (Yes or No):........................................................
         10. Physical Condition of the Product:................................................................................
                .......................................................................................................................................
                .......................................................................................................................................
         11. Sample size: ..................................................................................................................
         12. Sampling method: .......................................................................................
         13. Reason for sampling: ................................................................................
         14. Conditional release (Yes or No): ..........................................................................
         15. Remarks:........................................................................................................................
                .......................................................................................................................................
                ....................................................
         16. .....................................                 ......................          .......................       .....................
                 Importer/Agent                                                 Designation                       Signature                  Date

          17. .............................................................................................. ..........................
              TBS Inspector/ Authorized person                                       Designation Signature                              Date




                                                                       38
                       Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                                                                                                                      FORM NO. 7
                                             (Made under regulation 13(6) and 17 (5))

                                                          BATCH CERTIFICATE


                                                                       TYPE A

Name:........................................................................................................... ..........................................
Registered Address:...............................................................................................................................
Product:........................................................................................................ ...........................................
Bill of lading/Identification mark:..........................................................................................................

This is to certify that the above product has been sampled and tested by Tanzania Bureau of
Standards
           and found to conform to .....................................................................................

               QUANTITY: ...............................................................................................................

               Date: ...........................                                                                ...........................................
                                                                                                                DIRECTOR GENERAL

THIS CERTIFICATE REMAINS THE PROPERTY OF TANZANIA BUREAU OF
STANDARDS AND SHALL BE VALID FOR THE CONSIGNMENT DECLARED
ABOVE.THIS CERTIFICATE SHALL BE SURRENDERED ON DEMAND




                                                                           39
                       Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                                                                                                                      FORM NO. 8
                                                        (Made under regulation 14)
                                                               No............

                                                          BATCH CERTIFICATE


                                                                    TYPE B
Name:.....................................................................................................................................
Registered Address:...............................................................................................................................
Product:...................................................................................................................................................
Bill of lading/Identification mark:........................................................................................................

This is to certify that the above product has been physically inspected and approved by Tanzania
Bureau of Standards based on…………issued by…………

               QUANTITY: .....................................................................................

               Date:...........................                                                      ............................................
                                                                                                         DIRECTOR GENERAL

THIS CERTIFICATE REMAINS THE PROPERTY OF TANZANIA BUREAU OF
STANDARDS AND SHALL BE VALID FOR THE CONSIGNMENT DECLARED
ABOVE.THIS CERTIFICATE SHALL BE SURRENDERED ON DEMAND




                                                                           40
                     Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                                                                                                               FORM NO. 9
                                               (Made under regulation 15 (2) (a))


                                                                 No............

                                         CERTIFICATE OF ROADWORTHINESS

             Make:................................................... Model: .....................................................................
             Type of
vehicle:.......................................................................................................................
             Engine Capacity:...................................................................................................................
             Year of Registration:.............................................................................................................
             Chassis Number:....................................................................................................................
             Engine No/ Model:...............................................................................................................
             Inspected millage (Odometer
Reading):......................................................................................
             Bill of lading/Identification mark:..........................................................................................
             Inspected date:.......................................................................................................................
             Inspected date:.......................................................................................................................
             Radiation
level:.......................................................................................................... ..................
Remarks: This is to certify that the above vehicle has been inspected by Tanzania Bureau of
Standards and found to conform to TZS 698:2012
             Date: ……………….                                                                   …………………………………….
                                                                                                      DIRECTOR GENERAL

THIS CERTIFICATE REMAINS THE PROPERTY OF TANZANIA BUREAU OF
STANDARDS AND SHALL BE VALID FOR THE INSPECTED VEHICLE WITH
PARTICULAR ABOVE.THIS CERTIFICATE SHALL BE SURRENDERED ON DEMAND




                                                                       41
                      Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                                                                                                                      FORM NO. 10

                                                     (Made under regulation 18(2))
                                                                                                                                 Permit No.............
                                                  IMPORT CLEARANCE PERMIT

Name of Importer:…………….......….....................………………….................................
Address of Importer:........................................................................................................
Name of Clearing Agent:................................................................................................
Product(s):......................................................................................................................
Country of Export/Origin:................................................................................................
Quantity (Metric tones):..................................................................................................
Invoice and Value:......................................................................................... .................
Bill of Lading/Airway Bill/ Road Consignment note/ Certificate of origin:..................................
Container numbers:....................................................................................................................
Chassis number:.........................................................................................................................
Pre-Shipment Inspection Certificate? (Yes or No):.....................................................................
                              Basis for release
                              Physical Verification

                                     Conditional release

                                      Personal effects
                              Diplomatic goods
                              Non-regulated items
                              Small quantity
                              Donated goods
                              Exempted goods (from PVoC)/Capital goods/Government Projects
                              Promotional materials
                              Batch Certificate
                              TBS certified products (product certification scheme)


                       Remarks
                       .......................................................................................................................................
                       .......................................................................................................................................
                       .......................................................................................................................................
                       ..............................................................................
  Prepared by:................................... Signature :.....................                           Date:.........................


                                                                           42
            Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

             Name of Authorized Officer.......................Signature & Stamp................
                 Date:.....................


             NOTE: THIS PERMIT IS ONLY VALID IF IT BEARS AN AUTHORISED
             SIGNATURE AND STAMP. THIS CERTIFICATE REMAINS THE PROPERTY
             OF TBS AND IS VALID ONLY FOR THE CONSIGNMENT DECLARED
             ABOVE AT THE TIME OF ISSUANCE




                                                  43
                    Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                                                                                                                     FORM NO. 11

                                               (Made under regulation 18 (4))

                               CONDITIONAL RELEASE DECLARATION FORM


                      1. Point of
                         Entry:......................…………...………………………………………….………
                         ……
                      2. Product (s) Name:
                         ............………………………………………………………….……………
                      3.
                         Quantity:…..……...………….…………................................................................
                         ..............
                      4. Invoice
                         No:.......................................................................................…………………………...
                  5. Bill of lading/ RCN/ Airway bill:
..............…...……………………………………..……………..
                  6. Name and Address of Importer: .....................……
……………………………………………..
                      District/Town:……......................…....................................................................
                             ..............
                      Plot
                             No:……………...................…..…….…………………………..........................
                             ..........
                      Street:…………………................…………………………………….………
                             …………….
                      Name                                                                           of                         Main
                             road:……................………..………………………………………………...
                      Famous
                             neighborhoods:…..................…..………………………………………………
                             …...

                                                           Importer’s ID type..…................…………………ID
                                                                                No:………………………...…………
                          Telephone No...…..........….….….Mobile
             No……..…...............................................…….
                  E-mail
                   address:……………………………………………………………...…………...

                       7. Specific location/Warehouse where goods under conditional release are kept
      ........................................................................
                                                             Famous
                            neighborhoods:……………………………………………………................……
                                                             Sketch map of the location.




                                                                  44
              Standards (Imports Registration and Batch Certification)
GN. NO. 681 (Contd.)

                8. Name    and       Address of         Clearing                                        agent:
           ……………………………………………………...
                       Telephone No: ……………….......... ID No:
              …………………………………...
                       Mobile No:
              ……………………….........……………………………………….
                       E-mail address:
              ……………………..……………………………………………

              IMPORTERS DECLARATION:
              I declare that the consignment /goods above shall not be distributed, sold, used
       or transferred until the test results is out and in case of failure of the product to meet
       requirements of the standards consignment will be returned to the originating
       country/destructed at owner’s cost.

               NOTE:
             Any person who contravenes any of these regulations commits an offence and on
      conviction, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not less than two years or to a fine
      not less than fifty million shillings and not exceeding one hundred million shillings or to
      both.




      ………………………..                    .........……....…                     .................................

             Importername                   Signature                              Date

      ………………………..                                                                 .……………….
      ...................………....
                 Agentname                     Signature                             Date

            FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY:

             Remarks………………………………………………………………………………
              ………………………………………………………………………………………
              ……………………………………

             ……………                          ………………………                                    ………………
             TBS Inspector                  Signature                                    Date.




Dodoma,                                                               KITILA A. MKUMBO
  1st September, 2021                                   Minister for Industries and Trade



                                               45
