                TANZANIA BUREAU OF STANDARDS


                   PVoC PROGRAMME EXEMPTIONS


Importers of goods which are regulated under the Pre-shipment Verification of Conformity to
Standards (PVoC) programme may qualify for exemption if they meet the required criteria.
Goods exempted from PVoC inspection will undergo destination inspection upon arrival in the
country. Exemptions are granted following a successful assessment based on the criteria outlined
below.


 A            PERSONAL GOODS/BELONGINGS



Covers items owned and used by an individual for private or personal use, not intended for
business, trade, or resale.
Requirements
      a) Application letter requesting for PVoC exemption
      b) Supporting documents such as residence permit, work permit, student permit, passport,
         baggage declaration form (BD form)

Note: Exemption is granted per shipment.


              RAW MATERIALS, MACHINERY AND SPARE PARTS IMPORTED BY
  B
              MANUFACTURERS OF TBS CERTIFIED PRODUCTS



Requirements
      a) Application letter requesting for PVoC exemption


Page 1 of 6
     b) Final products must be certified by Tanzania Bureau of Standards (TBS) under the
        Product Certification Scheme ('tbs' mark or tested product certification)
     c) Valid TBS licence/Tested Product Certificate or its renewal endorsement
     d) List of goods (raw materials, machinery and machinery spare part) to be exempted.

Note: The exemption letter will remain valid until the expiry date of the Licence or Certificate
for the respective product. However, the exemption may also be issued on a shipment basis if
necessary.
  C           RAW MATERIALS, MACHINERY AND SPARE PARTS FOR UNCERTIFIED
              PRODUCTS



Requirements
     a) Application or introduction letter from the Confederation of Tanzania Industries (CTI)
        for CTI Members
     b) List of goods (raw materials, machinery and machinery spare part) to be exempted

Note: The exemption is granted for a period of one year with no renewal. However, it may also
be issued on a shipment basis within the year if deemed necessary.


 D            CAPITAL GOODS AND RAW MATERIALS FOR VALUE ADDITION



Capital goods refer to the tangible assets acquired by an investor for production of goods and/or
services provision, not for immediate consumption or resale, rather to enable or support the
business operations and income generation.
Requirements:
     a) Application or introduction letter from Tanzania Investment and Special Economic Zones
        Authority (TISEZA) requesting for PVoC exemption on behalf of the client
     b) Valid TISEZA certificate/ license
     c) TRA approval letter for tax exemption and approved list of exempted products.

Note: Exemption is valid for one year and renewable annually based TISEZA licence validity.
Exemption may also be issued on a shipment basis if deemed necessary.



Page 2 of 6
 E            GOODS FOR MINING AND EXPLORATION ACTIVITIES



Requirements
Mining companies
     a) Application letter from respective mining company for PVoC exemption
     b) Relevant mining and exploration licenses
     c) List of mining goods to be exempted.

Contractors of mining companies
     a) Approval notification of the local content plan issued by the Mining Commission
     b) Application/introduction letter from respective mining company requesting for PVoC
        exemption on their behalf
     c) Contract/ agreement between the contractor and the respective mining company
     d) Relevant exploration/mining licenses or permit or any other evidence/proof of
        involvement in the mining and exploration activities
     e) List of mining goods to be exempted.

Note: Exemption is valid for one year, renewable annually based on the mining/exploration
licence validity. Exemption may also be issued on a shipment basis if deemed necessary.


 F            GOODS FOR GOVERNMENT PROJECTS



Requirements
     a) Application/introduction letter for exemption from relevant Government institution,
        Ministry, Agency, Authority etc
     b) Evidence of quality verification agreement (certificate of quality from supplier) for the
        project goods

Note: Exemption is valid for one year, renewable annually based on the validity of the contract
or agreement between the respective government institution and the contractor. The exemption
may also be issued on a shipment basis if deemed necessary.



Page 3 of 6
 G            DONATED /RELIGIOUS/ CHARITY GOODS



Requirements
      a) Application letter requesting for PVoC exemption
      b) Certificate of donation
      c) TRA Tax exemption documents and list/packing list of goods to be exempted
      d) For religious/charity goods; Certificate of registration from Ministry of Home Affairs or
         Introduction letter from recognized national religious institutions such as BAKWATA,
         TEC, CCT.

Note: Exemption is granted on consignment basis.


 H            GOODS VALUED BELOW USD 5,000



Requirements
      a) Application letter requesting for PVoC exemption
      b) Proof from Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) that the total invoice value is below USD
         5,000

Note: Exemption is granted on consignment basis


 I            TBS CERTIFIED PRODUCTS

This applies to imported products bearing the “tbs mark” from abroad certified manufacturers
Requirements
      a) Application letter requesting for PVoC exemption
      b) Valid TBS licence/Tested product certificate or renewal endorsement
Note: Exemption validity will correspond to the licence or certificate validity period.
  J           TEMPORARILY IMPORTED GOODS



This applies to goods that are imported for a specific use within a specified time and thereafter
are re-exported.


Page 4 of 6
Requirement:
     a) Application letter requesting for PVoC exemption
     b) TRA permission (for goods to be returned to the country of origin after a specific use
        within a specified time)
     c) For exhibition goods; Endorsement letter from TANTRADE or any recognized
        organizing Government Institution

Note: Such goods might be those imported for a specific project or exhibition and after end of
the intended use will be re-exported


 K            RAW MATERIALS AND PACKAGING MATERIALS FOR PHARMACEUTICAL
              PRODUCTION



Requirements
     a) Application letter requesting for PVoC exemption
     b) Valid certificate/licence/permit from Tanzania Medicines and Medical Devices Authority
        (TMDA) and a list of raw materials/ packaging materials applied for exemption

Note: Exemption is valid for one year, renewable based on TMDA certificate/licence validity.
Exemption may also be issued on a shipment basis if deemed necessary.


 L            DIPLOMATIC GOODS



Requirement
     a) Application letter from the Embassy and/or introduction letter from the Ministry of
        Foreign Affairs and East Africa Cooperation
     b) The form PR06

Note: Exemption is granted per consignment.




Page 5 of 6
 M            CONSOLIDATED GOODS



Requirements
     a) Application letter requesting for PVoC exemption
     b) Valid TASAC license for consolidation operations
     c) Proof of recognized/ registered cargo storage facility (warehouse)

Note: Exemption is valid for one year, renewable annually based on the TASAC licence validity.
The exemption may also be issued on a shipment basis if deemed necessary.


 N      AIRCRAFT SPARE PARTS
Requirements
     a) Introduction letter/endorsement from Tanzania Air Operators Association (TAOA)
        requesting for PVoC exemption
     b) Certified copy of a valid Air Service Licence and/or Airworthiness Certificate from
        Tanzania Civil Aviation Authority (TCAA)

NOTE: Exemption is valid for one year, renewable based on the validity of the TCAA licence.




                                        APPROVED BY
                                    DIRECTOR GENERAL




Page 6 of 6
