               TANZANIA BUREAU OF STANDARDS

                GUIDELINE FOR PRE-SHIPMENT VERIFICATION OF
                CONFORMITY TO STANDARDS (PVoC) PROGRAMME

 A. INTRODUCTION

 Tanzania Bureau of Standards (TBS) implements a consignment based conformity assessment programme to

 ascertain the quality and safety of PVoC regulated products/commodities. Under this programme, the goods

 are inspected and/or tested to ensure compliance to a respective standard or approved specification before

 being shipped/exported to Tanzania. It should be noted that, all consignments subject to PVoC must obtain

 the mandatory custom clearance documents and Certificate of Conformity (CoC)/Certificate of

 Roadworthiness (CoR) without which the commodities arriving at Tanzanian Ports will be rejected or fined.

 Certificate of Conformity/Certificate of Roadworthiness is a legal certificate issued to the Importer / Exporter

 by an authorized PVoC contractor for Imported products whose quality conforms with the respective

 standards/approved specifications or requirements. It is the evidence that, the Imported consignment subjected

 to PVoC procedure complies and conforms to the required standard. The Certificate of Conformity/Certificate

 of Roadworthiness is valid for a period of three months from the date of issuance. Tanzania Bureau of

 Standards may reject consignment covered by CoC/CoR if found to be Non-conforming on verification at port

 of entry.

Pre-Shipment Verification of Conformity (PVoC) to standards programme for general goods started since 01

February 2012 under three years contract with Service Providers thus 2012-2015, 2015-2018, 2018-2021 and

currently 2025-2028 contract. The new PVoC contract includes Intertek International, Société Générale de

Surveillance (SGS) and TUV-Rheinland. Also, TBS entered into five years co-operation agreement (since


                                                      Page 1 of 8
2016) with China Certification and Inspection Group Company Limited (CCIC) for inspection of general goods

shipped from China Mainland, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The five years’ co-operation agreement has

been renewed from April, 2022 and will end in April, 2027. In this regard, TBS has appointed five inspection

companies for general goods namely: SGS, Intertek International, TUV-Rheinland and CCIC to conduct Pre-

Shipment Verification of Conformity (PVoC) to standards programme in their respective zones.

The scope of agreement with CCIC has been extended from inspection of general goods up to inspection of

used motor vehicles from China Mainland, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan. EAA Company Limited has been

contracted to inspect used motor vehicles from Japan and United Kingdom while Quality Inspection Services

Inc. Japan (QISJ) has a contract to inspect used motor vehicles in Dubai-United Arab Emirates.



 B. OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES
    The primary objectives of applying the PVoC programme are:

        i.   Ensure quality of products, health, safety, and environmental protection for Tanzanians and

             this is reflected in the scope of the regulated products.

       ii.   Minimize the risk of unsafe and sub-standard goods entering Tanzania through the executionof

             conformity assessment activities in the country of export. This will help to ensure that consumers

             are protected from unsafe and sub-standard goods and those Tanzanian manufacturers are not

             subjected to unfair competition.

      iii.   Facilitate fast clearance process by reducing bottlenecks caused by the verification

             performed on arrival at ports of entry.


     The guiding principle of the PVoC programme is based on Article 5 of Technical Barriers to Trade

     (TBT/WTO), which requires that technical requirements (i.e. Standards) applied to foreign products must

     also be applied to domestically manufactured products



 C. VERIFICATION PROCESS FOR GENERAL GOODS

     Exporter submits to TBS contracted PVoC Service Provider (SGS, TUV-Rheinland, CCIC or Intertek

                                                       Page 2 of 8
  International) the following documents:

           i.   Request for certification
           ii. Invoice
           iii. Parking list
           iv. Product registration certificates (for pre-packaged food and cosmetics)
           v. Conformity Documents (test reports from accredited laboratory, quality certificates, analysis reports
                 etc.)


   To obtain evidence that all requirements in the applicable standards or technical requirements are met,

  goods must undergo one or a combination of the following verification process:

      i.        Physical inspection

     ii.        Laboratory testing
    iii.        Factory audit

    iv.         Documentary verification


  NOTE: Inspection, witness loading and sealing of containers for route A, B and C shall be conductedfor

                all high risk products as per approved risk matrix.



D. RESPONSIBILITIES

  1. Importers

     Ensure their suppliers are conversant with import quality requirements and that their consignments

     containing regulated products are accompanied with a Certificate of Conformity (CoC).

  2. Exporters

     Ensure PVoC regulated goods as per list provided meet the quality requirements and obtain the

     Certificate of Conformity (CoC) from contracted PVoC service provider from their respective zones.



E. KEY FEATURES OF PVoC PROGRAMME

     i.         Every consignment of imported goods, which contain PVoC regulated products, shall be


                                                        Page 3 of 8
                 accompanied with a Certificate of Conformity (CoC) issued by authorized PVoC Service provider

                 prior to shipment.

    ii.          Certificate of Conformity is required to ensure smooth Customs clearance of shipments in Tanzania.

   iii.          Certificate of Conformity confirms that the products comply with the respective standards

                 requirements.

   iv.           PVoC incorporates elements of conformity assessment; consignment inspection based on product

                 risk assessment, product registration and product licencing schemes to provide exporters and

                 importers with maximum flexibility in demonstrating compliance with the approved technical

                 regulations.

    v.           PVoC regulated products can be exported through three routes depending on the type of the

                 product exported and compliance history.


F. CERTIFICATION ROUTES

  ROUTE A – Shipment Inspection and Certification

  Under Route A, products to be shipped have to be both physically inspected and tested to demonstrate

  conformity to relevant standards/requirements or manufacturer’s specifications. This route is open to all

  products being exported by either traders or manufacturers.

  The certification process through Route A is as outlined below:

            i.      Submission of Request for Certification (RFC) by the Importer/Exporter/Supplier

           ii.      Review of RFC/ Documentation submitted by Exporter to PVoC Contractor

          iii.      Consignment Inspection by the contracted PVoC service provider

          iv.       Consignment Testing

           v.       Sealing of Containers with tamper-proof seals

          vi.       Issuance of the CoC/Non-Conformity Report (NCR)) by the contracted PVoC service

                    provider.




                                                        Page 4 of 8
ROUTE B – Product Registration and Shipment Certification

Route B offers a fast track certification process for goods with reasonable and consistent history of

compliance with respective standards through the registration of such products by the contracted PVoC

service provider. Self-declaration of compliance is supported by substantiated evidence such as perfomed

inspections, test reports and quality certificates as approved by contracted PVoC service provider.


Product Registration is recommended to exporters/suppliers having frequent shipments of homogenous

products. Registration is annually renewable, subject to continual compliance through random monitoring

with a minimum of twice a year.


The process of registration and certification is as follows:

1. Product Registration
     i.  Submission of Registration Application to contracted PVoC service provider by the Exporter


      ii.       Review of registration application submitted by Exporter to contracted PVoC service provider
      iii.      Review of quality compliance history to respective standards
     iv.        Physical inspection and testing if required
     v.         Issuance of Statement of Registration



2. Registered Product Consignment Certification Process
          i.    Submission of Request for Certification (RFC)
          ii.   Review of the request for certification documents submitted by Importer/Exporter/Supplier
       iii.     Consignment Inspection and/or testing by the contracted PVoC service provider (where necessary)
       iv.      Issuance of the CoC/Non-Conformity Report (NCR)) by the contracted PVoC service provider.

ROUTE C - Product Licensing and Shipment Certification

This route is open only to manufacturers who can demonstrate the existence of a quality management

system in their production/ manufacturing process. It involves auditing of such production processes and

licensing of products manufactured thereof by the contracted PVoC service provider.

This route is recommended for manufacturers that have high frequency/volumes of shipments. Licencing is
annually renewable, subject to continual compliance through random monitoring with a minimum of twice a year.

                                                    Page 5 of 8
  The Licensing process includes:

  Product Licensing

        i.              Submission of Licensing application to the contracted PVoC service provider by the
                        manufacturer/exporter

       ii.              Review of Licensing application submitted

       iii.             Product testing

       iv.              Periodic factory surveillance in line with ISO Guide 28.


  Licensed Product Consignment Certification Process

              i.          Submission of Request for Certification (RFC) by Importer/Exporter/Manufacturer
              ii.         Review of the request for certification documents submitted
             iii.         Random consignment inspection and testing by the contracted PVoC service provider
         iv.              Issuance of the Certificate of Conformity (CoC)/Non conformity Report (NCR) by the contracted
                          PVoC service provider



G. DETAILS REGARDING REQUEST FOR CONSIGNMENT CERTIFICATION

  The exporter shall complete and submit RFC form t o the respective contracted PVoC service provider
  together with the following information/ documentation
                   i.       Product data sheet and/ or Product description (to specify the product’s intended use)
               ii.          Copy of product technical specification from the manufacturer (if available)
              iii.          Manual/ operating instructions where applicable (The manual/instruction shall
                            include English or Swahili translation)
              iv.           Production data (i.e. batch size/number, Name of manufacturer, date of
                            manufacture/expiry, heat/lot number)
               v.           Manufacturer’s quality certificates – where applicable
               vi.          Proforma/commercial invoice(mandatory)
              vii.          Import Declaration Form (IDF) – (where applicable)
              viii.         QMS Certificates (if available)
             ix.            Distributorship/Dealership agreements - if available (only applicable to
                            manufacturer-authorized distributors/ Dealers)
              x.            Test reports, third party certificates/approvals/Certification marks (if available)
               xi.          Registration or licensing evidence
                                                              Page 6 of 8
Note: Quality and completeness of the above mentioned documentation reduce time and costof

      processing of the request




H. IMPORTER SUBMIT THE CoC TO TBS IMPORTS OFFICE FOR AUTHENTICATION OR
   VALIDATION

       Original CoC is submitted to TBS by the importer accompanied with shipping documents (Bill of

       lading/Airway bill/ Road Consignment Note, commercial invoice, TRA assessment document), valid TBS

       registration certificate for food and cosmetic products through Online Application System

       (https://oas.tbs.go.tz/) for authentication.



I.   CLEARANCE OF THE CONSIGNMENT AT THE PORT OF ENTRY USING AUTHENTICATED
     CERTIFICATE OF CONFORMITY.
       The authenticated Certificate of Conformity is used by the importer/clearing agent for clearance of the
       goods at the point of entry.




                                                      Page 7 of 8
J. FLOWCHART DEPICTING THE CERTIFICATION ROUTES




K. THE PVoC CERTIFICATION FEE STRUCTURE PER ROUTES

                           Ad Valorem Fee as a   Minimum Fee    Maximum Fee
          SN    ROUTE
                            Percentage of FOB       (USD)          (USD)
           1        A             0.50                   250        5000
           2        B             0.45                   250        5000
           3        C             0.25                   250        5000


  For more information on PVoC Programe kindly visit our website: www.tbs.go.tz (PVoC

  Services).

  Contact us:

  Tanzania Bureau of Standards
  P. O. Box 9524,
  Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
  Tel General : +255 22 2450206
  Fax : +255 22 2450959
  Email : info@tbs.go.tz




                                           Page 8 of 8
