Guidelines for Food Importation and Exportation ZFDA/DFSC/GDL/003, Rev. 1

2.4.5

2.4.6

2.4.7

2.4.8

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

2.5

2.9.1

2.5.2

2.5.3

In addition to above requirements, the Proforma invoice for importation
of Food Supplements must indicate ingredients/compositions and their
strength/level.

Proforma invoice must also indicate the value of the product(s), currency
of payment, validity of the proforma, mode of shipment (sea, air, road),
and the destination port of entry.

The proforma invoice shall have a signature and stamp of the
supplier/shipper

The Executive Director, upon receiving applications for import permit
and other supporting documents as specified above, shall;

Examine the applications to authentify whether the applicant is
registered as Food importer.

Examine the Proforma invoice to ensure that the food intended to be
imported are those granted marketing authorization (registered) by the
Zanzibar Food and Drugs Agency.

Agency. Calculate the applicable and statutory fees of 0.5% FOB value of
goods to be imported to be payable to the Zanzibar Food and Drugs

On completion of above scrutinization and if satisfied with the submitted
data, the proforma invoice shall be dated and stamped with the official
ZFDA stamp and endorsed with the word “PAID”.

After completion of above process the Import Permit will then be issued.

Inspection of goods after shipment at destination port.

All food consignments after shipment also comply with the Revenue
Authorities such as ZRB and TRA rules and other port regulations. The
ZFDA Inspectors will conduct inspection of all consignment imported
through designated ports of entry under the Zanzibar destination
inspection procedures.

Food authorized for importation shall only be;

a) Pre-packaged food and Food supplements that are registered by the
Agency.

b) Non pre-packaged/Non registrable food which comply with the
specifications and /or requirements prescribed by the Agency.

c) Food, which has not been banned or does not contain an ingredient,
which has been banned in the Country of origin.
d) All that transported, packed and stored in accordance with Food
Safety and Good Hygienic Practices (GHP) as provided in the Zanzibar
Food, Drugs and Cosmetics Act Na.2/2006 and its associated food
regulations.

Import Permit shall not be transferable and shall be issued to cover only

one food consignment to be imported.

Page 7 of 27

