Guidelines for Food Importation and Exportation ZFDA/DFSC/GDL/003, Rev. 1

CHAPTER TWO
2. IMPORTATION OF FOOD
2.1 General
2.1.1 Authorized importers of food fall under the following categories:-

a) Government and Non-Government Organizations such as World Food
Programme

b) Food dealers (Wholesalers and Retailers) with valid license

c) Food Manufacturers with valid license

d) Donors

e) Persons authorized to import food for personal use.

f) Individuals/Institutions authorized to conduct Researches

2.2 Specific requirements for importers
2.2.1 Food importer should have the following requirements:

a) Government and NGOs shall be required to submit relevant
documents for justification.

b) Food dealers shall be registered as Food importers and must have
suitable and registered premises to stock such particular food
product and valid license issued by the Zanzibar Food and Drugs
Agency.

c} Food Manufacturers shall have valid manufacturing license and
registered as Food importers.

d) Food donations by Countries, Faith based organization (FBO’s) or
individuals shall be fit for human consumption, safe and of good
quality not prohibited from the Country of origin attached with
relevant documents for justification.

e) Individuals authorized to import food for personal use shall submit
relevant documents to justify that the products are not meant for
commercial purpose.

f) Individuals/Institutions authorized to conduct Researches shall
submit relevant documents approved by Ethical Committee Research
Committee of the Ministry responsible for Health -Zanzibar.

2.2.2 The importer shall be responsible for recall/withdraw of product from the
market once it is proven to cause health hazards to consumers.

2.3 Procedure for Registration as Food Importer

2.3.1 Any person who intends to import food into Zanzibar shall be required to
apply for registration as food importer to the Executive Director of
Zanzibar Food and Drugs Agency in a prescribed form in Annex 1.

2.3.2 Application shall be accompanied by fee as prescribed under current
ZFDA Fees and Charges Document. :

Page 5 of 27
