Required Report: Required - Public Distribution                      Date: December 10, 2025

                                                              Report Number:      ET2025-0021




Report Name: FAIRS Country Report Annual
Country: Ethiopia

Post: Addis Ababa

Report Category: FAIRS Country Report




Prepared By:

Approved By: Sarah Gilleski

Report Highlights:

This report presents regulatory requirements and standards that must be fulfilled to export food and
agricultural products to Ethiopia. The report contains pertinent information on applicable laws,
regulations, directives, guidelines, procedures, and key regulatory contact details. It is recommended
that this report be read with the FAIRS Export Certificate Report for a comprehensive understanding of
the import regulatory requirements and standards.




THIS REPORT CONTAINS ASSESSMENTS OF COMMODITY AND TRADE ISSUES MADE BY USDA STAFF AND NOT NECESSARILY
STATEMENTS OF OFFICIAL U.S. GOVERNMENT POLICY
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................................. 3
Section I: Food Laws ............................................................................................................................................... 4
Section II: Labeling Requirements ....................................................................................................................... 10
       Differences in Nutrient Reference Values .................................................................................................... 12
       Ethiopia utilizes Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), which are tailored to the local population's
       dietary patterns and health needs. These values may differ from the Reference Daily Intakes (RDIs) used in
       the United States. For instance, a U.S. label indicating that a product provides "25 percent Daily Value of
       Vitamin C" might not align with Ethiopia's RDA for Vitamin C, potentially leading to misinterpretation of
       the product's nutritional adequacy.................................................................................................................... 12
       Implications for Exporters ............................................................................................................................... 12
       Exporters of U.S. food products should be aware that using U.S.-based RDIs and health claims without
       adaptation to Ethiopian standards can lead to regulatory issues. To ensure compliance, it's advisable to: ..... 12
   Shelf-life / Date Marking Requirements .......................................................................................................... 18
   All pre-packaged foods must display a date mark, either as: ............................................................................... 18
   Country of Origin Labeling Requirements ..................................................................................................... 18
   How is an Exception Granted? ......................................................................................................................... 20
      Importers must apply to EFDA’s Food Registration and Licensing Directorate (part of EFDA’s Market
   Authorization Department). ................................................................................................................................. 20
       Importer Verification Checklist for Labeling: ............................................................................................ 20
Section III: Packaging and Container Regulations............................................................................................. 20
Section IV: Food Additive Regulations ................................................................................................................ 23
Section V: Pesticide and Contaminants ............................................................................................................... 25
Section VI: Other Requirements, Regulations, and Registration Measures .................................................... 27
Section VII: Other Specific Standards/Laws....................................................................................................... 35
Section VIII: Geographical Indicators, Trademarks, Brand Names, and Intellectual Property Rights ....... 38
Section IX: Import Procedures ............................................................................................................................. 41
Section X: Trade Facilitation ................................................................................................................................ 43
APPENDIX I: Government Regulatory Key Agency Contacts ......................................................................... 44
APENDIX II: Other Import Specialist Technical Contacts ............................................................................... 46




Disclaimer:



                                                                                                                                                                    2
This report was prepared by the USDA/Foreign Agricultural Service, Office of Agricultural Affairs
Addis Ababa, for U.S. exporters of food and agricultural commodities. While every possible care has
been taken in the preparation of this report, the information provided may not be completely accurate
either because policies/regulations/directives have changed since its preparation, or because clear and
consistent information was not available. It is highly recommended that U.S. exporters verify the full set
of import requirements with their foreign customers, who are normally best equipped to research such
matters with local authorities, prior to shipment of goods. FINAL IMPORT APPROVAL OF ANY
PRODUCTS IS SUBJECT TO THE IMPORTING COUNTRY’S RULES AND REGULATIONS AS
INTERPRETED BY BORDER OFFICIALS AT THE TIME OF PRODUCT ENTRY.




Executive Summary

Ethiopian food legislation is designed to ensure food safety, quality, and transparency across the
agricultural supply chain. These laws enforce strict regulations on hygiene, labeling, packaging, and
contamination control for food products. Businesses involved in food production, import, or distribution
must register and comply with the food safety standards, with regular inspections conducted to ensure
compliance. The regulations are aimed at protecting consumers from harmful practices.
Several key institutions are involved with regulating food safety, conducting inspections, and setting
food standards to protect public health. The Ministry of Health (MoH), Ethiopian Food and Drug
Authority (EFDA), Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Ethiopian Agricultural Authority (EAA), and
Ministry of Trade and Regional Integration (MoTRI) are the primary regulatory bodies. EFDA,
reporting to MoH, enforces regulations on processed and semi-processed foods, including hygiene,
packaging, labeling, and contamination control. The EAA regulates plant, livestock, and related product
import and export. While MoTRI oversees mandatory Ethiopian standards for the import and export of
agricultural goods. The Institute of Ethiopian Standards (IES) sets national standards and hosts the
Ethiopian Codex Contact Point and WTO Inquiry Point. In recent years, these regulatory bodies have
undergone restructuring to improve their mandates, capacity, and interagency coordination.
The Government of Ethiopian (GOE) is implementing macro-economic reforms aimed at addressing
persistent challenges such as foreign currency shortages, trade deficits, and high inflation. These reforms
include ongoing efforts to liberalize trade, reduce import barriers, modernize customs procedures, and
attract foreign investment. Ethiopia has adopted a market-based foreign exchange system and removed a
two-year import ban on select food and agricultural products. The GOE also has liberalized the export,
import, wholesale, and retail trade sectors, which were previously restricted to domestic businesses. The
GOE expects these reforms to attract foreign direct investment, enhance trade competitiveness, promote
fair trade practices, and support Ethiopia’s work towards accession to the WTO.




                                                                                                          3
In August 2024, the Government of Ethiopia introduced the National Food Fortification Program,
mandating the fortification of wheat flour, edible oils, and salt, with the requirement applying equally to
imported products. To enhance regulatory compliance and trade facilitation, the EAA launched the
Integrated Export–Import Certification System (IEICS/e-Phyto), replacing paper-based phytosanitary
certificates for agricultural imports. Further strengthening oversight, the Authority’s Animal Products
and Inputs Quality Testing Center obtained ISO/IEC 17025:2017 accreditation in April 2025, expanding
Ethiopia’s capacity to test imported animal-source foods, feed, and veterinary drugs. In August 2025,
Ethiopia also gazetted its tariff concession schedule under the African Continental Free Trade Area
(AfCFTA), providing preferential import tariffs on eligible agricultural products. Overall, the reforms
signal Ethiopia’s parallel pursuit of trade liberalization and enhanced regulatory controls on food quality,
safety, and nutrition.
Notable regulatory updates in the 2025 FAIRS Country Report cover Section II (labeling requirements),
Section II (packaging and container regulations), Section IV (food additive regulations), Section V
(pesticides and contaminants), and Section VIII (geographical indicators, trademarks, brand names, and
other intellectual property rights). The report also provides updated information on import procedures
and required documentation.
Section I: Food Laws

The GOE has been making reforms to modernize the country’s food safety and animal and plant health
regulatory systems. This modernization process is in part attributed to sustaining Ethiopia’s economic
growth, which has spurred a rising number of retail and wholesale food outlets, restaurants, and agro-
food manufacturers, especially in and around the capital city, Addis Ababa. The GOE has subsequently
taken steps to regulate these establishments to ensure the food they produce, import, distribute, or sell
complies with food safety and quality requirements. A growing middle class is also driving demand for
imported products.
Another key driver underpinning this modernization effort is the GOE’s interest in boosting agricultural
exports, like coffee, oilseeds, horticulture, and livestock products, to grow the economy, ensure food
security, and generate much-needed foreign currency. The GOE recognizes that to export these products
Ethiopia needs a reliable food safety system in place to meet the demands of foreign buyers mainly in
Europe, Asia, and North America.

Despite this modernization, there are still major capacity-related gaps, including a shortage of qualified
technical staff and insufficient laboratory capacity, which limits Ethiopia’s ability to enforce food safety
regulations. The GOE is trying to raise awareness, both inside and outside the government, on the
importance of food safety.

Food, Medicine, Healthcare and Control Authority

Ethiopia’s food safety regulatory system was authorized and mandated in 2009 in the Parliamentary
Proclamation of the Ethiopian Food, Medicine and Healthcare Administration and Control Authority –
Proclamation No. 661/2009. This legislation provides the legal authorities for the GOE to consolidate
the pre-existing food regulatory system with the aim of better “protecting the public from health risks
emerging from unsafe and poor-quality food.” The proclamation authorizes the setting of standards and



                                                                                                            4
regulations for locally produced and imported foods, in areas such as production, promotion, storage,
packaging and labeling, distribution, and laboratory testing.

In 2010, in a subsequent Parliamentary Proclamation – the Ethiopian Food, Medicine and Healthcare
Administration and Control Authority Regulation No. 189/2010 – the Food, Medicine, Healthcare and
Control Authority (FMHACA) was established, under the purview of the Ministry of Health, as the
competent authority responsible for setting and enforcing food safety standards and regulations. Under
this proclamation, food is defined as “any raw, semi-processed or processed substance for commercial
purpose or to be served for the public in any way intended for human consumption that includes water
and other drinks, chewing gum, supplementary food and any substance, which has been used in the
manufacture, preparation or treatment of food.”

FMHACA was given further statutory authority to enforce and implement food safety and quality
regulations as defined in the Food, Medicine and Healthcare Administration and Control Councils of
Ministers Regulation No. 299/2013. This legislation states that food must be wholesome and produced
in accordance with the relevant safety and quality requirements. Imported products failing to meet these
standards will be returned to the country of origin or destroyed at the point of entry. For example,
products that are expired or have deteriorated in quality may be seized and returned or destroyed. In a
case where the offending product was detected in post-market surveillance, FMHACA has the authority
to pull it from stores’ shelves and destroy it. This regulation also provides broadly defined requirements
dealing with food storage, handling, and transportation, and prohibits counterfeiting and adulteration.

In 2019, FMHACA carried out organizational restructuring with a new institutional name and a revised
mandate. In February 2019, the GOE Council of Ministries issued Proclamation No.1112/2019
authorizing a revised mandate of FMHACA. With the amended structure, FMHACA is renamed as the
Ethiopian Food and Drug Authority (EFDA). The EFDA is mandated to regulate only products related
to food, medicine, tobacco, cosmetics, and medical devices. Regulation No. 531/2023 also provides the
powers and duties of EFDA. The legislative mandate of EFDA has similarities to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration.

Ethiopian Agricultural Authority

In 2022, the GOE established the Ethiopian Agricultural Authority (EAA) as an autonomous federal
government authority by Article 45 Sub-Clause 1 of Proclamation No. 1263/2021 and Council of
Ministers Regulation No. 509/2022. EAA is mandated to strengthen the regulatory system by bringing
together scattered regulatory bodies and incorporating new regulatory procedures to ensure the
efficiency, quality, and safety of agricultural technology, inputs, products, and services. The main
mandates of the EAA are to improve the utilization of domestic products by enhancing food safety, to
make agricultural products and inputs available for foreign trade in a transparent manner that complies
with international standards, to expand market access, and to enhance the country’s ability to generate
foreign currency from exports. EAA is mandated to lead both Animal and Plant Health Regulatory
Directorates and to establish new standards in collaboration with IES. EAA ensures quarantine safety
standards are met through field and laboratory testing, and issues an acceptable plant or animal health
certificate, pre-entry permits, and post-entry exit permits, prepares a national list of quarantine pests and
diseases by studying the distribution of plant and animal pests and diseases.




                                                                                                            5
The Plant Health Regulatory Directorate of EAA regulates the safety of imported plant and plant
products, as authorized in the Plant Quarantine Regulation No. 4/1992. The definition of plants includes
living plants, plant products, and seeds. Plants and other related articles must be accompanied by an
import permit and a phytosanitary certificate from the competent authority of the exporting country and
are subject to quarantine inspection. Shipping containers carrying plants or plant articles must be marked
with the following information:
     Contents
     Origin
     Address of shipper, supplier, or freight forwarder
     Name of consignee
     Entry point in Ethiopia

In cases where quarantine pests are detected in an incoming shipment, MoA may allow the cargo to
undergo treatment to destroy or inactivate the pest.

The Animal Health Regulatory Directorate of the EAA is responsible for animal quarantine and
livestock disease issues. Imports of livestock, meat, by-products, and genetics require an import permit
along with a health certificate from the exporting country. When applying for an import permit, the
importer must identify the type of product, country of origin, means of transport, date of arrival,
countries transited, and port of entry. Upon arrival, livestock, meat, and by-products, as well as livestock
genetics materials will be subject to inspection. The Guidelines for Import and Export of Animal
Genetic Materials spell out the recommended procedures and requirements in detail. For further
reference, please see the guidelines attached in Appendix II of this report.

Institute of Ethiopian Standards (IES)

IES is responsible for setting national standards. As part of its standards development process, IES
consults with industry and public stakeholders to take their comments and concerns into account. IES
publishes the draft national standards online along with an open solicitation for public comments.

MoTRI is responsible for the establishment and enforcement of the legal metrological system. In
coordination with EFDA and EAA, MoTRI has the authority to control the quality of imports and to
restrict entry of products that do not comply with compulsory Ethiopian standards. MoTRI regulates
import and export of goods, including certain food items that must comply, where applicable, with IES
Mandatory Standards.

The Ethiopian Radiation Protection Authority (ERPA), under the Radiation and Nuclear Protection
Proclamation No. 1025/2017, establishes controls of radioactive materials in food stuffs and non-food
items. Through issuance of pre-import permit and import release permit controls, ERPA also establishes
regulations regarding the import, use, and authorization of radioactive materials. Though it does not
directly address food radiation levels, ERPA underscores Ethiopia’s overarching regulatory framework
for radiation safety.

Third-party inspection bodies, which have been approved by MoTRI, can certify that subjected products
meet the national standard. Pre-certified products will clear arrival inspection without delay, though



                                                                                                           6
MoTRI reserves the right to conduct random sampling and testing. Uncertified products will be subject
to normal inspection procedures at the point of entry.

 Table 1: Summary of Key Regulatory Agencies and Responsibilities
Government      Regulatory
Ministry        Authority/Directorate      Key Responsibilities
                                           EFDA is responsible for ensuring:
                                            Food safety and quality; regulates processed and semi-
Ministry of     Ethiopian Food and Drug      processed food products
Health (MoH)    Authority (EFDA)            Safety, efficacy, quality, and proper use of medicines
                                            Safety, quality, and performance of medical devices.
                                            Issues pre-import permit and/or special import permit
                                            Issues import release permit
                                            Issues Free Sale Certificate
                                            Issues health certificate
                                            Inspection of consignments of plants/other regulated
                                             articles including import and export of plants and plant
                                             products and provide import and export permits
                Ethiopian Agricultural      Inspection of required phytosanitary documents and
                Authority (EAA)              issuance of phytosanitary certificates
                                            Fumigation of consignments to meet phytosanitary
                Plant Health Regulatory      requirements
                Directorate                 Supervision of quarantine treatments including
                                             fumigation and weed cleaning processes
                                            Advise and supervise disposal of plant and plant
                                             products
                                            Crop surveillance for pests mainly cereals, fruits, and
                                             vegetables
                                            Protection of endangered areas – maintenance and
Ministry of
                                             surveillance of pest-free area(s) with low pest
Agriculture
                                             prevalence
(MoA)
                                            Inspection, approval, and registration of pesticides
                                            Food safety risk assessment in different crops including
                                             pests and pesticide application
                                            Issues pre-import permit and import release permit for
                                             plant and plant products
                                            Establish a system that ensures access to quality
                                             veterinary services to improve the prevention and timely
                Ethiopian Agricultural       control of animal diseases
                Authority (EAA)             Quarantine on import and export of livestock, fish, and
                                             their byproducts; prevent communicable livestock
                Animal Health Regulatory     diseases and the outbreak of migratory parasites
                Directorate                 Ensure the proper administration and quality control of
                                             veterinary drugs and feeds as well as veterinary services.
                                            Issues Veterinary Health Certificate


                                                                                                        7
                  Ethiopian Agricultural         Responsible for registration and certification of feed and
                  Authority (EAA)                 veterinary drugs that are produced, imported and in use
                                                  in the country
                  Veterinary Drug and            Setting standards for quality control activities
                  Animal Feed                    Market surveillance, banning, revoking and suspension
                  Administration and Control      of registrations, packaging and labeling, trade, and
                  Directorates                    licensing of veterinary drugs and animal feed
                                                 Issues pre-import permits and import release permits
                  Import and Export Goods        Quality control of exports and imports
                  Quality Control Directorate    Regulatory oversight on the importation and exportation
Ministry of                                       of goods that do not comply with the Ethiopian
Trade and                                         mandatory standards
Regional                                         Work with third party conformity assessment agencies
Integration                                       and facilitate pre-shipment inspections
(MoTRI)           Institute of Ethiopian
                  Standards (IES)                Sets national standards

                  Ethiopian Conformity
                  Assessment Enterprise          Provides certification, inspection, and laboratory testing
                  (ECAE)                          services

                  Ethiopian National             Provide accreditation services, by formal third-party
                  Accreditation Office            recognition, the competence of Conformity Assessment
                  (ENAO)                          Bodies (CABs) to perform specific activities, such as
                                                  tests, calibrations, certifications, or inspections
                                                 Oversees radiation safety and controls radioactive
                  Ethiopian Radiation             materials in food and other goods
                  Protection Authority           Establishes radiation limits and may mandate testing or
                  (ERPA)                          certification for imported food potentially exposed to
                                                  radiation
Ministry of       Bio and Emerging
Innovation and                                   Conducts biotechnology research and development in
                  Technology Institute            agriculture, environment, manufacturing, and other
Technology        (BETin)                         sectors
Ministry of                                      Prevention and control of environmental contamination
                  Ethiopian Environmental
Planning and                                     Approves import permits for GE seeds and unprocessed
                  Protection Authority (EPA)
Development                                       GE crops. Note: Reference links for biosafety policy,
                  Biosafety Regulatory
(MoPD)                                            regulations, and directives are in the summary table
                  Directorate
                                                  below

Table 2: Summary of Key Proclamations, Regulations, Directives, and Guidelines
Food Control Proclamations and Regulations                                                       Link
Food and Nutrition Policy                                                                      Download
Food, Medicine, and Healthcare Administration and Control Authority, Proclamation No.          Download
1112/2019
Definition of Organization, Powers, and Duties of EFDA                                         Download


                                                                                                        8
Food, Medicine, and Healthcare Administration and Control Authority, Regulation No.         Download
299/2013 of Council of Ministers
Food, Medicine, and Health care Administration and Control Authority establishment          Download
Council of Ministers Regulation No. 189/2010
Food, Medicine, and Healthcare Administration and Control Authority, Proclamation No.       Download
661/2009
Pre-Shipment Inspection Scheme Establishment Proclamation No. 173/1999                      Download
Quality and Standard Authority of Ethiopia Establishment Proclamation (No. 102/1998)        Download
Quality and Standard Authority of Ethiopia Establishment (Amendment) Proclamation (No.      Download
413/2004)
Trademark Registration and Protection Proclamation No. 501/2006                             Download

Trademark Registration and Protection Regulation No.273/2012                                Download

Food Control Directives and Guidelines
Baby Food Control Directive No. 840/2021                                                    Download
Infant and Follow up Formula Importers, Wholesalers and Exporters Directive No. 335/2020    Download
                                                                                            Download
Food Supplement Directive No. 333/2016
                                                                                            Download
Permitted List of Food Additives, November 2021
                                                                                            Download
Fortified Foods and Fortificants Control Directive - Draft 2023
Administrative Measures and Compliant Handling Directive No. 345/2013                       Download
EFDA Service Fees and Charges Regulation No. 370/2015                                       Download
Animal Health and Import-Export Related Proclamations/Regulations/Directives/
Guidelines
IGAD Regional Animal Health Certification Guidelines (ICPALD)                               Download
Veterinary Drug and Feed Administration and Control Proclamation No. 728/2011               Download
Veterinary Drug and Animal Feed Administration and Control Authority Establishment          Download
Council of Ministers Regulation No. 272/2012
Animal Diseases Prevention and Control, Proclamation No. 267/2002                           Download
Directive on Risk Assessment Parameters for Modified Organisms No. 05/ 2018                 Download
Directive Issued to Establish Procedures for the Management of Risks from any Transaction   Download
Involving Modified Organisms No. 06/2018
Live Animals Marketing, Proclamation No. 819/ 2014                                          Download
Live Animals Marketing Council of Ministers Regulation No. 341/2015                         Download
Directive for the Registration of Feed Products (No. 995/2024)                              Download
Plant Health and Related Proclamations/Regulations
Seed Proclamation No. 1288/2023                                                             Download
The Plant Quarantine Regulation No. 04/1992                                                 Download



                                                                                                  9
Plant Breeder's Right Proclamation No. 1068/2017                                                    Download
Pesticide Registration and Control, Proclamation No. 674/2010                                       Download
Biotechnology Policy, Regulations, and Directives
Biosafety Proclamation (Amendment) No. 896/2015                                                     Download
National Biosafety Advisory Committee Establishment Regulation, No. 411/2017                        Download
Directive for Application of Special Permit to Engage in Transaction of GMOs for Research           Download
or Teaching, No.04/2018
Directive to Provide Risk Assessment Parameters for Modified Organisms, No. 05/2018                 Download
Directive to Establish Procedures for Management of Risks from Any Transaction Involving            Download
Modified Organisms, No. 06/2018
Directive to Determine the Requirements for Transport and Storage of Modified Organisms,            Download
No. 07 /2018
Directive to Determine the Content of an Application for Undertaking Deliberate Release of          Download
Modified Organisms, No. 08/2018


Section II: Labeling Requirements

IES has Compulsory Ethiopian Standards (CES 73 and CES 197) applicable to labeling of prepackaged
food products. These are general standards for all prepackaged foods intended for human consumption.
CES 73 is the most actively used and referenced general standard for labeling prepackaged food
products. While CES 197 is applicable to labeling foods for special dietary uses. The following sub-
section describes these general standards for labeling prepackaged foods.
IES has a goal to make national standards available online. Presently, if you want a copy of a particular
standard, you must go to the ESA library, submit a request, and pay a nominal fee to obtain hard copies.
Alternatively, importers should be able to provide U.S. suppliers with a copy of both the voluntary and
compulsory standards. Post can assist U.S. companies in obtaining copies of standards on a case-by-case
basis.

CES 73:2013 - General Standard for Pre-Packaged Foods Labeling
This compulsory Ethiopian standard stipulates general principles of good labeling practice, mandatory
components of a label, and exempted products. CES 73 defines prepackaged food as “packaged or made
up in advance ready for retail sale in a container.” The required elements of a label include names of
product and ingredients, ingredient statements including quantitative ingredient declarations where
applicable, weight declarations, suppliers contact details, country of origin, storage instructions, date and
batch coding, prohibitions on misleading information, allergen declarations, and instructions for use.

CES 197:2018 - General Standard for Labeling and Claims for Pre-Packaged Foods for Special
Dietary Uses
This compulsory Ethiopian standard defines foods for special dietary uses, mandatory components of a
label for foods for special dietary uses, and specific prohibition on claims relating to special dietary use
if the product concerned does not meet the criteria for these products. The standard has provisions on
special requirements relating to appropriate storage conditions and exempted products.



                                                                                                           10
Mandatory vs Voluntary Labeling
 Mandatory Labeling
   Governed primarily by CES 73:2013 – Pre-packaged Foods Labelling and enforced by EFDA
     under Proclamation No. 1112/2019.
   Required information includes: Product name, ingredient list, net content, batch/lot number,
     shelf-life/date mark, storage instructions, manufacturer/importer name and address, and country
     of origin.
   Some nutrition information may be mandatory for specific products (e.g., foods for special
     dietary uses under CES 197:2018, or products that are fortified with vitamins/minerals).
 Voluntary Labeling
   Includes additional information not strictly required, such as nutrition claims, health claims, or
     marketing statements about nutrient content.
   These are permitted only if they are truthful, not misleading, and consistent with Ethiopian
     standards. EFDA evaluates such claims on a case-by-case basis.



Mandatory Labeling for Pre-Packaged Foods:
In accordance with the Compulsory Ethiopian Standard (CES 73), the following information must be
clearly and indelibly marked on the labels of prepackaged foods in either English or Amharic. Exporters
should note that packaged foods with a surface area less than 10 cm2 may be exempt from having to
display some of these labeling elements. Labels found on U.S. food products are commonly accepted.

    Trade name of the product
    Common name of the product
    Nutritional content
    List of ingredients (except for single ingredient foods) in descending order of weight
    Description of micronutrients used to enrich foods produced with fortification
    Labeling, description, or ads of any food supplement must not represent to be used in disease
     prevention, treatment, or cure, or in any way characterize as a medicine
   If the product contains any of the following food products or ingredients that may cause allergies,
     labeling must clearly describe its content:
     Breakfast cereals containing grain gluten such as wheat, rye, oats, barley, etc.
     Crustaceans and their products
     Eggs and by-products
     Fish and fishery products
     Peanuts, soybeans, and their products
     Milk and dairy products, including lactose
     Nuts and derived products
     Sulphites are in concentration of 10 milligrams per Kg or higher
   Net weight or volume of contents
   Name and address of the manufacturer, packer, distributor, importer, exporter, or vendor.
   Country of origin
   Production and expiration dates. (Note: Food products must have at least 50 percent of their shelf
     life remaining when they arrive at customs. Expired food cannot enter the country, nor can it be


                                                                                                     11
      sold in the marketplace. Certain foods are exempt from carrying expiry dates, including fresh
      fruits and vegetables, wines, beverages with 10 percent alcoholic content by volume, vinegar,
      sugar, and candies and chewing gums having sugar contents above 35 percent)
     Product identification number/code identifying producing factory and lot
     Instructions for use (if needed)

Food Labeling Regulations on Health Claims
In Ethiopia, health claims on food products are statements suggesting a relationship between a food or
nutrient and health benefits or disease risk reduction. These claims are considered voluntary but are
strictly regulated. They are governed by CES 73:2013 on pre-packaged food labeling and enforced by
EFDA under the Food and Medicine Administration Proclamation No. 1112/2019. Any health claim
must be truthful, verifiable, and not misleading to consumers.

Health claims must be supported by credible scientific evidence before they can appear on a label.
EFDA reviews such claims on a case-by-case basis, especially for imported foods. Unlike some
countries, Ethiopia does not have a list of pre-approved health claims. Only claims that are accurately
substantiated and supported by documentation are allowed. Claims that exaggerate benefits, imply
disease treatment, or are misleading are prohibited.

Importers must include any health claim in their EFDA registration dossier along with supporting
evidence. Labels with unapproved or unsubstantiated claims can be rejected, removed, or lead to product
withdrawal. While claims similar to those approved in the United States, such as calcium and bone
health or fruits and vegetables and cancer risk, may be allowed, they require EFDA approval based on
scientific substantiation for each product.

Differences in Nutrient Reference Values
Ethiopia utilizes Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), which are tailored to the local population's
dietary patterns and health needs. These values may differ from the Reference Daily Intakes (RDIs) used
in the United States. For instance, a U.S. label indicating that a product provides "25 percent Daily
Value of Vitamin C" might not align with Ethiopia's RDA for Vitamin C, potentially leading to
misinterpretation of the product's nutritional adequacy.

Implications for Exporters
Exporters of U.S. food products should be aware that using U.S.-based RDIs and health claims without
adaptation to Ethiopian standards can lead to regulatory issues. To ensure compliance, it's advisable to:
         Recalculate nutrient values based on Ethiopian RNIs.
         Obtain EFDA approval for any health claims.
         Ensure all labeling meets the requirements of CES 73:2013.
Failure to adhere to these standards may result in labels being deemed misleading, potentially leading to
product recalls or importation issues.

Nutrient Content Claims: Ethiopia distinguishes between absolute descriptors and relative descriptors.
 Absolute Descriptors: Refer to specific quantities or amounts of nutrients present in a food product.
   Examples:
       “High fiber” → product contains a significant amount of dietary fiber.
       “Low-fat” → product meets defined thresholds for fat content.


                                                                                                          12
    Requirements:
        Must meet CES/EFDA thresholds (the product must truly qualify as “low-fat” or “high-
           fiber”).
        Must be supported by nutrient analysis or credible documentation.
   Relative Descriptors: Compares the nutrient content of a food product to a reference value, often
    expressed as a percentage. Common words include “less,” “fewer,” “reduced,” “light,” “more”.
    Examples:
        “Reduced sugar” → product contains at least 25 percent less sugar than the standard product.
        “Light sodium” → product has a meaningful reduction in sodium relative to the reference
           product.
     Requirements:
        EFDA requires that relative claims are quantified and verifiable; vague or misleading
           comparisons are prohibited.

   Implied or Suggestive Claims: Implied claims suggest benefits or qualities without stating them
    directly, often in marketing language. Any implied claim that could mislead consumers is not
    permitted.

Other Specific Labeling Requirements:

Labeling Requirements for Alcoholic Beverages
 For beverages containing more than 1.2 percent alcohol, the alcohol proof is required on the label.
 Alcoholic beverages having less than 10 percent alcoholic content shall state product expiry date on
  its label.
 Alcoholic beverages are required to contain labels showing alcoholic volume and warning that
  alcohol consumption may cause health problems.
 The label should also contain a warning that women should not drink alcoholic beverages during
  pregnancy because of the risks of birth defects.

Labeling Requirements for Genetically Engineered (GE) Foods
Ethiopia requires mandatory GE labeling (“contains GMO”) for GE foods. Imports of GE food are
permitted upon authorization under the Biosafety Framework (2009 Proclamation, amended 2015).
 GE foods must be labelled with the following statement: “genetically modified”, “genetically
   modified organism” or other comparable description.

Labeling Requirements for Foods Treated with Ionizing Radiation
 Irradiated foods must contain the phrase “irradiated” or the internationally accepted food irradiation
  symbol indicating a food product has been irradiated with ionizing radiation may be placed besides
  the label.

Labeling Requirements for Baby Food Products
 Labeling requirements for baby food should be in accordance with the national compulsory General
   Standards for Pre-Packaged Foods Labeling (CES 73).
 Labels should not discourage breastfeeding in any manner and should be designed to provide the
   necessary information about the appropriate use of the product.



                                                                                                           13
   Any product shall not be described or presented on any label or in any labeling in a manner that is
    false, misleading, or discouraging breastfeeding or is likely to create an erroneous impression
    regarding its character in any respect.
   Neither the container nor the label shall have pictures of the infants or other pictures or texts, which
    may idealize the use of the product.
   The terms “humanized”, “materialized” or other comparable terms may not be used.
   The immediate container of the product should be affixed or written on with a label bearing the
    following particulars in a clearly legible, conspicuous, and indelible manner at least in Amharic or
    English.
       Name of the product and its identification as “infant formula,” “complementary food,” or
         “follow-up formula” or its equivalent.
       The words “IMPORTANT NOTICE” in capital letters and indicated there under, the statement
         “breastfeeding is the normal and optimal way to feed infants and young children. Breast milk is
         important for the healthy growth and development of infants and young children. It protects
         against diarrhea and other illnesses” in characters no less than one-third the size of the
         characters in the product name, and in no case less than 2 mm in height.
       A statement of the superiority of breast milk using letters with more than 12 font size.
       A statement that the product should be used only on the advice of a health professional as to the
         need for its use and the proper method of use.
       Precautions and warnings, where necessary.
       Appropriate instruction for use or preparation.
       Name and full address of the manufacturer, including country of origin.
       List of ingredients.
       Nutritional information declaring in numerical form the amount of nutrients present in the
         product per portion of the product as recommended for daily consumption or amount per unit
         for single use.
       Net content by weight for powdered products or volume for liquid.
       Date of manufacture and expiry, which shall be indented and indicate at least the month and
         year in which the product is to be consumed, considering climatic and storage conditions.
       The storage conditions, and where appropriate, shelf life of the product before and after opening
         and its reconstitution.
       Batch or lot number.
       Required professional advice, if necessary.
   A statement “breast milk is the best food for your baby,” or a comparable statement regarding the
    superiority of breastfeeding or breast milk shall be provided.
   All ingredients on the label of the product need to be listed in accordance with the following sub-
    articles:
       Source of protein in the product is identified and clearly shown on the label.
       Except for single ingredient products, a list of ingredients is declared on the label.
       If the ingredient is from animal or plant, scientific name of the plant and part of animal or plant
         used is declared.
       Additives such as fillers, artificial colors, sweeteners, flavors, or binders are listed by their
         specific names/ “E numbers” and qualified by words.
       “Natural” or “artificial” in descending order in weight or volume.

Labeling Requirements for Baby Food for Infants and Young Children


                                                                                                          14
   A manufacturer or distributor cannot offer to sell or sell baby food for infants and young
    children if the labeling includes a photograph, drawing or other graphic representation other
    than for illustrating methods of preparation.
   A manufacturer or distributor cannot offer for sale or sell baby food for infants and young
    children, unless the labeling indicates in a clear, conspicuous, and easily readable manner, in
    Amharic or English, the following particulars:
       Instructions for appropriate preparation and use in words and easily understood graphics.
       The age in numeric figures after which the product is recommended.
       A warning about the health risks of improper use, preparation, or storage and of introducing the
         product prior to the recommended age; ‟a minimum font of 3 mm tall letters based on the
         lower-case letter in bold red color on a white background for packages with less than 200 cm2
         of available label space and large font in proportion to the size of larger packages.”
              o No less than one-third the size of the characters in the product name, and in no case less
                  than 3 mm in height in bold red letters on a white background.
       The list of ingredients and the declaration of nutritional value in accordance with relevant
         national standards or, in the absence of such standard, with the relevant Codex Standard.
       The required storage conditions both before and after opening, considering climatic conditions.
       The product category (whether infant, follow-up, growing up, complimentary food with age
         group, etc.).
       Contains the word, “WARNING” and indicated there under, the statement, “before deciding to
         supplement or replace breastfeeding with this product, seek the advice of a health professional.
         It is important for your baby’s health that you follow all the preparation instructions carefully. If
         you use a feeding bottle, your baby may refuse to feed from the breast. It is more hygienic to
         feed from a cup” in characters no less than one-third the size of the characters in the product
         name, and in no case less than 3 mm in height and in bold red on a white background.
       Preparation instructions for infant or follow-up formula in powdered form stating that:
        o Powdered formula is not sterile and may be contaminated with pathogenic microorganisms
             during the manufacturing process or may become contaminated during preparation.
        o It is necessary for formulas to be prepared one feeding at a time using water that has been
             boiled (to 212°F or 100°C) and then added to the powdered infant formula immediately or
             when the water is at least 158°F or 70°C, before feeding the baby, cooled to body
             temperature.
        o Any unused milk must be discarded immediately after every feeding.
       Includes a feeding chart in the preparation instructions.
       In the case of follow-up formula, states that the product shall not be used for infants less than
         six months old or used as the sole source of nutrition for infants in characters “no less than one-
         third the size of the characters in the product name, and in no case less than 3mm in height.”
       A manufacturer or distributor shall not offer for sale or sell young children formula unless the
         container or label affixed thereto states that the product shall not be used to feed infants below
         12 months or used as the sole source of nutrition for young children” in characters no less than
         one-third the size of the characters in the product name, and in no case less than 3mm in height.
   A manufacturer or distributor cannot offer to sell or sell baby food for infants and young
    children:
     If the labeling contains any health or nutrition claim or any representation that states or suggests
        that a relationship exists between the product or constitute thereof and health, including the
        physiological role of a nutrient in growth, development, and normal functions of the body.


                                                                                                           15
Labeling Requirements for Ready-to-Use Therapeutic and Complementary Foods
 Labeling requirements for ready-to-use therapeutic food and complimentary food products should
   be in accordance with the national compulsory standard CES 73 - General Standards for Pre-
   packaged Foods Labeling.
 A manufacturer or distributor cannot offer to sell or sell ready-to-feed therapeutic food or a
   complementary food product if the container or label affixed contains:
    Any text, image or other representation that suggests the suitability of the product for infants
       under six months including but not limited to references to development milestones clearly
       reached before six months, the use of pictures of infants appearing to be younger than six
       months.
    Any text, image or other representation of the product or is likely to undermine or discourage
       breast-feeding or create a belief that the product is equivalent or superior to breast milk.
       o Any text, image or representation that undermines or discourages appropriate
           complementary feeding or that may suggest that the product is inherently superior to home
           prepared complementary foods.
       o Any recommendation to feed the product in a bottle or otherwise promote the use of bottle
           feeding.
       o Any endorsement, or anything that may be conveyed or construed as an endorsement by a
           health professional, an association of health professional or other body; and
       o Any element that allows for cross-promotion of any other baby foods for infants and young
           children.
 In addition to the above requirements, the label of ready-to-feed therapeutic food or a
   complementary food product must include:
    A statement in characters at least one-third the size of the product name, and in no case
       smaller than 3 mm in height.
    The importance of exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months and of continued
       breastfeeding up to two years or beyond.
    The recommended age of introduction is not less than six months (180 days) and a
       statement that early introduction of complementary foods negatively affects
       breastfeeding.
    Instructions for preparation, storage, handling, and use.
    A feeding chart showing the appropriate ration/serving size consistent with guiding
       principles issued by the World Health Organization (WHO).

Prohibitions Related to Labeling of Skimmed or Condensed Milk
 Labeling requirements for skimmed or condensed milk should be in accordance with the national
  compulsory standard CES.
 A manufacturer or distributor cannot offer to sell or sell skimmed or condensed milk in powder or
  liquid form, unless:
    The container or affixed label contains the words, “this product should not be used to feed
       infants” in characters no less than one-third the size of the characters in the product name, and in
       no case less than 3 mm in height.

Labeling Requirements for Low-Fat and Standard Milk
 Labeling requirements of law-fat and standard milk should be in accordance with the national


                                                                                                         16
  compulsory standard CES 73 - General Standards for Pre-packaged Foods Labeling.
 A manufacturer or distributor cannot offer to sell or sell low-fat or standard milk in powder or liquid
  form, unless:
    The container or affixed label contains the words, “this product should not be used as an infant’s
      sole source of nourishment” in characters no less than one-third the size of the characters in the
      product name, and in no case less than 3 mm in height.

Labeling Requirements for Plant-Based Meat/Dairy Alternatives
The Ethiopian standard for plant-based meat or dairy alternatives has the same labeling requirements as
any prepackaged foods. In addition to the general labeling requirements for prepackaged foods, the
following specific labeling elements are required:
 For plant-based meat products such as texturized soy proteins (TSP) a clear statement “food for
   human” on the label.
 For dairy alternatives such as soymilk, the label should have clear instructions on disposal of used
   packages.

Required Labeling Elements for Raw Materials for Food Products:
 Name of the raw material
 Ingredient list
 Net content
 Name and address of the producer and/or importer
 Country of origin
 Lot identification
 Expiry date or minimum useful life
 Conditions for product storage

Labeling Requirements for Fortified Food and Micro-Nutrients:
 Presentation and description of fortified foods on any label or in any labeling shall not be false,
   misleading, or deceptive or is likely to create an erroneous impression regarding its character in any
   respect.
 The label should clearly indicate the pack size within the unit package The label needs to be affixed
   on all primary packaging of any fortified food and/or micro-nutrient supplement bearing the
   following information in clearly legible and indelible letters at least in Amharic and/or English:
    Name of the product
    Name and full address of the manufacturer, including country of origin
    List of ingredients
    The name and amount of micro-nutrients available
    Net content by weight for solid products or volume for liquids
    Date of manufacture and shelf-life, which indicates at least the month and year
    The storage conditions and, where appropriate, the shelf-life of the product before and after
       opening and reconstitution
    Batch or lot number
    Standard mark and logo and registration number
 Appropriate instructions for use or preparation of fortified foods and micro-nutrient products.




                                                                                                        17
Labeling Requirements for Animal Feed Products
The labeling requirements for feed products are specified in the Directive for the Registration of Feed
Products No. 995/2024. Feed products must have a clearly written, legible, and irremovable label either
in Amharic or English. The label must be written directly on the product’s packaging or attached via a
non-perishable material sewn to the packaging. Pasted, tied-on, erased, or illegible labels are not
acceptable. Labels must avoid misleading words or images.

Label Contents:
    Name and complete address of the manufacturer
    Trade name of the product
    Brand name
    Date and year of manufacture
    Batch number
    Shelf life of the product
    Nutritional composition of the product
    List of raw materials used, in descending order of quantity
    Net weight of the product
    A clear description of the target animal type, including age group, production type, and grade
    Information on transportation and storage conditions
    Cautionary notices or warnings related to the product's use, if necessary

Labeling Requirements for Animal Genetic Materials:
Ethiopia’s labeling requirement for importation of animal genetic materials such as semen, ova and
embryo must contain the information:
    Breed name
    Donor number
    Date of production and batch number
    Transit package and/or letter must include country of origin, species, producer company, volume
       per package, storage temperature and means of transportation

Shelf-life / Date Marking Requirements
All pre-packaged foods must display a date mark, either as:
     Best before: for products that can retain their quality beyond a certain date.
     Use by / expiry date: for highly perishable foods where safety cannot be guaranteed beyond the
        date.
 Format: Dates should be clearly legible and preferably in DD/MM/YYYY or MM YYYY format.
 Placement: On the primary package (the part that directly contacts the food), easily visible to the
    consumer.
 Special cases: Small packages (≤10 cm²) may have exemptions if space is limited, but the importer
    may need to provide this info separately (e.g., over-label or leaflet).

Country of Origin Labeling Requirements
 Imported foods must clearly indicate the country of origin on the label.
 Format: Plain, unambiguous text (e.g., “Product of USA” or “Made in the USA”).
 Placement: Should be on the main display panel or otherwise clearly visible to the consumer.
 Language: Amharic or English is accepted. Many importers provide both languages for compliance.



                                                                                                      18
Table 3: Summary of Required Labelling Formats
      Labeling
                     Requirement                 Format                        Placement        Language
   Information
                                       Best before or Use by;
Shelf-life / Date                                                                              Amharic or
                   Mandatory           DD/MM/YYYY or                       Primary package
mark                                                                                           English
                                       MM YYYY
                       Mandatory for         Product of [Country]/ Made    Main display        Amharic or
Country of Origin
                       imports               in [Country]                  panel               English




Circumstances Under Which Labeling Exceptions May Be Granted
EFDA is the designated competent authority, empowered by the Food and Medicine Administration
Proclamation No. 1112/2019 and its subsequent instruments, Proclamation No. 1263/2021 and
Regulation No. 531/2023 to issue case-by-case determinations on labeling exemptions. Such exemptions
are rarely granted and lie solely within EFDA’s discretion. They typically apply only to small packaging
formats (under 10 cm²), research or trade samples, emergency or humanitarian imports, transitional
grace periods for new requirements, or for language over-labeling. By contrast, all retail products
intended for sale to Ethiopian consumers must fully comply with CES 73:2013 – General Standard for
the Labelling of Pre-Packaged Foods and other applicable Ethiopian standards.

Ethiopian sources (Proclamation 1112/2019, EFDA directives, and CES 73:2013) point to a few
exception situations:
    Small packages (≤10 cm² surface area): CES 73 allows omission of certain details (e.g., full
       nutrition panel) if the pack is too small to carry them, provided information is available through
       other means.
    Import for research, samples, or emergencies: EFDA may allow food items to be imported
       without full retail labeling if they are not intended for commercial sale (e.g., clinical trials,
       laboratory analysis, trade samples, emergency aid shipments). In these cases, EFDA typically
       requires the importer to submit documentation and may issue a special permit.
    Grace periods: When new standards are introduced or labeling rules are updated, EFDA has
       discretion to give a grace period (sometimes 6–12 months) so existing stock or shipments already
       in transit can be cleared.
    Language flexibility: By law, labels must be in Amharic or English. In practice, EFDA often
       accepts English-only labels on imports at entry, provided the importer adds an Amharic sticker
       or over-label before retail distribution.
    Foods for Special Dietary Use (FSDU)/Medical Foods: If EFDA determines that labeling
       requirements in CES 197 (for FSDU) cannot reasonably be applied (e.g., because of space
       constraints or international format), it can approve a modified label format, but only through
       prior authorization.




                                                                                                      19
How is an Exception Granted?
   Importers must apply to EFDA’s Food Registration and Licensing Directorate (part of EFDA’s
      Market Authorization Department).
   EFDA may issue a written authorization or conditional approval stating which labeling elements
      are exempted and under what conditions (e.g., for research only or not for retail sale).
   EFDA can revoke exemptions if products are found on the retail market without compliant
      labels.

Importer Verification Checklist for Labeling:
    Product/trade name matches CES/commodity standard
    Ingredients listed in correct order
    Allergens declared
    Net quantity in International System of Units (SI units)
    Manufacturer’s name and address present
    Ethiopian importer’s name and address included
    Country of Origin stated
    Lot/batch number included
    Expiry/Best-before date clearly printed
    Storage/use instructions (if needed)
    Any special-category marks (dietary, GE, irradiated, alcohol, etc.) applied


Section III: Packaging and Container Regulations

In accordance with the EFDA Proclamation No. 1112/2019, it is generally required that packaging
material should be made out of substances, which are safe and suitable for their intended use, and the
product shall be packed in a container which will safeguard its hygiene, safety, quality, and food grade.
The Proclamation states “no packaging material shall be put into use unless it complies with the
international and national safety and quality standards.”

Any food product regulated under Proclamation No. 1112/2019 needs to be appropriately packed and its
packaging material cannot contaminate the product and must comply with national standards. The
EFDA proclamation defines primary packaging as “the covering, wrapper, or container that has direct
contact with the product intended for retail sale.”

Individual product standards may also contain additional guidance and/or requirements for packaging
and container requirements. As an example, the standard for canned peaches indicates packing
requirements, including lacquer usage inside the can as well as can thickness. The packaging of infant
and follow up formula must be made from non-plastic material. To obtain approval for packaging
materials, a certificate of analysis and specifications are required.

Special Packaging, Container Size Requirements, or Preferences
Ethiopia does not impose a single universal law on container sizes for imported pre-packed foods.
Instead, packaging is governed through product-specific Ethiopian standards and conformity assessment
requirements. All imported foods must use safe, food-grade containers that do not contaminate the



                                                                                                         20
product, and those subject to compulsory standards are checked for packaging compliance during pre-
shipment verification by approved bodies. Beyond this, rules focus mainly on technical specifications
for particular categories rather than across-the-board restrictions.

For beverages in PET bottles, ES 6792:2021 sets “normal” nominal capacities of 500 ml, 1,000 ml,
3,000 ml, and 5,000 ml, with a mandatory 10 percent extra capacity tolerance, while still allowing other
sizes by supplier-buyer agreement. A standard for honey, caps glass jar sizes at 2 kg but permits
flexibility for plastic and metal containers. In the case of fresh fruits and vegetables, ES 6689:2021
requires sturdy, clean containers sized and shaped to fit pallet surfaces without overhang, reflecting a
focus on logistic efficiency rather than retail pack volumes.

For many other foods, such as edible oils or grocery staples, no strict size regulations exist, but market
practice and national quality schemes influence importer choices. Edible oils, for example, are most
commonly sold in 0.5 L, 1 L, 3 L, and 5 L packs, with larger containers mainly reserved for institutional
buyers. Thus, while Ethiopia’s regulations mandate food-safe packaging and set specific size rules in
some categories, most container choices for imported pre-packed foods are guided by a mix of product
standards, conformity assessments, and prevailing consumer and industry preferences.

Packaging Sustainability Measures
IES embraces international standards related to packaging sustainability measures identical with the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). IES has two optional standards applied to
packaging and the environment. These are:
   ES ISO 18606:2015 - Packaging and the Environment (Organic Recycling)
   ES ISO 18604:2014 - Packaging and the Environment (Material Recycling)

ES ISO 18606:2015: This standard is applicable to organic recycling of used packaging but does not
address regulations that exist regarding the recoverability of any residual packaged goods. The standard
established the requirements for packaging suitable for organic recycling. The above standard defines
organic recycling as the process “through microbial activity, the controlled biological treatment of the
bio-degradable components of used packaging, which produces compost, in the case of anaerobic
digestion, also methane.” In addition, the standard does not consider landfilling and littering as organic
recycling.
A package is considered suitable for organic recycling if all the components are suitable for organic
recycling. However, individual components of the packaging can be considered recoverable by organic
recycling if they meet the requirements of this international standard. The suitability of packing
components and packaging material is verified by test methods described in this standard. The standard
provides normative descriptions of the maximum concentrations of regulated metals and other
substances hazardous to the environment and determination of eco-toxic effects. The standard also
contains a recommended assessment checklist for meeting the requirements and provides examples of
packaging suitable for organic recycling.
ES ISO 18604:2014: This standard specifies the requirements for packaging to be classified as
recoverable in the form of material recycling while accommodating the continuing development of both
packaging and recovery technologies. The standard also sets out procedures for assessment of meeting



                                                                                                         21
the requirements. The standard defines material recycling as “reprocessing, by means of a
manufacturing process, of a used packaging material into products, a component incorporated into a
product, or a secondary (recycled) raw material, excluding energy recovery and the use of the product as
a fuel. The standard has established procedures and criteria for recyclable packaging in the product life
cycle steps such as design, production, utilization, sorting by the end-user, and collection. For instance,
if plastic or PET bottle packaging complies with the standards or specifications, then the packaging is
considered 100 percent recyclable.

Recycled Content or Design Requirements
At present, Ethiopia does not mandate specific recycled content percentages in food packaging
standards. For instance, ES 6792:2021 for PET bottles defines performance and dimensional
requirements but does not include recycled content obligations. However, the National Plastic Waste
Management Strategy and Roadmap sets out a pathway to introduce measures such as recycled content
targets, deposit-return systems, and circular design standards in the future. The regulatory framework
emphasizes recyclability and circularity, even if binding recycled content percentages have not yet been
widely applied.

Bans, Restrictions or Limitations on Packaging Materials
Ethiopia has introduced restrictions on certain single-use plastics through its National Plastic Waste
Management Strategy and Roadmap (2024-2034) and subsequent legislation. The long-standing Solid
Waste Management Proclamation No. 513/2007 established the framework for municipal waste control.

Single Use Plastic Restrictions
On June 2, 2025, the Ethiopian Parliament passed a new law (Solid Waste Management Proclamation
No. 1383/2025) to phase out the production and import of designated single-use plastics. The law bans
the import, domestic production, and use of single-use plastics, particularly plastic bags thinner than
0.03 millimeters. The law also requires recycling or reuse of disposable items such as bags, bottles,
straws, and wrappers, linked to environmental and public health risks. The Environmental Protection
Authority (EPA) is granted the power to create implementing regulations and monitor the
implementation of these restrictions.

Municipal Waste Disposal Laws and Recycling Regulations
The principal legal basis remains the Solid Waste Management Proclamation which regulates municipal
solid waste practices. Building on this, the Solid Waste Management Proclamation No. 1383/2025 and
the EPA’s plastic waste management strategy have advanced Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR)
as a policy tool. The legislation promotes a circular economy by turning waste into new resources and
holding producers responsible for their products. Enacted measures introduce obligations for producers
to participate in or fund collection and recycling systems, particularly in high-volume sectors such as
bottled water and beverages. The policy direction is toward binding producer or importer responsibility
for post-consumer packaging waste.

National Strategies, Goals, or Proposals for Packaging Waste Reduction
Ethiopia has articulated clear national objectives for packaging sustainability through the National
Plastic Waste Management Strategy and Roadmap and complementary laws. These strategies call for
reductions in single-use plastics, restrictions on difficult-to-recycle materials, expansion of recycling
infrastructure, and encouragement of biodegradable or compostable alternatives. The 2025


                                                                                                            22
parliamentary legislation reflects this policy by embedding bans, producer obligations, and waste-
reduction targets into enforceable law. Together, these measures form a coordinated national approach
to transition away from problematic packaging toward recyclable and sustainable options.

Section IV: Food Additive Regulations

EFDA regulates the use of food additives, which must comply with both international and national food
safety standards. Ethiopia has based its national standards on Codex standards. Any food additive to be
imported into Ethiopia must follow Codex or Ethiopia’s standard concerning its use as an input for food
processing.

The revised EFDA Proclamation No.1112/2019 defines food additives as any substance prepared in
accordance with applicable requirements and added to food to give flavor, impart color, preserve, or
enhance its appearance or other related functional purposes. Article 11 of the proclamation states that the
maximum level of food additive use is in accordance with the Ethiopian standard issued by the
appropriate body.

According to the revised proclamation, EFDA determines the list of allowable food additives and
prohibits the use of some food additives in certain categories. EFDA evaluates the safety of food
additives before authorizing the use or new uses for already permitted food additives. Before a new
additive can be used or before an additive can be used in a new way from the permitted list, the
manufacturer must show that the food additive is safe and get EFDA approval. EFDA created a national
list of permitted food additives in November 2021.

Individual food and beverage standards, where applicable, reference both permitted and prohibited
additives. Generally, food and beverage products covered under the Ethiopian Standards may contain
only permitted additives in accordance with Codex Stan 192, General Standard for Food Additives. For
example, in the case of natural wines, the Ethiopian Standard ES 351: 2001, which is adopted from the
Codex standard, specifies the list of permitted additives that may be added to fresh grapes, musts, and
dry grapes during vinification. The standard also provides a list of additives and treatments permitted
during vinification and conservation of wines and sweat filtrates. This includes lists of permitted
substances and forbidden additives. For instance, tannins can be used for clarification purposes, but
coloring substances are prohibited except for oenocyanin or caramel.

Ethiopia uses a positive list system. Only additives included in the EFDA National List (or those
permitted in commodity standards) may be used. Certain product standards also explicitly ban additives
in specific foods. Permitted additives have defined functional classes, conditions of use, and maximum
levels. Some commodities (e.g., flours) prohibit any additives, while EFDA directives require
registration and monitoring of additive use.

The National List of Food Additives and related directive are published by EFDA (in English and
Amharic) and are accessible on the EFDA website. Commodity-specific rules can be obtained through
the Institute of Ethiopian Standards.

EFDA references Codex standards as a scientific basis but requires additives to appear on its national list
or relevant ES before use. To add a new additive, industry must submit a technical dossier to EFDA,



                                                                                                        23
which reviews safety data, consults stakeholders, and then publishes an updated list or amended
standard.

Step-By-Step Process for Industry to Seek Additive Approval
 Preliminary check: Verify whether the additive and the intended use/level are already allowed under
   the EFDA National List or the relevant ES commodity standard.
 Prepare dossier: Compile a technical dossier with identity (INS number), manufacturing
   specifications, purity criteria, intended food categories and maximum use levels, toxicological/safety
   data, and any risk-management proposals (e.g., maximum level).
 Submit to EFDA: If the applicant is an importer, a local agent/representative is normally required.
   EFDA will conduct a technical evaluation; this may include requests for additional data, lab testing,
   or review by technical committees.
 Public consultation / stakeholder review: For additions to the national list, EFDA typically issues
   draft directives and invites stakeholder comments.
 Decision and Publication: If EFDA’s assessment supports safety and suitability, the additive/use is
   incorporated in the National List, or the relevant ES is updated; EFDA then publishes the revised
   list/directive, and the additive becomes authorized with stated conditions.
 Post-Authorization Controls: Authorized additives are subject to monitoring and enforcement
   (EFDA may require certificates, testing of imported consignments, or labeling/traceability data as
   part of market surveillance).

Food Additives Control Directive No. 1020/2024
This EFDA directive, issued in August 2024, establishes strict regulations governing the use, import,
export, and sale of food additives within Ethiopia. The directive aims to regulate the use of food
additives in alignment with Codex Alimentarius standards, ensuring food additives are safe and do not
endanger public health.

This directive is applicable to any person who engages in the production, import, export and distribution
of an allowable list of food additives permitted by Codex Alimentarius Commission and determined by
EFDA that the food additives are not prohibited to be used in food. This guideline does not refer to food
additives except when they are used for food preservation or to improve the nutritional content of the
food.

   Permitted Food Additives: Only food additives listed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission or
    recognized by Ethiopian standards are permitted for use. The directive specifies the acceptable
    quantities of additives in various foods. It also prohibits additives that conceal food spoilage or lower
    the nutritional value of the food. Additives should be safe, transparent in their usage, and follow
    internationally recognized guidelines.
   Prohibited Substances: The directive bans the use of any substances that are not explicitly included
    in the Codex Alimentarius or EFDA-approved list of food additives. This provision ensures that no
    unapproved or unsafe substances are introduced into the Ethiopian food market.
   Labeling Requirements: Additives must be clearly labeled, and misleading or deceptive
    descriptions are prohibited. Labeling of any food additives must meet the Compulsory Ethiopian
    Standard (CES 73) labeling requirements for pre-packaged foods. The labeling must clearly indicate
    the additive’s name, functional class, and identification number. Misleading or deceptive



                                                                                                          24
    descriptions are strictly prohibited. Labels must also contain information about the additive’s origin
    and any necessary usage or storage instructions.
   Safety Regulations: Additives must not reduce food quality or nutritional value, nor should they
    hide any defects in the food. The use of additives is intended to improve the safety and quality of
    food products, not to cover up poor manufacturing practices. Any additive used must comply with
    established purity standards.
   Manufacturing, Import, and Export: A pre-licensing requirement is necessary for manufacturers,
    importers, or wholesalers dealing in food additives. Only additives on the approved list are allowed
    for manufacturing, importing, or exporting. The directive includes a detailed application process to
    ensure compliance with these requirements.
   Notification Requirements: Any person responsible for placing food additives on the market,
    whether through manufacturing, import, export, or distribution, must notify EFDA. The notification
    process requires detailed documentation. The notification application process includes several key
    requirements:
         The name, identification number, and functional class of the food additive.
         The name and address of the manufacturer, including valid contact information (phone
             number and email).
         The name and address of the importer, along with a valid contact number and email.
         Full food additive ingredient list.
         Labels of the food additive.
         Original Certificate of Free Sale from the competent authority of the exporting country.
   All submissions for notification must be in Amharic or English.
   The notification must be renewed every two years. The process must start no later than six months
    before the expiration of the current notification.
   Any changes to the data in the initial application (such as changes in the manufacturer, contact
    details, or product composition) must be promptly communicated to EFDA.

Hard copies of the Ethiopian standards for food additives are available at IES with payment of nominal
administrative fees. Post can assist U.S. companies in obtaining copies of the standards on a case-by-
case basis.

Section V: Pesticide and Contaminants

Ethiopia accepts the Codex General Standard for Pesticides and Contaminants. Food and feed products
regulated by Ethiopian standards must comply with the Codex General Standards for Contaminants and
Toxins in Food and Feed (Codex Stan 193). The revised EFDA Proclamation No.1112/2019, Article 5
stipulates that any food product cannot have chemical residues including pesticides, fertilizers,
veterinary drugs food additives, cleaning chemicals, radioactive substances, and other contaminants
above the maximum residue level (MRL) issued or adopted by the appropriate organ.

In 2010, the GOE enacted the Pesticide Registration and Control Proclamation No. 674/2010. The
legislation establishes a mandatory registration system for pesticides, tailored to national needs. The
registration process involves a risk-based evaluation of comprehensive scientific data demonstrating that
the product is effective for its intended purposes and does not pose an unacceptable risk to human or
animal health or the environment. The proclamation states, “no person shall import, manufacture or sell
a pesticide, which has not been registered under this Act.”


                                                                                                         25
Ethiopia's pesticide regulations are governed by the EAA, which oversees the registration, importation,
distribution, and use of pesticides. The EAA ensures that pesticides are effective for their intended
purposes and do not pose unacceptable risks to human health, animal health, or the environment under
the conditions of use in Ethiopia. Ethiopia does not maintain a national MRL list and there is no
formalized MRL deferral path, instead it defers to international standards, particularly those established
by Codex, when setting MRLs. The EAA references Codex MRLs as guidance, especially where local
data is insufficient, aligning domestic requirements with globally recognized standards to ensure food
safety and facilitate trade.

The EAA Plant Health Regulatory Directorate is mandated to:
 Regulate pesticide management, relating to importation, distribution, transportation, storage,
   retailing, and use.
 Adopt regulations.
 Promote the correct use of pesticides and search for alternatives to chemical pesticides.
 Raise awareness and provide technical support when the need arises, etc.

EAA regulates and requires all pesticides to be registered prior to use. The registration process requires
the applicant to provide efficacy, safety, and quality data. Once registered, the pesticide can be used for
up to five years at which time the registration may be renewed.

In addition to registration, EAA also is responsible for establishing MRLs and conducting pesticide
residue analysis on primary agricultural products. Applicable MRLs, as well as limits for other
contaminants, are listed in the individual product standards. For example, in the case of apples, there are
41 different MRLs, as well as limits for heavy metals (e.g., lead) and microbiological contaminants (e.g.,
coliform). Imported apples, as well as domestically produced apples, are expected to comply with these
requirements. In an event where a national standard does not exist, the GOE will likely defer to the
Codex standard.

The EAA regulates pesticides and pesticide residues in foodstuffs by controlling registration,
importation, distribution, and authorized use of pesticides. The EAA conducts scientific risk assessments
to ensure pesticides are safe for human health, the environment, and agricultural use, and monitors
residues in imported and locally produced foods through inspections and testing.

Import tolerance applications are accepted when new pesticides are introduced or when adjustments to
existing MRLs are required. Importers must submit supporting scientific data and risk assessments,
which the EAA evaluates to determine whether the proposed MRLs are safe and acceptable under
national standards.

Imported food products are subject to port inspections, where samples are collected and analyzed for
pesticide residues to ensure compliance with established MRLs, often referencing Codex standards
when national limits are not available. If residues exceed permissible levels, regulatory authorities can
impose sanctions including rejection of the shipment, detention or destruction of the product, fines, and
temporary or permanent import restrictions for the responsible importer.




                                                                                                          26
According the recent organizational restructuring and change of mandate as per Proclamation No.
1263/2021, the rights and obligations of Veterinary Drug and Feed Administration and Control
Authority are transferred to the EAA. The EAA’s Veterinary Drug and Animal Feed Directorate is
responsible for setting standards related to animal feed and veterinary drugs, including MRLs for
veterinary drugs and other related compounds. Like pesticides, veterinary drugs must be tested for
safety, efficacy, and quality and registered prior to use. The registration lasts for five years, after which
time the registration may be renewed. At present, Ethiopia is using Codex as its basis for veterinary drug
MRLs.

Contaminants
Ethiopia's regulations on food contaminants are governed by the EFDA, which sets standards for
maximum levels (MLs) of contaminants in foodstuffs. These standards aim to protect public health by
limiting the presence of harmful substances such as heavy metals, mycotoxins, and other contaminants
in food products. EFDA’s regulations are informed by international standards, including those
established by Codex, to ensure food safety and facilitate international trade.

IES has a general standard for contaminants and toxins in food and feed. This standard, which draws
upon the corresponding Codex Standard (193-1995) lays out the principles and procedures to manage
and set acceptable tolerances for contaminants and toxins in food and feed. This standard, however, does
not identify or list contaminants and toxins of concern and their corresponding MLs. Instead, these are
found in standards for individual commodities, where they exist. For instance, soymilk must comply
with the maximum metal contaminants (lead and cadmium) and pesticide residue limits specified in
Codex Stan 193.

Local authorities in Ethiopia establish national MLs for contaminants by referencing international
standards, particularly those set by the Codex. In cases where Codex standards are not available, the IES
may develop national MLs based on scientific risk assessments and available data. This approach
ensures that Ethiopia's food safety standards align with global best practices while considering local
conditions and risks.

Exporters wishing to export food products to Ethiopia must comply with the EFDA's regulations, which
may include providing documentation such as health certificates and certificates of analysis. These
documents should verify that the products meet the required safety standards and do not exceed the
established MLs for contaminants. Additionally, exporters may need to submit samples for laboratory
testing to confirm compliance with Ethiopian food safety standards.

Port inspection practices in Ethiopia involve the examination of imported food products to ensure they
comply with national food safety standards. If contaminants are detected at levels exceeding the
established MLs, the EFDA may impose sanctions, including the rejection of the shipment, destruction
of the non-compliant products, or penalties to the importer.

Section VI: Other Requirements, Regulations, and Registration Measures

Food Product Registration
EFDA has a mandatory list of food products that must be registered and approved prior to importation
for the first time. Infant formula (milk) and food supplements are strictly prohibited from entering the


                                                                                                           27
market without prior registration and approval. Details are available in the Infant and Follow-up
Formula Exporters Importers and Wholesalers Directive No./335/2020 and Food Supplement Directive
No. 333/2020. In addition to infant formula and food supplements, EFDA requires registration for milk
and milk products, meat and meat products, poultry products, seafood, processed vegetables, sliced
fruits, nuts and their products, therapeutic foods, cereal based complementary foods, confectioneries,
fats and oils, processed fruits, packed water, soft drinks, beer, iodized salt, and noodles.

The required documentation for new registration of imported food products includes:
 Application form for registration.
 Agency agreement between manufacturer/exporter and local importer.
 Certificate of Free Sale (or FDA’s Certificate to a Foreign Government for FDA-regulated products).
 Food manufacturing or products registration certificate or approval.
 Authenticated copy of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
   (HACCP), or ISO 22000.2005 certificates. In appropriate circumstances, internationally accepted
   certification or certificate of quality management system may be accepted in lieu of GMP and
   HACCP.
 Certificate of lab analysis of sample product for registration from accredited lab.
 Documents showing the quality and safety of raw materials and food additives used in
   manufacturing.
 Study evidence for determining shelf life of the product.
 Veterinary certificate attesting it is free of diseases that can be transmitted from animals to human.
 Product sample.
 Technical documents such as:
     Formulation and manufacturing and packaging procedure.
     Data on method of analysis and specification of the finished product.
     Stability study reports and shelf-life assignment.
     Packaging and labeling requirements for finished products.
     Quality analysis result.
 Other details of the product:
     Trade name of the food product.
     Common name of the food.
     Nutrition content.
     List of ingredients (except for single ingredient foods) in descending order of weight.
     Country of Origin, name, and address of the manufacturer or importer.
     Production and expiration dates.
     Product identification number.
     Net weight or volume of contents.
     Description of micronutrients used to enrich foods produced with fortification.
     If the food product contains milk and milk products, fish and shellfish, wheat, barley, peanuts,
        soybeans, and other food allergens, the label must clearly describe its content.
     If the food is made with GE ingredients, supporting information must be provided.
     Irradiated foods must contain clear information showing that the food is irradiated.
     Instructions for use (if needed).

Food Products Registration Process



                                                                                                     28
 EFDA uses an Electronic Regulatory Information System (eRIS) to oversee the market authorization
and import permit approval for food and medical products. Both importers and EFDA use this online
system to manage the licensing, registration, and import application process. Figure 1 provides a
summary outlining the typical steps for food product registration with EFDA.




Figure 1: Food Product Registration Process Flow




                                                                                                    29
                                                1. Prepare Application Documents
  Business License: Ensure your      Product Information: Prepare      Labeling: Make sure labels meet    Certificate of Free Sale: Provide
  company is licensed in the food     details such as product name,      EFDA standards (language,          evidence that the product is
              sector.                 ingredients, and composition.     nutrition, and health claims).    approved in its country of origin




                                                         2. Online Submission
     Register on EFDA Portal: Create an           Upload Documents: Submit the required       Application Fee: Pay the applicable fee for
      account on EFDA’s online system.               product and company documents.                         processing.




                                                   3. Document Review by EFDA

  Preliminary Review: EFDA will check if all required documents are     Detailed Review: EFDA will assess the product’s safety, labeling,
                           provided.                                             and compliance with Ethiopian food standards.




                                                 4. Product Testing (If necessary)
                                                                       Third-Party Testing: External laboratories may be used for testing
   EFDA Labs: Products may need to be tested for quality and safety.
                                                                                             specific parameters.




                                              5. Issuance of Registration Certificate
    Approval or Rejection: Based on compliance, EFDA will either          Certificate Issuance: If approved, you will receive a product
                   approve or reject the product.                                            registration certificate.




                                                    6. Post-Market Surveillance

   Compliance Monitoring: EFDA will conduct ongoing checks on registered products in the market to ensure they meet safety and quality
                                                           standards.



Facility Registration: EFDA requires pre-licensing formalities to issue a competency certificate to
Ethiopian food manufacturers. According to the revised Food Manufacturing Factories Pre-Licensing
Directive, the facility registration requirement applies to local food manufacturers to ensure food safety



                                                                                                                                   30
and quality. EFDA classifies local food manufacturers into three different entities. This classification is
based on the perishability of the product, the manufacturing process of the product, and end users of the
product. This does not apply to U.S. facilities exporting to Ethiopia.

   Special Nutritional Purpose Foods:
     Food supplement/dietary supplement/infant formula
     Follow up formula
     Complimentary foods for infants and young children
     Ready to use supplementary foods (such as Plumpy Nut, Plumpy Sup, F-100 and F-75) for acute
       and moderate malnourished people
     Special nutritional purpose foods
     Other manufacturers producing foods of similar nature to the above

   High-Risk Food Products for General Purpose: Per EFDA’s Food Manufacturers Establishment
    Pre-licensing Directive No. 358/ 2013 (Amharic), the following items are considered high-risk.
     Processed animal products
     Processed seafood
     Processed fruits and vegetables
     Processed nuts
     Therapeutic foods
     Complementary foods (for children three years and older)
     Fortified foods (iodized salt, edible oil, flour, etc.)

    Low-Risk Food Products:
     Crackers, snack food, and confectionery products
     Edible oils and fats
     Packed water
     Soft drinks
     Beers
     Extruded products and noodles

   Notified Food Products: EFDA categorizes the following food products as Notified food products:
    which require mandatory conformity assessments before being imported, exported, or sold.
     Hot sauce
     Legume products
     Packed rice products
     Processed seed (corn, wheat, sorghum, barley, oat, etc.) products
     Packed sugar
     Bakery raw materials
     Processed coffee and tea
     Processed spices
     Alcohol (more than 10 percent) and liquor products
     Vinegars
     Other related food products not mentioned above
     Imported food aid products donated by governmental or non-governmental organizations
     Raw materials used for food production


                                                                                                         31
Mandatory Feed Product Registration
The EEA’s Directive for the Registration of Feed Products (No. 995/2024) created a regulatory
framework that requires registration for all feed products, including processed fodder, feed ingredients,
and raw materials. It applies to both locally produced and imported feed products, mandating that any
feed product intended for commercial use must be registered with the EAA. Additionally, the directive
includes a focus on quality control and feed product safety, with requirements for market licenses based
on these factors.

Definitions: The Directive provides specific definitions for various terms used throughout, including
"processed feed," which refers to feed made by blending multiple ingredients, and "feed supplement,"
which includes nutrient preparations for animals. It also defines "feed raw materials" as products or by-
products used in formulating animal feed. The document clarifies the roles of regulatory entities, product
registrants, and the concept of product quality assurance systems. It also includes terms related to feed
safety and standards, such as "Genetically Modified" (GM) ingredients, certificates of analysis, and
product variations (major and minor).

Registration: Before any feed product can be imported, marketed or used commercially, it must be
registered with the EEA. The product must meet national or international safety and quality standards.
The registration process involves submitting various documents, including certificates of competence,
product details, and safety reports.

Application and Re-Registration Process: The process involves submitting required documents to
EAA, such as legal agreements, product safety reports, and product labels. Registrants must comply with
requests for additional information within three attempts, or a new application must be submitted.
Registered feed products must be re-registering every four years, with any major or minor variations
requiring notification and additional documentation.

Quality and Safety Requirements: Feed products must adhere to strict quality and safety standards.
This involves testing multiple batches of the product and submitting certificates of analysis. Stability
studies are required to determine the shelf life of the product in the Ethiopian climate. The packaging
must also meet specific standards to ensure it protects the product from contamination and withstands
varying weather conditions. U.S. exporters are encouraged to refer the detailed regulations outlined in
Veterinary Drug and Feed Administration and Control Proclamation No. 728/2011 and Feed
Registration Directive No. 995/2024.

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Feed Materials and Growth Hormones
According to Page 5 (Article 3) of the Feed Registration Directive, genetically modified or feed
materials containing growth-stimulating hormones, drugs, or medicinal products cannot be registered for
domestic production or importation. Exceptions exist for scientific research and emergency relief feed
products, as well as pet food accompanying travelers or diplomatic missions.


Required Documents for Feed Product Registration:

Legal Documents:


                                                                                                           32
   Agency Agreement: For imported products, a legal agency agreement with the foreign
    manufacturer.
   Manufacturing Agreement: If produced by a third party, an agreement between the producer and
    manufacturer, as well as between the producer and local importer.
   Manufacturer’s Commitment: An agreement stating that the manufacturer and importer are
    responsible for recovering defective products if necessary.
   Product Recall Procedures: Document showing the manufacturer's procedure for collecting
    defective products from the market.
   Manufacturing License: Issued by the appropriate authority in the country of origin.
   Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Certificate: Or an equivalent certificate of competency issued
    to the manufacturing company.
   Non-GMO Certification: Evidence that the product is free from genetically modified ingredients.
   Animal Product Health Certification: If using animal by-products, proof that the product is free
    from diseases like Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE).
   Marketing Authorization: A certificate showing that the product is marketed in the exporting
    country, similar to a Certificate of Free Sale.
   Quality/Safety Management Certificate: As necessary, evidence of the product's compliance with
    recognized food safety or quality management systems.
   Manufacturer Profile: A general description of the manufacturer.
   Label and Sample: The product's label and a physical sample.

Product Description:
  General Information: Document detailing the product's physical and chemical properties,
    composition, intended use, usage instructions, precautions, and storage/transportation conditions.

Production Process Documents:
  Raw Materials List: Detailed list of raw materials and their safety documentation.
  Product Formula: Complete formula of the feed product.
  Manufacturing Flowchart: A flowchart showing the production process.
  Step-by-step Process Description: Detailed explanation of each step in the production process.
  In-process Quality Control: Documentation of quality and safety control activities at each stage of
    production.
  Batch Record: A batch record of at least one production batch.

Quality Control Documents:
 Product Specifications: Documents outlining the quality and safety specifications of the feed
   product.
 Certificates of Analysis: Laboratory test certificates from at least three different batches of the
   product.
 Testing Method Validation: Proof that the product testing methods are valid.
 Stability Study: Stability study report determining the product’s shelf life, considering Ethiopian
   climate conditions.

Packaging Documents:


                                                                                                         33
   Packaging Material Description: Detailed description of the packaging material and its compliance
    with standards.
   Quality Control of Packaging: Criteria and testing methods for the packaging material to ensure it
    meets safety standards.

Labeling Documents:
  Label Sample: A sample of the product label, which must include details like manufacturer name,
   product name, batch number, shelf life, net weight, ingredients, intended use, and any necessary
   warnings.

Product Safety Documents:
  Safety Assurance: Evidence that the product is free from physical, biological, and chemical hazards.
  Safety Study: A safety study report conducted by the manufacturer or published in a recognized
    scientific journal.




Figure 2: Flowchart for Feed Product Registration




                                                                                                      34
                                                     1. Application Submission:
   The registrant submits application form along with all required     These include legal documents, product descriptions, manufacturing
                            documents.                                 process details, safety assurances, and packaging/label information.




                                                     2. Document Verification:
 EAA reviews the submitted documents to verify their completeness
                                                                       Missing or incomplete documents are requested from the applicant.
     and compliance with national or international standards.




                                                  3. Product Sample Submission:
  The applicant is required to submit a physical sample of the feed      The sample should be representative of the product intended for
                         product for testing.                                                  commercial use.




                                                        4. Laboratory Testing:
 The product sample undergoes lab testing to ensure it meets quality   Tests assess the product’s physical, chemical, and biological safety,
                      and safety standards.                               ensuring it is free from contaminants or hazardous materials.




                                                     5. Review and Evaluation:
  EAA conducts a comprehensive review of both the lab test results          The review ensures that the feed product complies with all
                and the submitted documentation.                                            regulatory requirements.




                                                       6. Certificate Issuance:
     If the product passes the review and testing, EAA issues a            This certificate authorizes the product for commercial use or
                       registration certificate.                                           importation into the country.




                                                 7. Post-Registration Monitoring:
 After registration, the product is subject to ongoing monitoring to   Any variations in the product must be reported, and re-registration is
 ensure its continued compliance with safety and quality standards.                          required every four years.




Section VII: Other Specific Standards/Laws

Seed Law


                                                                                                                                       35
In May 2023, Ethiopian parliament enacted a new seed law, marking the third revision in the history of
the country’s seed regulatory system. The first seed related regulation was in 1997, which was replaced
by the seed law 206/2000. That was again revised and replaced by the seed law 782/2013. The new seed
law provides a legal framework much-needed to boost seed sector development in Ethiopia. One of the
major challenges faced by the Ethiopian seed regulatory system has been the very limited
implementation of the laws and regulations. The new Seed Proclamation No. 1288/2023 repealed the
previous Seed Proclamation No. 782/2013 and outlines three different systems for registering new crop
varieties in the country. One of these systems involves a performance trial conducted by EAA,
performance evaluation by a committee of experts, and an approval by a National Variety Release
Committee. The second system is designed for varieties that have undergone evaluation in other
countries with similar agro-ecological conditions. It allows for a streamlined registration process,
recognizing international testing data. The third system permits local farmers and pastoralists to register
and use varieties that have been traditionally adapted to their specific environments, facilitating the
inclusion of indigenous knowledge and practices.

The new proclamation also outlines seed marketing (including import and export), seed quality
standards, testing and certification. The importation of seeds is regulated to ensure the introduction of
quality seeds that meet national standards. The proclamation outlines specific requirements and
procedures for seed importation:
     Obtain an import permit from EAA prior to bringing seeds into the country.
     Ensure the seed variety is officially registered and approved by the EAA.
     Comply with national seed standards regarding quality, purity, and germination rates, as specified
        by the EAA.
     Provide a valid phytosanitary certificate from the country of origin confirming the seeds are free
        from pests and diseases.
     Adhere to labeling requirements, including variety, origin, and germination information.
     Submit seeds for inspection and quarantine by the EAA upon arrival.

Food Fortification
Ethiopia's Fortified Foods and Fortificants Control Directive is aimed at improving public health by
addressing widespread micronutrient deficiencies, particularly in vulnerable groups. The regulation
mandates the addition of essential vitamins and minerals, such as iron, iodine, and vitamin A and D, to
staple foods like wheat flour, corn flour, salt, and edible oils. The regulatory framework for food
fortification outlines specific standards and guidelines for local producers and importers to ensure
compliance. For example, salt must be iodized to combat iodine deficiency disorders, which have
historically been prevalent in Ethiopia. Wheat and corn flour are required to be fortified with iron and
folic acid, addressing issues such as anemia and neural tube defects. Similarly, edible oils must be
fortified with vitamin A and D. EFDA oversees the enforcement of these regulations, ensuring that
fortified products meet the established standards. EFDA also conducts regular inspections, monitors
compliance, and collaborates with stakeholders in the food industry to facilitate the fortification process.

In June 2022, the Ethiopian Standard Council endorsed mandatory fortification of edible oil and wheat
flour to address the problem of micronutrient deficiencies in the country. Prior to this decision, IES had
a voluntary standard for wheat flour and edible oils. The Compulsory Ethiopian Standards (CES) for
fortified edible oils and wheat flour are as follows:


                                                                                                          36
   CES 310: 2022: Fortified Edible Oils: Edible oils must be fortified with Vitamin A and D to address
    public health concerns related to nutritional deficiencies. The standard specifies the minimum
    amount of vitamins and nutrients that must be present after fortification to improve the dietary intake
    of essential nutrients among consumers.
   CES 309: 2022: Fortified Wheat Flour: Wheat flour shall be fortified with Vitamins B1, B2, B6,
    B12, niacin, folate, and zinc. These micronutrients must conform to the limits set in the national
    standard.

In October 2023, EFDA drafted a regulation on food fortification as detailed in the "Fortified Foods and
Fortificants Control Directive." This draft directive outlines several key regulatory and standards
requirements. The directive defines “fortificants” as compounds containing specific micronutrients
(vitamins and minerals) intended to be added to a food product. The directive shall be applicable on all
fortified foods and fortificants produced locally and imported to the country. Below are the key
regulatory requirements and standards based on the directive:

   Mandatory Registration: All fortified foods and fortificants, whether locally produced or imported,
    must be registered with the EFDA. It is prohibited to manufacture, import, distribute, or sell any
    fortified products without prior registration.
 Compliance with Standards: Fortified products must meet the national Ethiopian standards or
    internationally recognized standards in the absence of local standards. The EFDA may require
    additional information or samples during the product evaluation process.
 Certificates for Market Authorization: Applicants must submit various certificates, including a
    certificate of competency for local manufacturers or importers, a certificate of Good Manufacturing
    Practice (GMP), a certificate of analysis, and food-grade packaging certification. For imported
    products, a certificate of free sale from the country of origin is also required.
 Packaging and Labeling: Fortified products must use food-grade, non-transparent packaging to
    protect the product’s integrity. Labels must clearly list ingredients, net content, production and
    expiration dates, fortification details, and storage instructions in Amharic or English. Labels must
    not be misleading or deceptive.
 Inspection and Testing: After registration dossier evaluation, the EFDA may conduct onsite
    inspections to verify compliance with GMP and may test product samples in a laboratory to confirm
    adherence to standards.
 Stability and Shelf-Life: Products must undergo stability testing under conditions that simulate
    Ethiopia's climate. Applicants are required to submit reports on both accelerated and real-time
    stability studies, ensuring that products maintain quality throughout their shelf life.
 Major and Minor Variations: Any changes to the product, such as changes in ingredients,
    packaging, or shelf life, must be reported to EFDA. Major variations that affect the safety or quality
    of the product require EFDA approval before marketing, while minor variations must still be
    reported but are subject to less stringent requirements.
 Re-registration: Fortified products must be re-registered within 120 days of their registration
    expiration. Applicants must provide updated certificates, confirm that the manufacturing process
    remains unchanged, and submit fresh samples for analysis if required.
Halal Food Regulations
Ethiopia has been developing its standards for halal food imports in response to the growing demand,
but there are not fully detailed, publicized national halal standards as strict as those found in countries
like Saudi Arabia or Malaysia. However, the country follows certain guidelines for halal food imports,


                                                                                                         37
focusing on international standards and religious requirements. Ethiopia also issues halal certifications,
particularly for meat exports to the Middle East. The Ethiopian Islamic Affairs Supreme Council
(EIASC), Department of Accreditation and Certification, plays a key role in overseeing halal
certification and compliance in Ethiopia. The EIASC is responsible for establishing, enforcing, and
monitoring guidelines to promote the development of halal services in Ethiopia, as well as issuing
certifications for halal products. Prior to granting a halal certificate, EIASC verifies the halal status of
raw materials and products through an official site inspection. Also, it may collaborate with foreign halal
certifying bodies to ensure imported products meet Islamic dietary laws.

Ethiopia also accepts international halal certifications issued by competent authorities. Ethiopia often
relies on international halal standards, such as those set by the World Halal Food Council (WHFC) or
International Halal Integrity Alliance (IHI Alliance), to guide its halal food regulations. These
international guidelines are commonly adopted by Ethiopian importers and exporters to meet market
demands. Importers need to submit halal certification documents issued by these authorities, which
prove that the products meet halal standards from slaughter to packaging. With a substantial Muslim
population, there is a growing demand for halal food products in Ethiopia. Thus, U.S. exporters catering
to this market segment are advised to ensure proper halal certification.

Other Standards: IES’ Compulsory Standards Catalogue 2023 contains a list of mandatory standards,
ranging from food microbiology to food labeling and from beans to bananas. It is important to note that
health and safety aspects, such as MRLs for pesticides or other contaminants that are found in voluntary
standards, are, in fact, mandatory, and shipments must comply with these requirements. The voluntary
aspect of these standards only refers to quality-related issues, such as the grade of the product. IES’
mandatory standards “have the force of law” and are enforced by laws and administrative regulations.
Food products subject to specific compulsory requirements are fresh and canned fruits and vegetables,
coffee (export), alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages, edible oil, oilseeds, food additives, as well as
pre-packaged foods, including baby foods.


Section VIII: Geographical Indicators, Trademarks, Brand Names, and Intellectual Property
Rights

Despite being a member of the convention establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO), Ethiopia has not yet ratified most international conventions on the protection of Intellectual
Property Rights (IPR). Ethiopia is not yet a signatory to the Paris Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property, the WIPO Copyright Treaty, and the Madrid System for the International
Registration of Marks, or the Patent Cooperation Treaty.

The Ethiopian Intellectual Property Authority (EIPA) oversees IPR issues including trademarks, brand
names, and other intellectual property rights. EIPA facilitates and promotes the legal protection and use
of IPR guaranteed by various laws. The authority also administers functions related to trademark
registration, invalidation, or cancellation. In addition to its administrative duties, the EIPA is involved in
the drafting of intellectual property laws and regulations. In particular, the office has a mandate to study,
analyze and advise the government on IPR policies and legislative initiatives. Overall, the IPR system in
Ethiopia remains underdeveloped. IPR laws are designed to protect creators, inventors, and businesses




                                                                                                            38
by offering them exclusive rights to their innovations and creations, as well as providing remedies for
infringement and unauthorized use.

Geographical Indicators (GIs)
Ethiopia currently lacks explicit legal protection for geographical indications (GIs), though they may
receive indirect coverage under the Trademark Registration and Protection Proclamation No. 501/2006
and revised Proclamation No. 273/2012. Legal analysts describe that the existing trademark law does
offer limited provisions for the protection of GIs as collective trademarks. In the absence of a distinct
legal framework for GIs, both trademarks and GIs are typically protected under the same legal
framework. The EIPA has drafted a law on the registration and protection of GIs and conducted industry
consultation. The drafted law safeguards the names of products linked to specific geographical areas,
ensuring that only products originating from these regions can use the designated GI labels. Local
examples include Ethiopian coffee varieties like “Yirgacheffe”, “Sidamo”, and “Harar”, which are
protected to preserve their unique qualities tied to geographic origin.

Trademarks
EIPA oversees trademark protection under the Trademark Registration and Protection Proclamation No.
501/2006, complemented by the Trademark Registration and Protection Regulation No. 273/2012. The
law defines a trademark as any visible sign capable of distinguishing goods or services of one person
from those of others, encompassing elements such as words, designs, letters, numerals, colors, or the
shape of goods or their packaging. This law allows individuals and businesses to register trademarks for
goods and services to distinguish their products in the market. The law protects registered trademarks
from unauthorized use and provides remedies for infringement. Notably, Ethiopia follows a first-to-file
system, meaning trademark rights are granted to the first applicant who registers.

Trademark Registration and Application:
Any individual, association, or legal entity involved in the production and distribution of goods and
services can apply for trademark registration if they meet the requirements set forth in the Trademark
Registration and Protection Regulation No.273/2012. The registration of a trademark will be valid for
seven years from the date of the application. The registration can be renewed for an additional seven-
year period. The renewal must be made within three months of the registration expiry, or within six
months after by paying a penalty in addition to the regular renewal fee. Failure to renew the trademark
within the specified time will result in the trademark being considered waived or canceled.

Key Aspects of Trademark Registration and Protection in Ethiopia:
 Eligibility for Registration: Natural persons, companies, or other entities can apply to register a
   trademark. Foreign applicants must appoint a professional representative in Ethiopia.
 Registration Duration and Renewal: Trademark registration is valid for seven years from the filing
   date and can be renewed indefinitely for consecutive seven-year periods.
 International Filing and Priority: Ethiopia recognizes the right of priority for trademark applications
   filed abroad, allowing applicants to claim the filing date of an earlier application in a foreign country
   if filed within six months.
 Distinctiveness Requirement: A trademark must be capable of distinguishing the goods or services
   of one person from those of others. Marks that are descriptive, generic, or contrary to public order or
   morality are not eligible for registration.




                                                                                                          39
   Trademark vs. Trade Name: Registering a trade name does not automatically protect the associated
    trademark. Separate registration is required for trademark protection.
   Nice Classification System: Ethiopia utilizes the Nice Classification (NCL) system for categorizing
    goods and services into 45 classes, aligning with international standards.
   Use Requirement: If a trademark is not used for three consecutive years after registration, it may be
    subject to cancellation.

Requirements for Foreign Trademark Application:
 Renewed Business License or Certificate of Registration of a foreign trademark or Certificate of
   Incorporation.
 Authenticated Power of Attorney, if the application for the registration of a trademark is filed
   through an agent.
 Sample of trademark: One full-size copy on A-4 paper and eight reduced-size copies on A-4 paper.
 Completed application form in two copies.
 Please refer to this link for information on trademark application fees.
       o Application fee: Application fee of 1,750 birr for one class. If the trademark is subject to a
          service covering more than one class of goods or services, the fee shall include additional
          payment of 50% of 1,750 birr).
       o Certificate Registration fee: 3,000 birr for one class.

Other Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Laws
 Patent Law (Proclamation No. 123/1995): This law governs the protection of inventions, minor
   inventions, and industrial designs. To be patentable, an invention must be novel, involve an
   inventive step, and be capable of industrial application. Patent protection lasts for 15 years, with a
   possible five-year extension if the invention is being properly used in Ethiopia.
 Copyright Law (Proclamation No. 410/2004, amended by Proclamation No. 872/2014): Copyright
   protection is automatic upon the creation of a work, and registration is optional. The protection lasts
   for the life of the author plus 50 years.
 Industrial Design Regulation: Aesthetic aspects of products, such as shape, color, texture, or
   ornamentation. Industrial designs are protected for five years, renewable up to 15 years, provided
   proof of use in Ethiopia is furnished.

Table 4: Summary of Key Intellectual Property Rights Protection in Ethiopia
                                                                                                Registration
     Type of IPR               Protection Method               Duration of Protection
                                                                                                 Authority
                                                           Seven years, renewable
Trademark                 Registration required                                                    EIPA
                                                           indefinitely
Geographical
                          Registration required            Indefinite (if valid criteria met)      EIPA
Indications
                          Automatic (registration
Copyright                                                  Life of author plus 50 years            EIPA
                          optional)
Patent                    Registration required            20 years                                EIPA
                                                           Five years, renewable up to 15
Industrial Design         Registration required                                                    EIPA
                                                           years
Source: EIPA Proclamations and Regulations



                                                                                                          40
Plant Breeders’ Right Protection
Ethiopia’s Plant Breeders’ Right Proclamation No. 1068/2017 establishes legal protection for breeders
of new plant varieties across all genera and species in Ethiopia. Some species may be exempted through
the Ministry of Agriculture directives. To qualify for protection, a variety must satisfy: novelty,
distinctness, uniformity, and stability. The protection lasts for 20 years for annual crops and 25 years for
trees, vines, and other perennial plants. The breeder has exclusive rights to produce, sell, condition for
propagation, import, export, or otherwise commercialize the protected variety. This also covers
“essentially derived varieties” and those not clearly distinguishable from the protected variety. The
Ministry may impose restrictions (e.g. compulsory licensing) on cases such as inadequate supply, public
health, or other public interest concerns. Also, exceptions exist for private use, experimental use,
research, or using a variety as an input for further breeding. The application process includes filing with
the Ministry of Agriculture, preliminary determinations, sample deposit, use of clear variety
denominations, and publication for opposition comments. Determination of protection also requires that
genetic resources used in breeding comply with laws on access and benefit sharing when applicable.
Infringement provisions cover unauthorized commercial use of protected varieties. Remedies include
injunctions, damages, and potentially criminal liability.

Please refer to the 2025 Ethiopia Investment Climate Statement on protection of property rights for a
complete understanding of IPR situation in Ethiopia. In addition, Ethiopia’s property rights laws, rules,
regulations, and treaties are available at WIPO.

Section IX: Import Procedures

The following are the general steps for importing a product into the country.
 An importer must apply for an import permit and obtain a letter of credit from an Ethiopian bank for
  the total value of the imports before an order can be placed.
 Bank approves letter of credit and authorizes release of foreign exchange.
 Importer pays foreign suppliers for goods.
 Customs clearance and inspection by relevant government authority at Port of Djibouti or dry ports in
  Ethiopia. (Note: Customs clearance and inspection can take several weeks.)

Certificates and documents generally required for importing food and beverage products to
Ethiopia:
 Registration certificate
 Agency agreement- legally binding contract in which a company (the principal) authorizes another
  party (the agent) to act on its behalf in a foreign market
 Original and copy of health certificates for food items excluding alcoholic drinks:
   Phytosanitary Certificate if the food item is unprocessed fruit, vegetable, or cereal.
   Veterinary Certificate if the food is unprocessed animal and animal product.
 Certificate of conformity, including laboratory analysis, for products with compulsory standards
 Certificate of Origin
 Free sale certificate (or FDA’s Certificate to a Foreign Government for FDA-regulated products)
 Packing list
 Customs declaration
 Bill of loading, airway bill or track bill


                                                                                                          41
 Commercial invoice
 Certificate of irradiation, evidencing the amount of remaining in it is not harmful to human
  consumption if the food is irradiated.

Shipment of grains, oilseeds, fresh fruits, and vegetables require a phytosanitary certificate issued by a
competent government authority. Livestock and livestock products require a veterinary certificate.

As noted in Section I, imported products must comply with national compulsory standards. Third-party
certifiers can provide a written attestation that the shipment in question complies with the relevant
Ethiopian standard(s), which will allow the cargo to enter the country without inspection at the point of
entry. A list of third-party certifiers is available in Appendix II. Uncertified cargo will be subject to
normal inspection procedures.

Import of Compound Feed, Feed Ingredients, and Additives
EAA’s Veterinary Drug and Animal Feed Administration and Control directorate has a directive to
control the import of animal feed and related products. The Feed Processor, Importer, Distributor and
Exporter Registration and Certification Directive No. 03/2015 is not available online. The directive
requires the following documents to import compound feed, feed ingredients and additives:
  Registration Certificate
  Import Permit
  Sanitary or phytosanitary certificate
  Ingredient composition in order of largest to smallest
  Certificate of Batch Analysis (nutrient profile, contaminants such as mycotoxins, heavy metals,
   foreign matter, microbiological safety, compliance with declared ingredient composition, etc.)
  Certificate of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP)
  Certificate indicating that it is free from GMOs
  Certificate of freedom from Protein of Ruminant origin

Import of Animal and Animal Genetics Materials (AAGM)
Importation of AAGM is allowed for specific purposes such as for commercial breeding and production,
research, and extension. The following conditions must be met to import AAGM:
  Imports must fulfill the needs of the importer within the national interest.
  Must be certified free of GMOs or living modified organisms (LMOs).
  Labeling and contents of transit package/letters.

For importation of AAGMs, GOE regulatory authority requires that the World Organization for Animal
Health (WOAH) guidelines to be strictly adhered. This includes from labeling, production and
processing, health, manpower, transportation, and facility requirements. The guidelines for import and
export of animal and genetic material are enclosed as an attachment.



Figure 3: Flowchart for Import Procedures




                                                                                                             42
                                                    1. Obtain an Import License
  Acquire an import license from MoTRI. This requires a valid business registration certificate, a Tax Identification Number (TIN), and
                                                     other relevant documents.




                              2. Obtain a Pre-import Permit (for certain restricted goods only)
  Certain restricted goods need a pre-import permit, issued by regulatory agencies. For example, veterinary drug and animal feed require
                                                           approval from EAA.




                                                     3. Arrange Payment Issues
                                                                         Obtain bank permit and arrange mode of payment or Franco valuta
          Obtain foreign currency approval through bank
                                                                                             permit currency approval




                               4. Collect Commercial Documents for Customs Declaration
  Upon arrival of the goods, the importer prepares commercial documents that include bill of lading/airway bill, invoice, bank document,
                                          packing list, certificate of origin, pre-import permit, etc.




                                                 5. Prepare Customs Declaration
  Importer or agent fills out customs declaration form with information about the goods, their tariff classification, and customs valuation,
                                                    which will determine duties and taxes.




                                               6. Submit the Customs Declaration
                    The declaration and all necessary documents are submitted to the Ethiopian Customs for clearance.




                             7. Obtain Import Customs Clearance and Goods Release Note




       8. Pay Service Charges, Exit Goods from Customs Warehouse, & Receive Final Import Customs
                                                Declaration



                             9. Submit Clearance Declaration to National Bank of Ethiopia
   Importers who obtained foreign currency for the transaction must submit the final customs declaration to the NBE for future imports.


Section X: Trade Facilitation



                                                                                                                                          43
The GOE has an Electronic Single Window (eSW) platform that helps facilitate trade and enhance local
capacity. This initiative, launched in January 2020, is part of the government’s commitment to improve
international trade and ease of doing business in the country. The eSW system automates trade
procedures and replaces the need for physical, manual, and duplicative processes. It also plays a key role
in enhancing transparency for trade. The single window system connects 16 major cross-border
regulatory agencies. It enables traders to submit documentation and receive electronic permits relating to
import and export through a single window submission, significantly reducing the time and cost to trade.
The automated platform creates a paperless environment and eliminates multiple physical inspections
and repetitive document submissions; it has reduced clearance time from 44 days to 13 days with the
goal of clearance times eventually reaching only three days.

Before launching the electronic single window service, Ethiopia had been using manual procedures that
required frequent face-to-face interaction with regulatory agencies. This resulted in high trading costs
and delays due to extensive documentary requirements, high levels of physical inspection of imports,
and lack of coordination among border agencies. The electronic single window platform has two major
portals:
   Trader Portal: The trader submits the trade documents required for customs and border clearance
      electronically, views the processing procedures and various statistical information, and provides
      the function to pay the taxes and fees electronically.
   CBRA Portal: It provides the function that the person in charge of the authorities to process
      electronically the verification, inspection and approval of the documents received through the
      trader portal.

Please visit the Ethiopian Customs Trade Portal for detailed information on taxes, tariffs, and other
documentations related to trade facilitation.

Required Third Party Inspection
The Ministry of Trade and Regional Integration (MoTRI) and the Ethiopian Food and Drug Authority
(EFDA) require a Certificate of Conformity (COC) for food and agricultural products subject to
Compulsory Ethiopian Standards (CES). The COC ensures product quality, food safety, and facilitates
faster customs clearance at entry ports. Products falling under CES must be accompanied by a pre-
export certificate of conformity.

Mandatory standards cover a range of agro-food products, including fresh and canned fruits and
vegetables, alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages, edible oils, oilseeds, food additives, and prepackaged
foods. Certificates of conformity can be issued by authorized third-party inspection companies
accredited to ISO/IEC 17025. International companies authorized to conduct pre-shipment Verification
of Conformity (VoC) programs for Ethiopia include Cotecna and Bureau Veritas. U.S. exporters are
advised to contact the North America branch offices of these third-party inspection companies to submit
inquiries and arrange certification.



APPENDIX I: Government Regulatory Key Agency Contacts

 Ethiopian Food and Drug Authority (EFDA)                Ethiopian Conformity Assessment Enterprise
 Email: contactefda@efda.gov.et                          (ECAE)
 Tel: +251 115 524 118                                   Email: info-cp@eca-e.com
 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia                                   Tel: +251 118 695 041                      44
                                                         Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
 Ethiopian Agricultural Authority (EAA)
 Email: info@eaa.gov.et
45
APENDIX II: Other Import Specialist Technical Contacts

Third-party inspection companies that provide Pre-Export Verification of Conformity for food and
agricultural products:

 Cotecna Ethiopia VoC Program Office
 Email: info@cotecnakenya.com (coverage from Kenya office)
 Tel: +251 116 670 477
 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

 Bureau Veritas Services PLC
 Email: contact.ethiopia@bureauveritas.com
 Tel: +251 118 685 120 or +251 966 685 898
 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

 Control Union Certifications Ethiopia
 Email: ethiopia@controlunion.com
 Tel: +251 116 298 330
 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

 SGS - Ethiopia
 Tel: +251 116 670 778
 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

 Intertek Ethiopia
 Tel: +251 929 296 883
 Addis Ababa, Ethiopia




Attachments: Guidelines for Import & Export of Animal and Genetic Material (3).pdf




                                                                                                   46
