THIS REPORT CONTAINS ASSESSMENTS OF COMMODITY AND TRADE ISSUES MADE BY
USDA STAFF AND NOT NECESSARILY STATEMENTS OF OFFICIAL U.S. GOVERNMENT
POLICY


Voluntary    - Public

                                                                            Date: 12/23/2013
                                                              GAIN Report Number: CB1317

Netherlands Antilles
Post: Miami ATO

Curacao - FAIRS Country Report
Report Categories:
Food and Agricultural Import Regulations and
Standards - Narrative
Sanitary/Phytosanitary/Food Safety
Approved By:
Katherine Nishiura
Prepared By:
Omar Gonzalez

Report Highlights:
Updated Sections: Section I & Appendix I.
With the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles in 2010, Curaçao, now an autonomous country within the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, is fully responsible for its own regulation of imported food and agricultural
products. For Curaçao, which was home to the Government of the Netherlands Antilles, the transition has
consisted of adopting Netherlands Antilles legislation as its own and some minor renaming of regulatory
agencies and shuffling of responsibilities in order to maintain the status quo. Therefore, this regulatory
transition has not really impacted trade for the time being and Curaçao remains quite import-friendly to U.S.
suppliers.
General Information:
This report was prepared by the Caribbean Basin Agricultural Trade Office (CBATO) of the USDA/Foreign
Agricultural Service in Miami, Florida, for U.S. exporters of domestic food and agricultural products. While every
possible care was taken in preparation of this report, information provided may not be completely accurate,
either because policies have changed since its preparation or because clear and consistent information about
these policies was not available. It is highly recommended that U.S. exporters verify the full set of import
requirements with their foreign customers who are normally best equipped to research such matters with local
authorities before any goods are shipped. FINAL IMPORT APPROVAL OF ANY PRODUCT IS SUBJECT TO THE
IMPORTING COUNTRY’S RULES AND REGULATIONS AS INTERPRETED BY BORDER OFFICIALS AT THE TIME OF
THE PRODUCT ENTRY.




Food Laws:
Following the October 2010 dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles, Curaçao and Sint Maarten became
autonomous countries within the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The remaining three islands (Bonaire, Sint
Eustatius and Saba), also known as the BES Islands, became extraordinary overseas municipalities of the
Kingdom. Please note that this FAIRS Country Report is specific to Curaçao. For information on Sint Maarten’s
import regulations and standards please refer to the Sint Maarten FAIRS Country Report. For information
pertaining to the BES Islands’ import regulations and standards, U.S. suppliers may contact the CBATO. See
Appendix II for contact information.

Given its new country status, Curaçao is transitioning from being part of a dependent Dutch collectivity to a
mostly self-governing country (the Netherlands still retain responsibility for foreign affairs and defense). In
terms of regulating imports of food and agricultural products, the first stage of the transition involved adopting
existing Netherlands Antilles legislation as Curaçao legislation, which in essence maintained the status quo.
Currently, the main legislation governing food and agricultural products is the Food Act (formerly the
Netherlands Antilles Food Law 334 of 1997). The Government of Curaçao will try to update food safety and
other food related laws as needed.

The governmental transition has also meant some minor changes in regulatory structures and shuffling of
responsibilities. As shown in the following diagram, the Ministry of Public Health, Environment, and Nature
currently houses the key regulatory agencies with responsibility for imported foods and agricultural products.
Of these, the Inspectorate of Public Health is the main regulatory agency for most processed foods. Most of
their inspection is done at the retail level although they may also conduct random checks at the port of entry.
The Veterinary Affairs Department handles imports of live animals and unprocessed meat products. The
Agriculture and Fisheries Service handles plant products. These last two agencies conduct most of their
inspection at the port of entry.
Labeling Requirements:
Labeling requirements are based on European laws. However, Curaçao accepts U.S. food labels and for the
most part does not restrict U.S. products because of labeling issues. No additional labeling requirements are
placed on U.S. products. There are no special requirements for sample–size products or institutional packed
product for the food service sector. The U.S. nutritional fact panel is acceptable. U.S. suppliers should be aware
that health claims are generally not acceptable and any such claims must be approved in advance by the
Inspectorate of Health, Environment and Nature (see Appendix I for contact information).

Packaging and Container Regulations:
Curaçao has no major regulations dealing with food packaging that restrict trade of U.S. products in any way.
The Food Act simply specifies that packaging for food products must not be harmful to humans.

Food Additive Regulations:
The CBATO has not been made aware of any problems with U.S. products in this regard. Curaçao tends to
follow Codex standards for food additives. The Inspectorate of Health, Environment and Nature maintains its
own positive list of additives. Copies of the approved list of additives can be obtained from the Inspectorate
(see Appendix I for contact information).

Pesticides and Other Contaminants:
Legislation dealing with pesticide use (Decree 116) dates back to 1961 and has been adopted into country law
(Pesticide Ordinance) by Curaçao. One of the stipulations of the Pesticide Ordinance is that pesticides can only
be imported and marketed in Curaçao if the Inspector of Health Protection has been notified at least three
months in advance. Article 2 of this law describes the procedure of the above mentioned notification and
stipulates the need for a sample to be submitted. Additional documentation may also be required from the
applicant. The Inspectorate maintains a list of prohibited pesticides. For pesticides and other contaminants in
food products that are not prohibited, the Inspectorate relies on internationally accepted Codex standards
and/or U.S. guidance. Further information and copies of the prohibited pesticide list can be obtained from the
Inspectorate (see Appendix I for contact information).
Other Regulations and Requirements:
Products are not required to be registered or laboratory tested. Product samples shipped via express mail or
parcel post are subject only to a customs duty. Processed products are monitored at the retail level, while for
animal and plant products enforcement is carried out mostly at the port of entry.

Other Specific Standards:
No special import permits or licenses are required. However, U.S. exporters should be aware that plant
products (e.g. fresh produce) require a phytosanitary export certificate and meat products and other animal
products require a health certificate from the appropriate regulatory agency in the country of origin. A
certificate of free sale is required for most processed products.

Copyright and/or Trademark Laws:
The Bureau of Intellectual Property of Curaçao (formerly of the Netherlands Antilles) is the agency which
enables right holders to exercise their intellectual property rights in both Curaçao and Sint Maarten in
accordance with national and international standards. The Bureau carries out the National Trademark
Ordinance (National Gazette 1996, No. 188) and the National Trademark Decree (National Gazette 2000, No.
147). Trademark registration, which is voluntary, is a rather simple procedure and is normally carried out by an
agent authorized by the Bureau. Registration affords trademark protection for a 10 year period and is
renewable, upon request, for periods of 10 years. To carry out a search of registered trademarks and to obtain
a list of authorized agents and registration fees, U.S. companies can contact the Bureau (See Appendix I for
complete contact information).
It is worth noting that registrations made previously with the Bureau of Intellectual Property of the Netherlands
Antilles will remain in effect throughout the former Netherlands Antilles (Curaçao, Sint Maarten, Bonaire, Sint
Eustatius, and Saba) until their expiration.

Author Defined:
Import Procedures:

Customs clearance is normally handled by a Customs broker. Upon presentation of normal import
documentation (commercial invoice, bill of lading, phytosanitary or health certificate where required, and
Customs declaration), the shipment is reviewed and if accepted it is entered into the Customs Department
electronic system. Import documentation is accepted in Dutch and Papiamento (the official languages), as well
as in English and Spanish. However, the Customs declaration must be in Dutch. Duty is paid directly to the
Customs Department. For disputed or rejected product, there is a formal appeal process which allows the
importer to make an appeal directly with Customs.

The length of time for clearance depends on various factors, such as, the number of container ships arriving at
the same time, how quickly they can be unloaded and when they are transported to the importer. Perishable
goods have priority and usually are cleared within one day. Dry goods can be cleared within 2 days.

Appendix I. Government Regulatory Agency Contacts:

FOR FOOD IMPORT REGULATIONS, CONTACT:

Inspectorate of Public Health                                                 (processed food products)
Ministry of Health, Environment & Nature
Apna Building
Willemstad, Curacao
Tel: 011 (599-9) 466-9366, 466-9362
TeleFax: 011 (599-9) 466-9367

Veterinary Affairs                                                       (Meat and animal products)
Ministry of Public Health, Environment & Nature
Abattoirweg 15
Willemstad, Curaçao
Tel: 011 (599-9) 461-4000
Fax: 011 (599-9) 461-1014
Email: vetdcur@onenet.an

Dept. of Agriculture & Fisheries Management                              (Plant products)
Ministry of Public Health, Environment & Nature
Willemstad, Curaçao
Tel: 011 (599-9) 737-0288
Fax: 011 (599-9) 737-0723

FOR CUSTOMS PROCEDURES AND TARIFFS, CONTACT:

Customs & Excise Department
Sha Caprileskade / Handelskade
Curaçao
T: 011 (599-9) 434-5300, 5357
F: 011 (599-9) 461-6557, 465-5544

FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ISSUES, CONTACT:

Bureau for Intellectual Property of Curaçao
Berg Carmelweg 10-A
Willemstad, Curaçao
Tel: 011 (599-9) 465-7800
Fax: 011 (599-9) 465-7692, 465-7815
E-mail: bipantil@curinfo.an
Website*: www.bip.an

* The above website is provided for the readers’ convenience; USDA does NOT in any way endorse, guarantee
the accuracy of, or necessarily concur with the information contained in such website.

Appendix II. Other Import Specialist Contacts:

Caribbean Basin Agricultural Trade Office (CBATO)
Foreign Agricultural Service
U.S. Department of Agriculture
909 SE 1st. Ave Suite 720
Miami, FL 33131
Tel: (305) 536-5300
Fax: (305) 536-7577
E-mail: atocaribbeanbasin@fas.usda.gov
Website: www.cbato.fas.usda.gov

Katherine Nishiura, Director
E-mail: katherine.nishiura@fas.usda.gov

Omar González, Agricultural Marketing Specialist
E-mail: omar.gonzalez@fas.usda.gov

Graciela Juelle, Agricultural Marketing Assistant
E-mail: grace.juelle@fas.usda.gov
