PHSD                                       PLANT HEALTH SERVICES DIVISION
                                             DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS GOVERNMENT


                                                    IMPORT CONDITIONS FOR REGULATED ARTICLES
                                                              (Plant Health Ordinance 2012)




Regulated Article: Fruits and Vegetables

Scientific Name:

Country/ies: All Countries

Date Revised: January 14, 2014


GENERAL INFORMATION ON IMPORTATION

The information contained here covers the Plant Health Services Division (PHSD) import conditions. Importers
must satisfy all import conditions that are extant at the time the commodity arrives at the port of entry in the
Turks and Caicos Islands. It is the importer’s responsibility to verify the accuracy and completeness of all
import conditions before they attempt to import regulated articles. 1 Regulated Articles may only be
imported into the Turks and Caicos Islands through a port of entry.

No regulated article may be imported into the Islands unless:

    1. A plant import permit has been issued for that importation and

    2. The regulated article meets the animal import conditions of the permit and the regulated articles is accompanied
       by any other documentation required by or under the Plant Health Ordinance 2012 or any other written law to
       accompany imports.

There are penalties (Plant Health Ordinance 2012, Section 34, subsection 3) for persons who import a regulated article in
contravention of 1. and 2. above.

Importers must give the PHSD an arrival notification of the intended importation of all imported Regulated Articles. If
there is on board a vessel or aircraft arriving in the Turks and Caicos Islands any regulated article, the captain or owner
of the vessel or aircraft on or before coming into a port of entry must declare to the PHSD, the presence of the regulated
article on board the vessel or aircraft.

Importers must ensure that all regulated articles, intended for import, meet and comply with all requirements from any
other regulatory body that may have responsibility for such import, for example, The Customs Department, Department
of Environment and Maritime Affairs and the Department of Environmental Health. Importers should note that this list is
may not be exhaustive.

All imported regulated articles will be subjected to an inspection by a Plant Inspector from the Inspection Unit for Plant
and Animal Health at the port of entry.


PHSD 4001/1 (REVISED 2014)
CONDITIONS OF ADMINISTRATION

    A. For persons wishing to import regulated articles into the Turks and Caicos Islands, they must:

            1. Complete all relevant sections of the relevant application form and return it to the Department via
               email, fax or mail:

                                                DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                               PLANT HEALTH SERVICES DIVISION
                                           BUTTERFIELD SQUARE, 16 PARADE AVENUE
                                          PROVIDENCIALES, TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS
                                                   Email: agriculture@gov.tc
                                                  Telephone: 1.649.946.5801
                                                    Telefax: 1.649.941.7587

            2. Be issued with an import permit (issued in accordance with Plant Health Ordinance 2012) in respect of
               the plant or associated articles to be imported;

            3.   Comply, in full, with all the import requirements for the issuance of an import permit. Failure to do so
                 will result in the plant and/or associated articles being refused entry, held in quarantine or destroyed
                 within 24 hours based upon the risks posed to the Turks and Caicos Islands.

                 Give The Inspection Unit for Plant and Animal Health at least 48 hours’ notice of confirmed arrival date,
                 time, airline/vessel number and the designated port of entry. All relevant documents (the original
                 import permit and the original Phytosanitary Certificate/s) must accompany all consignments of plants
                 and associated articles which must be submitted at the port of entry in order to facilitate biosecurity
                 inspection and clearance. In some instances, especially where seeds for propagation and/ or soil are
                 imported, a soil analysis certificate and/ or a seed purity certificate must be produced. Failure to do so
                 may result in delays in biosecurity clearance being approved.

                 In the event that during the course of transporting the regulated article to the Turks and Caicos Islands,
                 it was trans-shipped via another country and repackaged, a phytosanitary certificate must be obtained
                 from the Plant Protection and Quarantine Office of that country stating that the regulated article/s did
                 not leave the quarantine area, noting the period of time in quarantine and were not exposed to any
                 plant pest of quarantine significance.

    B. All import permit fees for regulated articles are waived until further notice.

    C. It is your responsibility to contact the Plant Health Services Division, Department of Agriculture, to confirm that
        the import conditions below are current since plant pest status in various countries is dynamic.


    SANITARY CERTIFICATION

Fruits and Vegetables for export to the Turks and Caicos Islands must have the following qualities and/ or characteristics:

1. Fruits and Vegetables must be properly packaged in suitably labeled containers, which protect the products from
   external or internal damage.

PHSD 4001/1 (REVISED 2014)
    a) Each container must consist of products of similar varietal characteristics which are mature but not overripe,
       well formed, clean, well coloured, well-trimmed and which are free from decay, anthracnose, and freezing injury
       and are free from damage caused by bruises, cuts or other skin breaks, pulled stems, russeting or similar
       discoloration, scars or scab, sunburn, sunscald or spray burn, cercospora spot, other diseases, insects, or
       mechanical or other means.

    b) Fruits and Vegetables shall be packed in accordance with good commercial practice and the package shall be at
       least fairly tight. The weight of the smallest fruit or whole vegetable in any container shall be not less than 75
       percent of the weight of the largest fruit in the container. Size of the product may be specified by count.

    c) The labels shall have the following information: i. Name of product, ii. Number of product,
       iii. Source/Origin of product.



2. Fruits and vegetables must be thoroughly washed and sanitized to remove all soils, debris, weeds, and organisms.
   The Plant Protection Officer will deny the entry of fruits and vegetables with visible evidence of contamination or
   presence of foreign matter.

3. Fruits and Vegetables transported via vessel/aircraft must be packed in clean containers, which must be suitably
   covered and stacked on pallets or some structure that is at least 6 inches above the floor.

4. Storage of fruits and vegetables directly on the floor, engine room, or chemical storage room is strictly prohibited.

5. Storage of fruits and vegetables in dwelling areas of vessels is prohibited’

6. Fruits and vegetables must not be stored directly in the sun. The products must be properly covered and maintained
   at a cool temperature to minimize damage and to increase shelf life.

7. Imported fruits and vegetables must be declared free of any injurious plant pest and diseases on a Phytosanitary
   Certificate issued by the agriculture authority of the Exporting Country.

8. Imported fruits and vegetables are subject to inspection by a Plant Protection Officer at the port of entry.

    Exceptions:

    -   Personal/Domestic quantities of fruits and vegetables do not require an Import Permit. However, a
        Phytosanitary Certificate is required, and declaration of the articles at the port is mandatory. Failure to declare
        any quantity of a regulated article is an offense, which is punishable by law.

    -   Personal/Domestic Quantity of fruits and vegetables means less than or equal to a total count of 25 fruits and /
        or vegetables of any species or variety OR 25 pounds of one or mixture of articles.

-   It is highly recommended that potential importers of both personal or commercial quantities of regulated articles
    contact Plant Health Services Division for advice before doing so since import restrictions on that article may be in
    place for certain countries at that period of importation.




PHSD 4001/1 (REVISED 2014)
