Public Health Directorate   ‫ادارة الصحة العامة‬




                                             Ff
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain




                              Food Im porters Guide to the

                                      Kingdom of Bahrain

                                               Prepared by :

                                         Nujood Khalifa Almuqahwi

                                          Head imported food unit




                                      S uperv is ed and Rev iew ed by :

                                             Dr.Najat Abulfateh

                                          Director of Public Health




                                               Faisal Ali Alsari

                                        Chief of Food control section




                                               Approv ed by :

                                             Dr.Maraim Al Hajri

                                  Assistant Undersecretary for Public Health




                                                  1
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain




                                                          Contents




        Introduction: ................................................................................. 3

           Aim: ................................................................................................................. 4


        PHASE 1: Pre- import...................................................................... 4

           Classification:.................................................................................................... 5

              Licensing: ........................................................................................................ 6

              Awareness:...................................................................................................... 6

              specifications for general requirements .............................................................. 6


        PHASE 2: After import .................................................................. 14

           Required Documents:....................................................................................... 15

              Inspection procedures: .................................................................................... 16

              Food imported for non-commercial purposes ( personal use): ............................. 18

           HANDLING OF REJECTED FOOD SHIPMENTS: ...................................................... 19




                                                                    2
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain



        Introduction:
        Since God created human and gave him the ability to seek and spread, he has been
        working diligently to obtain the food with which he can live and maintain himself, which
        has made the quest to satisfy the body's desires and meet its food needs innate and
        instinctive and the availability of food has become a prerequisite for the stability of human
        life everywhere.
        As human life develops and population numbers increase and food production is required
        to reduce the food gap, which is being tried to be filled by imports of food commodities,
        food-borne diseases have increased, so the Food Control Section of the Department of
        Public Health has been established, which plays an active role in implementing health
        policies in all matters of food safety under public health law No. 34 of 2018 which covers
        all public health services for individuals, precautionary measures to safeguard
        infrastructure, water monitoring, and waste management. It also includes precautionary
        measures for communicable and non-communicable diseases and food control.
        Due to the kingdom of Bahrain's reliance on importing a high percentage of food from
        outside the Kingdom, the role of the imported food safety group has emerged to inspect
        all food received through land, sea and air ports in order to ensure its safety, validity and
        conformity to specifications and standards by applying risk based systems and global best
        practices.




                                                      3
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain


        Aim:

        This guide was prepared to educate food importers of all the requirements and

        specifications required in imported foods within the risk management framework of the

        Kingdom of Bahrain on all incoming food shipments, with the aim of facilitating

        procedures and avoiding the rejection or delay of shipments that may result from lack of

        knowledge of these requirements and procedures. This guide is divided into two phases,

        addressing the pre-import phase and the second post-import

        phase.




        PHASE 1: Pre- import
        This stage deals with the most important items of specifications and standards for food
        labelling, shelf life and food additives, in order to achieve the concept of food safety from
        farm to fork.

        Therefore, before you import any food item, you must make sure to fulfill the following:



                                                                 Classification


                                                                   Licensing


                                                                   Awareness




                                                     4
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain


         Classification:

           As an importer, its crucial to specify what food commodity you will

           import in order to help you know the procedures required for each product

           before importing it in terms of:

           1. Determining the HS-code of the product:


              It is a number that includes names of Goods, their description and distinction, and

              the categories of customs duties to which they are subject. It is used to classify

              goods and determine their customs tariffs. For more information, click here to

              access the website of the Customs Affairs in the Kingdom of Bahrain.

           2. Determining the accurate type of activity required in :

                 a. commercial registration certificate( CR)

                 b. certificate to practice commercial activates under health surveillance.

           3. Some products need prior registration or other procedures from different

              regulatory authorities such as:

                 a. In the event that you import functional foods such as baby food, energy

                       drinks and athletes food, it is necessary to register your products before

                       importing them. You can view the guideline for special foods Licensing from

                       here.

                 b. Other food ( regular) , does not require prior registration or authorization

                       before importing, but it is required to be in accordance with Gulf

                       specifications and standards. However, if you wish to have any advice from

                       our specialists prior to import please don’t hesitate to contacts as and you


                                                      5
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain

                       can fill out the form for pre-approval of food products which can be found

                       through this link.

         Licensing:
              1. Obtaining a license from the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Tourism by

                 submitting an application to issue a commercial registration certificate with the

                 required activities (sale/trade of food and beverages, or sale/trade of food and

                 beverages-health food). You can apply through electronic system (Sijilat)

                 website.

              2. Obtaining a certificate to practice commercial activities under health surveillance,

                 with the required activities such as (food stores, import, export and sale of

                 foodstuffs) through the Public Health directorate, Licensing Department, by

                 filling the form available here.

        Awareness :


          As an importer, you are encouraged to familiarize yourself and your suppliers with any

          applicable requirements related to GSO standards and regulations used in the Kingdom

          of Bahrain before importing to avoid rejection of shipments. In this section we will

          address the most important GSO standards for foodstuffs. Where the GSO standards

          are divided into two parts, one is concerned with general requirements and the other

          for each food products separately.




                                                     6
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain


         The specifications for general requirements are as follows:


                                  Labeling of prepackaged food stuff




                                               GSO
                                                9



                                      GSO                 GSO
                                      2500                150



                                                                   GSO 150 :
        Additives permitted for use
                                                                   Expiration dates
               in food stuff
                                                                   for food products:

                                                                   Part 1: Mandatory
                                                                   expiration dates

                                                                   Part 2: voluntary
                                                                   expiration dates




                                                7
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain


         standards                                   Main clauses
            GSO 9
                       MANDATORY LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS
                          1. The Name of the Food
                          2. List of Ingredients
                                  a. Artificial sweeteners or nutritive are not allowed in all baby
                                     foods.
                                  b. To declare the source of animal if the food item or one of
                                     its components contain animal component.
                          3. Nutritional Information
                          4. NET CONTENTS
                          5. NAME AND ADRESS
                          6. COUNTRY OF ORIGIN:
                          7. DATE MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND
                             USE:
                                  a. (2.4) the production date : and expiration date shall be
                                     declared as follows:-
                                              I.  For food products with a minimum
                                                  durability less than three months (i.e. Day
                                                  -Month -Year) .
                                              II. For food products with a minimum
                                                  durability of more than three months (i.e.
                                                  Month –Year). Shelf life period calculated
                                                  until the end of month recorded its
                                                  expiration.
                                  b. Dates shall be engraved or in relief, printed or
                                     stamped by irremovable ink directly on all packages
                                     or on their original label by the producer only.
                                  c. Statements intended to appear on the label shall be
                                     marked in a clearly visible and easily legible manner
                                     to the consumer, it shall not obscure any information
                                     required on the label.
                                  d. Adding stickers for production and expiry dates is not
                                     permissible. There shall be not more than one date of
                                     production or of expiry on the same package, both
                                     dates shall not be subject to deletion, change or
                                     deceit.




                                                    8
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain



                            8. LANGUAGE : Labelling and adjoining explanatory
                               statements shall be in Arabic and, where another language
                               is used, it shall be alongside the Arabic. All the information
                               provided in another language shall be identical with those
                               written in Arabic.




        With regard to GSO 2500, the most important items of this description are:

                               Unpermitted Food Additives in all foodstuffs
        E.number                                         Name
         E 104          Quinoline Yellow (yellow no.1) C.I 47005
         E105           Fast Yellow A B (C.I 13015)
         E107           Yellow 2 G (Food Yellow 5) C.I 18965
         E123           Amaranth (C.1. 16185. FD and C Red 2)
         E124           Ponceau 4 R (Red 2) (CI. 16255)
         E131           Patent Blue V (C.I. 42051)
         E142          Green S ( Acid Brilliant Green, Food Green S, Lissamine Green, C.I
                       44090)




                                                    9
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain




                       Additives Permitted for Use in Food in General,
                    Unless Otherwise Specified, in Accordance with GMP
              INS                        COLOR                         FOOD STUFF
             E173
                                       Aluminum
                                                        External coating of sugar confectionery for
                                                           the decoration of cakes and pastries
             E174                       Silver                External coating of confectionery
             E175                       Gold                  External coating of confectionery
             E180                 Lithotrubine BK                  Edible cheese surface

         In case of below colors added write the following statement “This material may be
         having a negative effect on activity and concentration in children “under contents)

              INS                                                  COLOR
             E102                                                tartrazine
             E110                                              Sunset yellow
             E129                                                 Allura red
             E122
                                                         Azorubine (Carmoisine)




                    Permitted food sweeteners except in infant and children foods as
                                                 prescribed by GSO 995

           INS             sweeteners                    Warning should be mention on the label

          E954         Saccharin and its salts                                  -

          E951              Aspartame                Not to be used by persons who have phenylketonuria

          E950         Acesulfam potassium                                      -

          E955               Sucralose                        Temperature should not exceed 25C

          E957              Thaumatin                                           -

          E420         Sorbitol and sorbitol       Excess of consumed quantity 40 g per day could be cause
                               syrup                                     laxative effects

          E421               mannitol              Excess of consumed quantity 20 g per day could be cause



                                                         10
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain

                                                                     laxative effects

          E953         Isomaltitol(isomalt)                                 -

          E965         Maltitol and maltitol                                -
                              syrup
          E966                lactitol         Excess of consumed quantity could be cause laxative effects

          E967                xylitol           Excess of consumed quantity 40 g per day could be cause
                                                                     laxative effects

          E968              erythritol         Excess of consumed quantity could be cause laxative effects

          E961              neotame                                         -

          E956               alitame                                        -

          E960          Steviol glycosides                                  -

          E962       Aspartame-acesulfame                                   -
                               salt




        With regard to validity periods, the validity of food products is divided into two parts
        according to Gulf standards: Part 1: Mandatory expiration dates (GSO 150-1 ) and Part 2:
        voluntary expiration dates (GSO 150-2).

        Mandatory periods of validity include perishable foods that contain, in whole or in part,
        milk or milk products, eggs, meat, chicken, fish, crustaceans or ingredients that help
        growing of micro- organisms and cause food spoilage , poisoning or food disease and that
        keep chilled at a temperature of (0 - 5) oC, in addition to children's food, also food
        products that by their nature require a certain temperature for preservation such as fresh
        eggs (table eggs), fresh food and ready-to-eat foods.

        Voluntary validity periods include frozen food products that are kept at a temperature not

        exceeding -18 oC, some non-perishable chilled food products that are kept at a




                                                      11
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain

        temperature from 0 oC to 5 oC, and also food products that are kept at an appropriate

        temperature in well-ventilated stores (not greater than 25 oC).


        It should be noted that products which are not included among this standard "expiration
        dates of food products - Part II: voluntary expiration dates" shall be specified by
        consultation with the authority side depending on scientific bases for determining the
        expiry periods and obtaining its permission, So that the manufacturer guarantees the
        validity and safety of the product for consumption during the prescribed period.
        Moreover, the expiry period for processed or repackaged products from materials of
        limited expiry period without being subjected to any thermal procession shall not exceed
        the remaining expiry period of the materials from which they are prepared.




                                                     12
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

            Of Bahrain


           Additional explanatory notes for labelling of food prodcuts:

              You should declare common name or E number for food additives.

              In case of gelatin , lecithin’s and mono- di- glycerides the source shall be
                mentioned.
              All food items accompanied by children's toys must have
                the Gulf Conformity mark. Further to the Ministerial Resolution
                issued by the Ministry of Industry, commerce and Tourism No. 1 of
                2014 regarding the adoption of the Gulf Regulations for Children's toys.


              Please refer to the specifications of each food product where these are just
                general items and You can obtain specifications and regulations through
                the link of the standards store at the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and
                Tourism.




                                      Resolution No. (99) for 2015
                         On the import and trading of gelatin candy for children


           The import of gelatin candy for children is required to be at least 45 mm high and
            45 mm wide.
        It is prohibited to import and trade gelatin candy for children containing conjak
            (E425) or other names such as (Klakumanan, Konyako, Konjonak, tarot powder,
            yam flour) or any other names that may exist.




                                                    13
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain



        PHASE 2: After import
        The Imported Food Safety Group follow the Food Control section, which falls under

        the umbrella of the Public Health Directorate. There are three ports of entry in the

        kingdom of Bahrain ( sea port, air cargo , and causeway ) . Public health specialists are

        distributed over 3 ports of entry and work 24 hours a day, except for Khalifa Bin

        Salman Port. The responsibility of this group is to inspect all the food received through

            the ports and to ensure its safety and compliance with specifications and standards.




                                                                                 Khalifa bin




              Public Health Directorate
                                                                                Salman Port

                                          Food Control   Imported Food
                                                                                  Air cargo
                                            Section           Group

                                                                                 King fahad
                                                                                 Causeway




                                                         14
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain


                 1. Required Documents:

        When the food shipment arrives at the port of entry , the importing company’s

        representative fills in the imported food inspection form and attaches all the required

        documents. You can obtain the form from here or through our offices in the ports.


                Fees for food inspection as follow depends on total weight of shipment /each

                 delivery order or bill of lading.


                From 1-1000 kg                From 1000 -5000 kg                >5000 Kg

                        8                               9                           10




           a.    A copy of the customs declaration

           b.    Packing list /a list of all types of foodstuffs and details of the size, number and

                 weight of the packages for each item separately, in addition to the total weight of

                 each item.

           c.    A copy of the delivery order or bill of lading

           d.    Health certificates, and for their acceptance, the following requirements are

                 required:

                       All consignments must be accompanied by an original health certificate

                        issued by the competent authority in the country of origin or an officially

                        recognized body .The health certificate should attest to compliance with the

                        GCC requirements countries and , where relevant, animal and plant health

                        requirements.




                                                        15
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain

                      The name and address of the exporting company

                      Brief description of the exported foodstuffs, their quantity and origin.

                      An attached list, authorized by the officially recognized body, of the types of

                       exported foods and the details of the package size of each item separately

                       (in the case of multiple items).

                      Container number or bill of lading.
                      The date of issuance of the certificate.
                      stamp and signature of the health authority issuing the certificate.
                      Halal slaughtering certificate for meat and poultry /halal certificate for food
                       items that contain ingredients of animal origin Issued by any Islamic
                       association accredited in the Kingdom of Bahrain.
                      Any additional documentation as requested by the competent authorities , in
                       case of incidents and emergency management.




              2.   Inspection procedures:

               Checking the suitability of the Conveyance / Vehicle / container / Packs and

                   make sure it’s free from         chemical pollutants, insects, rodents or other

                   substances that have an impact on the safety of the food in the container.

               Physical check includes:

                       o   Labeling of food products:

                              Ensure that it comply with their specifications and regulations,
                               particularly with the prepackaged food labeling , including:
                                     Brand name
                                     Name of the food




                                                          16
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain

                                    List of ingredients in descending order of ingoing
                                     weight.
                                    Net contents
                                    Production and expiry dates
                                    Name and address of manufacturer
                                    Country of origin
                                    Instruction for storage and use


                Sensory attributes, such as appearance, odor, flavor, taste, and texture of foods
                   detectable by human senses, are often used to evaluate food quality.

                Make sure there is no rust, corrosion, dents or leak in the cans.

                check for abnormal changes and any defrosting signs for frozen and chilled

                   foods as well as the container temperature recording statement during the

                   flight.


        If a physical examination shows the safety of the food shipment alongside its compliance

        with GSO standards , and samples are not required for laboratory analysis, the shipment

        is released.


        If laboratory samples are required to be withdrawn according to our sampling policy which

        is based on risk , the shipment will be under detention until the results reveals according

        to following:


            release note will be issue if the laboratory results is satisfactory

            rejection note for unsatisfactory results.


        The importer can     raise a dispute regarding its unsatisfactory results by submitting an

        official letter to the head of the group or to the supervisor of the port of entry in order to


                                                      17
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

           Of Bahrain

        raise the matter to the re- test committee ,please provide any evidence from the company

        if its available.


            3. Food imported for non-commercial purposes ( personal use):

                 The person must assure in writing to use them for personal purposes only and

                    not to be sold, distributed or advertised to the general public .

                 The amount should be within the allowance .

                 Labelling and adjoining explanatory statements shall be either in Arabic or
                    English , if another language is used, sticker must be attached from the person
                    concerned from an approved translation office.
                 They are not prohibited locally or internationally or contain components that are
                    prohibited domestically or internationally. These foods may be sampled for
                    laboratory examination to confirm fitness for purpose if deemed necessary by
                    the competent authority.




                                                      18
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain



        HANDLING OF REJECTED FOOD SHIPMENTS:

        After rejection of the shipment the importer in this case has to take decision either to re-

        export the shipment to country of origin or to destroy it under food control supervision

        based on the Public Health Law No. 34 of 2018.


        Re-export procedure:

           o submit a request letter to the health office at the concerned port of entry with the

               following attachments ( custom declaration port from which the shipment was

               submitted with the following attached (copy of customs declaration of re-export,

               copy of rejection notice)

           o Once the application received , you will be contacted by the food control specialist

               before re-export.

           o To get an official certificate for re-export , importer must fill the form (here).




        Destruction procedures:
           o Submit a request letter to the health office at the concerned port of entry.
           o Food control specialist will coordinate with you regarding destruction as soon as you
               determine the date for destruction .
           o Asker landfill for waste management procedures from (here)
           o To get an official certificate for destruction , importer must fill the form (here).




                                                      19
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom

          Of Bahrain


        FINALLY:
        We hope that we have succeeded in clarifying all the necessary information to
        facilitate import procedures to the Kingdom of Bahrain.
        For more information, please do not hesitate to contact us through the
        following communication numbers for each port of entry:




                  Port:           office no.    Fax no                  Email
                 ‫المنفذ‬           ‫رقم الهاتف‬    ‫الفاكس‬             ‫البريد االلكتروني‬

               Khalifa port       17162217     17162040           MK@health.gov.bh
               ‫منفذ ميناء‬
                  ‫خليفة‬

                Air cargo         17324547     17339164           AC@health.gov.bh
              ‫منفذ الشحن‬
                 ‫الجوي‬

               King Fahad         17699876     17697841           CW@health.gov.bh
               causeway
               ‫منفذ جسر‬
               ‫الملك فهد‬




                                               20
