Type of Law: Law
Date Issued: 18 Oct 2012
Date Published: 8 Apr 2013
Status: In force

Amended by:
M1 Law No 3 of 2020

Summary:
For the purpose of the organizing of plants and plant products importing
and exporting (trading operations) and to ensure the prevention of the
entry of Agricultural pests and prevent their spreading and resettling in Iraq,
In the name of Iraqi people
Presidency
Based on what have been approved by Iraq Iraqi Assembly of
Representatives and yet approved by the President of Republic of Iraq,
and based on the provisions of subsection (First) of Article (61) and item (third)
of Article (73) of the Constitution:
Issued the following law:
Quarantine Law
No. (76) For the year 2012
Article 1, the following terms are intended the meanings against indicated for
the purposes of this law:
First, >M1 the Department: The Plant Protection Department of the
Ministry of Agriculture <.
Second, Quarantine officer: technical officer authorized by Iraqi Ministry of
Agriculture to the implementation of the tasks entrusted to him under the
provisions of this law.
Third, plants: living plants or parts thereof, including seeds or genetic plant
material, and other propagation materials.
Fourth, plants products: Products of plant origin and processed for not changing
their biological nature.
Fifth, pest: any type, strain or biotype follows the vegetable kingdom, animal or
any pathogen harm plants or their products, no longer dead organisms that do
not cause any pest infection.
Ninth, Quarantine pest: pest has potential negatives impact on the economy and
possess a threat to plant production which is non-existent in Republic of Iraq.
Seventh, non-Quarantine pest: pest present in Republic of Iraq and its entry has
a negative impact on the economy also affect the plants and their products.
Eighth, Agricultural quarantine station: the place that been determined to monitor
imported plants for the purposes of scientific research.
Ninth, living genetically modified organisms (GMOs): any living organism being
genetically modified.
Tenth, beneficial organisms: any living organism, including fungi, yeasts,
bacteria, viruses and invertebrates that are announced by Iraqi Ministry of
Agriculture as objects useful to plants or plant production.
Eleventh, the Quarantine measure: formal detention for items or materials
subject to the instructions of plant health in order to be placed under surveillance
or conduct research them or to continue the inspection to be tested or treated.
Twelfth, consignment(s): any material being consigned to Republic of Iraq from
abroad and accompanied by Agricultural Health Certificate, which are subject to
the law.
Thirteenth, Agricultural Health Certificate: model document is designed according
to the International Plant Protection Convention Annex (1) accompanying this
law.
Fourteenth, importer: any normal or legal person has the right to import and
circulation of any of the plants and their products or beneficial soil or their
packaging materials.
Fifteenth, exporter: any normal or legal person has the right to export any of the
plants and their products or beneficial soil or their packaging materials.
Sixteenth, soil: material those were being extracted partially or entirely from the
upper layer of the earth's crust, which can feed the plant.
Seventeenth, packaging materials, any plant–based substances used to
encapsulate or contain (packaging) the plants.
Eighteenth, agricultural Quarantine check points: airports, seaports and land
border crossings and railway stations and postal services.
Nineteenth, license: approval from Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture in accordance with
the models prepared.
Twentieth, Eradication (genocide): the eradication of pests using one of the
methods of control used or approved nationally and internationally.
Twenty-one, splurge: getting rid of the consignment(s) imported from outside the
Republic of Iraq using the means being specified by the Commission of
Quarantine and each case should treated individually.
Twenty-two, cleansing: the treatment of the consignment(s) prior to export to get
rid of pests.
Twenty-three, interior the Quarantine measure: development area or specific
areas under the control of the specialist Department in order to avoid the spread
of the pest.
Twenty-four, Quarantined area: the site that spread the outbreak for the first time
or event Furan pest already present in Republic of Iraq.
Twenty-five, rejected materials: materials non-compliant with the conditions set
forth in this law.
Twenty-six, consignment(s)s transit: the passage of consignment(s)s into Iraqi
territories.
Twenty-seven, internal safety certificate: A document model includes a
consignment(s) descriptions transferred out of the Quarantine placed area within
Republic of Iraq.
Twenty-eight, national inquiry points (bodies): Ministry of trade or any of the
bodies authorized thereof representing the Government of Republic of Iraq and
holds the answer queries and for sending and receiving international information
from the World Trade Organization that Iraqi Ministry of trade to submit periodic
reports to the General Secretariat of the Council of Ministers on the activities and
mechanisms of work you do in this regard.
Twenty-nine internal inquiry Body: the entity is being authorized by Iraqi Ministry
of Agriculture forward reports and to answer the international inquiries to the
national inquiries Body and yet to coordinate with them in this field point.
Thirty, the committee: (the agricultural committee of Quarantine).
Article 2, this law aims to:
First, to regulate importing, exporting and trading of plants, or their based
products, and beneficial organisms.
Second, preventing the Agricultural pests from entering and spreading whereas
to protect the plant production from their risk(s).
Third, the protection of the plant production from the risk(s) of pests and prevent
their spreading.


Article 3, Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture shall verify the objectives of this law by
using the following means:
First, to examine plants consignment(s) together with their products at their
entering point to Republic of Iraq.
Second, to quarantine the farmlands those being contaminated inside Republic
of Iraq.
Third, the issuance of certificates and licenses the safety of Agricultural pests to
all plants and their products exported out of Iraq in accordance with international
standards.


Article 4, shall the authorized authority assumes the following tasks:
First: prevent or restrict the import, export or sell or planting or propagation or
transfer of any plant or its products, pest or beneficial organism or organisms are
genetically modified or soil or any other material capable of harboring or
spreading of the pest.
Second: allow the import of any plant or its products, wholesome object or any
other material, whether they are prohibited or defined for the purposes of
scientific research and experimentation to outfit the basic objective of imported
and the conditions required protecting public health and Agricultural production
and the environment in Iraq.
Third: to determinate the locations of the Agricultural Quarantine stations.
Fourth: placed plants, if necessary, and its products or pests or beneficial
organisms or living modified genetically or soil organisms or anything else
imported for the purposes of scientific research and scientific experiments that
could carry pests in vegetable the Quarantine measure determined by the
authorized authority station and under the supervision of technicians working in
and for a period of time sets according to the scientific standards of the situation.
Fifth: allow the entry of certain plants and plant by products are set forth in the
instructions to identify plants and their products those were prohibited from
entering after the approval of the minister for a specific period of time, but on
condition to completely get better pests with all their stages by using methods
and means set by the commission and on account of the importer.
Sixth: proposal examination fees, vaporization and other expenses required for
the implementation of this law according to valid instructions.
Seventh: to determine the checkpoints on the main roads linking the Quarantined
area to other regions and the administrative authorities to facilitate the task of
internal Quarantine measures.
Eighth: to coordinate with the relevant authorities in order to determine the
necessary measures to be taken to control the harms.
Ninth: to lift internal Quarantine measures from the Quarantined area after
obtaining the approval of the minister at the request of the authorized authority /
ministry of agriculture.
 Article 5, first: to form a committee in Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture that called
(Agricultural Quarantine Commission) and headed by a deputy ministers named
by the Minister and the membership of:
a- two representatives of Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture with ranks of not less than a
director.
b- A representative from Iraqi Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific
Research of not less degree for an assistant professor, ”Member”.
c- A representative of Iraqi Ministry of Science and Technology, entitled Head of
community members
d- A representative from Iraqi Ministry of Interior for not less than the rank of a
member provider.
e- A representative from Iraqi Ministry of Trade of not less degree, director of
member.
f- A representative from Iraqi Ministry of Finance / General Administration of
Customs of not less degree, director of member.
g- A representative from Iraqi Ministry of Environment to less degree, director of
member.
h- A representative from the National Security Services at least degree from the
manager, ”Member”.
i- A representative from Iraqi Ministry of Health no less degree from the
manager, ”Member”.
j- >M1 A representative from the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resouces in
the Kurdistan Region, whose address is no less than that of a member director.<

Second, one of the Agricultural Quarantine staff who has the experience to be
the secretary of that commission.
Third, follows the Commission shall:
A, to draw up the ministry's policy in the field of Agricultural Quarantine and its
applications after having the minister’s authentication.
B to identify plants and their products banned imported or brought into Republic
of Iraq or allow being imported with instructions issued by the Minister.
Fourth, determines the functioning of the committee and its meetings and how to
make decisions and recommendations and the Quorum of the session and any
other matters required by the nature of their work instructions issued by the
Minister.
Article 6, first: plants and their products and other materials subject to the
instructions of import inspection of Quarantine officers are subject to a point of
entry or in last place for the arrival of the container or determined by the
authorized authority.
Second: the importer shall assume responsibility of costs ensued from measures
taken, including charge, discharge, transportation, re-export processing and
testing.
Third: the customs authorities and other responsible authorities not to allow the
entry of consignment(s)s except under license from the Quarantine officer.
Article 7, first: may not enter any consignment(s) of plants or plant by products
or beneficial organisms or other materials subject to the instructions of import
under this law, but under the import license and health certificate Agricultural
issued by a plant protection in the exporting country provides for the integrity of
harmful pests.
Second: determine the authorized authority conditions to be met before you
import the consignment(s) of plants or plant by products or beneficial organisms.
Third: importer declaration upon the arrival of the consignment(s) to enter for
plants and plant by products, beneficial organisms and other materials subject to
the instructions of the point of import under this law.
Article 8, first: on every person entering Iraq, along with plants or plant by
products or any material objects covered by the provisions of this law that
authorized by the customs authority at the point of entry and shall inform the
Quarantine officer so for the purpose of taking the necessary measures.
Secondly: the Customs’ workers who confiscate any item of the items stipulated
in “Article First” should not allow to these items to enter only by the approval of
the Agricultural Quarantine officer and according to this law.
Article 9, >M1 First: Material for parfumery, tanning and commodities that are
not imported for agricultural purposes enterying via mail or via passengers
should be excluded from health certificate provided the weight of these
materials does not exceed ten (10) kg and they do not oppose to the
special rules and provisions concerning public health.
Second: Seed samples submitted to the National Committee for the
Registration, Accreditation and Protection of Agricultural Varieties for the
purpose of their registration shall be exempted from the import permit after
determining their quantity by the aforementioned committee and in a manner
that does not conflict with the laws in force.
Third: Materials that do not require inspection certificate from the country of
origin are subject to examination at the border Quarantine. <
Article 10, First: is not permitted to export plants or their products or beneficial
organisms or other materials subject to the instructions of export under this Act
(Law) from Iraq only after the granting of Agricultural Health Certificate issued by
the authorized authority.
Second: the exporter should pack shipment materials according to the law and
should be sealed with the Agricultural Quarantine seal.
Thirdly, the exporter should pay the fees those related to the consignment(s)
examination according to the export based on this law.
Fourth: the shipment must be exported during the ten (10) days from the date of
issuance of Agricultural Health Certificate, besides the duration of export should
be extended not over (20) days depending on the type of the shipment,
conditions of storage and transportation requirement.
Fifth: amended M1.
Sixth: >M1 The exporter should bear the costs for transporting consignment(s)
and for carrying out examination and disinfection measures . <
Article 11, First: plants and their products should and other materials should be
accompanied with Agricultural Health Certificate from the origin country.
Second: exporter specifying a port entry and exit of the consignment(s) under
which determines the Quarantine period required by the Quarantine officers
to exit the consignment(s) from Iraq.
Third: materials and other things should be entered via the
Agricultural Quarantine points where the Quarantine officers assume
organizing forms of materials as to explain their data.
Article 12, based on this law the terms should be applied on materials crossing
and it include pests that endangers (threatens) the Agricultural production.
Article 13, first: re-export the consignment(s)s being crossing denied (cross
rejected) to the territory of the Republic of Iraq, according to the provisions of this
law within (7) days from the date of notifying the exporter of the decision of
rejection, otherwise the Quarantine officer would terminate these materials on
accounts of its importer without compensation.
Second: based on recommendation of the Quarantine officer the Minister has to
decide to destroy materials and other things those being rejected to enter the
Republic of Iraq terriotory before the expiry date as that mentioned in the article
(first) if only considered its existence poses a danger to the plants.
Article 14, First: is not permitted the prohibited consignment(s)s from entering
(the transit action) into Iraq in accordance with the provisions of this law,
unless they are being inside refrigerators or containers (made of Iron),
sealed and wrapped closely so as to prevent leakage and the introducing and
spreading of pests during their transit, yet they should and stamped the seal of
Quarantine at the point of entry and they shall not be opened during the transit
action through the Iraqi territory. That mentioned sealed should be
validated from the Quarantine officer at the exit point.
Secondly: the exporter and the carrier of the consignment(s) should inform
the Quarantine Department about any emergency or accidental thing might
happen during the passage of the consignment(s) within the territory of Republic
of Iraq.
Article 15 First: Whoever wants to export consignment(s) of plants or plant by
products or beneficial organisms or other materials subjected to the provisions of
this law, should have the following:
A. to have exporting license that being approved by Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture
   on the type and the quantity of the consignment(s) and the destination to
   which the shipment of consignment(s) is sent,
B. to submit a request for every single materials being exported to a specific
   body,
C. to inform the Agricultural Quarantine Department in case of any changing on
   the consignment(s) destination within (7) days before shipment,
Second, the Agricultural Health Certificate to the exporting permitted
consignment(s) unless, the exporter should presents the official and approved
memorandum that approved that the consignment(s)shipping proceduers have
been done just according to the formal format model that being attached to the
index No (1) of this law.
Article 16, first: Iraqi Ministry of Agriculture assums responsibility of determining:
A: pest of the affected areas, which are recorded for the first time in Iraq or any
pest present and spread and might happened a rapid multiplication leads to a
significant economic damages to the plantation coverage. This area shall
consider “area under Quarantine”.
B: plant family and its products prohibited to transfer from the area that is being
under Quarantine.
C: the Quarantine measures and its duration.
Secondly, it is not permitted to the plant family and its products those were being
identified in the paragraph (b) of section (first) of this article from Quarantined
areas to other areas during the Quarantine period.
Third: the Quarantine officer exams the plant family and its products those were
not being covered by the provisions of section (second) of this article to ensure
safety and free of infection(s), and are conducting clearing operations that update
it, according to the opinion of the competent authority before allowing them to
leave the region and bear the person concerned the cost of cleansing to be
supplied a statement in favor of letting get out of the Quarantined area.
Article 17, First: without prejudice to any more severe penalty contained in the
applicable laws shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than (6) months
and not more than three (3) years or a fine of not less than (1,000,000) million
IQD and not more than (10,000,000) ten million IQD, or both and the confiscation
of the consignment(s) subject of the offense each of the transplant or owned,
sells, offers for sale, transfer or distributed any material violation of the provisions
of this law.
Second: shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed (6)
months or a fine of not less than of (1,000,000) million IQD, or both, of:
A: hinders working of the Agricultural Quarantine officer or assaulted him during
the exercise of his functions under this Act.
B: Does not state about plants or its products at Iraqi entering point and
according to provisions of this law.
Third: be punished by imprisonment for not less than (6) months or a fine of not
less than (2,000,000) million IQD , or both any person who violates the provisions
of Article (15) of this Law.
Article 18, an internal investigations point shall be formed in the Ministry,
assuming coordination with national investigations point. The point, its
connections, its formations and tasks shall be identified by instructions issued by
the Minister.
Article 19, >M1 the employees of the Agricultural Quarantine Department and
the supporting employees should be granted (10%) of the fees obtained
under Instructions on Examination and Treatment No. (1) of the year 2006
distributed by a decision from the Minister. <
Article 20, the Minister of Agriculture determines the fees of consignment(s)s
test, evaporation and other expenses as that stipulated by this law and its
provisions along with terms of exclusion issued by coordination with the Minister
of Finance.
Article 21, the Agricultural Quarantine law No.(17) for the year 1966 shall
nullified and these instructions issued by this law shall remain valid opposing not
to the provisions this law until issuing another law replacing or nullifying the
former one.
Article 22, the Minister of Agriculture shall issue instructions to facilitate the
implementation of the provisions of this law.
Article 23, of this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and implemented
after thirty (30) days from the date of publication.
Reasons:
For the purpose of the organization of plants and their products, import and
export trading operations and ensure the prevention of the entry of Agricultural
pests and prevent their spread and resettled in Iraq.Initiated this law.
