                                                ST HELENA

                              REVISED EDITION OF THE LAWS, 2017

                                     PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY

                                 FOOD SAFETY ORDINANCE, 20161

Ordinance 17 of 2016
In force 1 April 2017

No amendments to 1 November 2017

Subsidiary legislation:
FOOD SAFETY (PROCEDURE AND FEES) REGULATIONS, 2017                                      Page 19
Legal Notice 4 of 2017 (in force 1 April 2017)

FOOD SAFETY (PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN) REGULATIONS, 2017
Legal Notice 5 of 2017 (in force 1 April 2017)          Page 27

FOOD SAFETY (GENERAL FOOD HYGIENE) REGULATIONS, 2017
Legal Notice 6 of 20172 (in force 1 April 2017)                                         Page 54
                                   _____________________

                                  FOOD SAFETY ORDINANCE, 2016

                                    ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

                                           PART 1
                               PRELIMINARY AND INTERPRETATION

1.         Short title and commencement
2.         Interpretation
3.         Meaning of sale
4.         Presumption that food is intended for human consumption

                                                 PART 2
                                            IMPLEMENTATION

5.         Regulatory Authority
6.         Food authority and authorised officers
7.         Power to make regulations



1
  Under section 10 of the Revised Edition of the Laws Ordinance, 1999 this text is authoritative and is
the sole authentic edition in respect of the law contained in it as at 1 November 2017.
2
    Reference corrected by Gazette Notice No. 53 of 27 March 2018
                                                 2


                                          PART 3
                                         OFFENCES

8.     Food not complying with food safety requirements
9.     Rendering food injurious to health
10.    Consumer protection

                                          PART 4
                                         DEFENCES

11.    Offences due to fault of another person
12.    Defence of due diligence

                                         PART 5
                                      ENFORCEMENT

13.    Powers of entry
14.    Hygiene improvement notices
15.    Remedial action notices
16.    Fixed monetary penalty notices
17.    Prohibition orders
18.    Inspection and seizure of food
19.    Detention notices
20.    Sampling, examination and analysis of food

                                        PART 6
                                    ADMINISTRATION

21.    Registration and licensing of businesses
22.    Service of documents
23.    Time limits for prosecutions
24.    Punishment
25.    Offences by the body corporate
26.    Right of appeal
27.    Amendment of legislation and transitional provisions

AN ORDINANCE to make new provision for the regulation of the production, trade and
handling of food, to promote food safety and to introduce standards of hygiene in the food
business; and for connected and incidental purposes.


                                         PART 1
                                      PRELIMINARY

Short title and commencement

      1.       This Ordinance may be cited as the Food Safety Ordinance, 2016 and comes into
force on 1st April 2017.

Interpretation
                                                 3

      2.        In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires,—
“authorised officer” means a person who is authorised in writing, either generally or
      specifically, under section 6(3);
“bakehouse” means any premises where bread, confectionery, biscuits or any other baked
      product are produced for sale;
“building” includes any hotel, school, factory, movable van or other building where persons are
      employed and also includes the curtilage of such building within the business;
“business” includes the undertaking of a canteen, club, school, hospital or institution, whether
      carried on for profit or not;
“commercial operation” in relation to any food or contact material, means any of the following:
      (a)       selling, possessing for sale and offering, exposing or advertising for sale;
      (b)       consigning, delivering or serving by way of sale;
      (c)       preparing for sale or presenting, labelling or wrapping for the purpose of sale;
      (d)       storing or transporting for the purpose of sale;
      (e)       importing and exporting;
      and, in relation to any food source, means deriving food from it for the purpose of sale or
      for purposes connected with sale;
“contact material” means any equipment and packaging or other material that comes in contact
      with food and includes surfaces where food is prepared;
“equipment” includes any apparatus, furnishings and utensils used for the storage, preparation
      and distribution of food and drink;
“feed” includes, but is not limited to, any substance or product, including additives, whether
      processed, partially processed or unprocessed, intended to be used for oral feeding to
      animals;
“food” includes any substance or product, whether processed, partially processed or
      unprocessed, intended to be, or reasonably expected to be ingested by humans;
“Food Authority” means the Food Authority referred to in section 6;
“food business” means any trade or business, whether for profit or not, both public and private,
      in the course of which any operation with respect to the production, processing, handling
      or distribution of food are carried out;
“food business operator” means the natural or legal persons responsible for ensuring that the
      requirements of laws relating to food safety are met within the food business under their
      control, including managers and employees and those with a financial interest in such
      business;
“food premises” means any premises used as a food business, including bakehouses,
      slaughterhouses and private dwellings used to prepare food for sale;
“food source” means any growing crop or live animal, bird or fish from which food is intended
      to be derived (whether by harvesting, slaughtering, milking, collecting eggs or otherwise);
“occupier” means the person in occupation or having the charge, management or control of a
      building or part of a building, either on the person’s own account or as the agent of another
      person; and in the case of a ship or aircraft, means the master or other person in charge of
      it;
“official control” means any form of control that the Food Authority performs for the
      verification of compliance with laws relating to food safety;
“placing on the market” means the holding of food or feed for the purpose of sale, including
      offering for sale or any other form of transfer, whether free of charge or not, and the sale,
      distribution, and other forms of transfer themselves;
 “premises” includes any land, building, vehicle, stall or any structure, whether moveable or
      fixed, any aircraft or ship, and any streams, drains, ditches or places, whether open, covered
      or enclosed, whether built on or not, both natural and artificial;
“processing” means any action that substantially alters the initial product, including heating,
      smoking, curing, maturing, drying, marinating, extraction, extrusion or a combination of
                                                4

      those processes;
“Regulatory Authority” means the Regulatory Authority referred to in section 5;
“preparation” in relation to food, includes manufacture and any form of processing or
      treatment, and “preparation for sale” includes packaging;
“stall” includes any stand, marquee, tent , caravan or mobile canteen;
“substance” includes any natural or artificial substance or other matter, whether it is in solid or
      liquid form or in the form of a gas or vapour;
“treatment” in relation to any food includes subjecting it to heat or cold.

Meaning of sale

      3.       (1)     The supply of food otherwise than by sale, at, in or from any place where
food is supplied in the course of a business, is deemed to be the sale of that food and references
to purchasing and purchasers are to be construed accordingly.

      (2)       This Ordinance applies—
      (a)   in relation to any food which is offered as a prize or reward or given away in
            connection with any entertainment to which the public are admitted, whether on
            payment of money or not - as if the food were, or had been, exposed for sale by each
            person concerned in the organisation of the entertainment;
      (b)   in relation to any food which, for the purpose of advertisement or in furtherance of
            any trade or business, is offered as a prize or reward or given away - as if the food
            were, or had been, exposed for sale by the person offering or giving away the food;
            and
      (c)   in relation to any food which is exposed or deposited in any premises for the purpose
            of being so offered or given away as mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) - as if the
            food were, or had been, exposed for sale by the occupier of the premises;

      (3)     For the purposes of subsection (2), “entertainment” includes any social
gathering, amusement, exhibition, performance, game, sport or trial of skill.

Presumption that food is intended for human consumption

     4.       (1)      Any food commonly used for human consumption is, if sold or offered,
exposed or kept for sale, presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have been sold or, as the case
may be, to have been or to be intended for sale for human consumption.

      (2)     The following are presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be intended for sale,
or for manufacturing food for sale, for human consumption:
      (a) any food commonly used for human consumption which is found on premises used
           for the preparation, storage, or sale of that food; and
      (b) any article or substance commonly used in the manufacture of food for human
           consumption which is found on premises used for the preparation, storage or sale of
           that food.

      (3)      Any article or substance capable of being used in the composition or preparation
of any food commonly used for human consumption which is found on premises on which that
food is prepared is, until the contrary is proved, presumed to be intended for such use.
                                                 5

                                          PART 2
                                     IMPLEMENTATION

Regulatory Authority

     5.       (1)     The Health Protection Board established by section 3 of the Public Health
Ordinance, 1932 is the Regulatory Authority for the purposes of this Ordinance.

      (2)      The Regulatory Authority must enforce and execute the provisions of this
Ordinance and has such other functions as the Governor considers appropriate in relation to the
operation of this Ordinance.

     (3)       The Regulatory Authority may institute proceedings under any provision of this
Ordinance.

     (4)        The Regulatory Authority may, where necessary, assign its functions and
delegate its powers under this Ordinance to an Authority of another country which has functions
and powers similar to those of the Regulatory Authority.

      (5)       The Regulatory Authority may issue Codes of recommended practice for the
guidance of the Food Authority as regards the execution and enforcement of this Ordinance and
of regulations and orders made under it.

      (6)      The Regulatory Authority may direct the Food Authority to take specified steps
in order to comply with a Code issued under subsection (5).

Food Authority and authorised officers

      6.       (1)     For purposes of this Ordinance, the “Food Authority” is the authority
with responsibility for the delivery of official controls over food, and consists of the Director of
Health, the Senior Medical Officer/clinical Director and the Senior Environmental Health
Officer.

      (2)     The Food Authority must carry out official controls to verify the food business
operator’s compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

      (3)       The Governor may appoint and authorise any officers necessary for the delivery
of official controls according to the requirements of this Ordinance.

      (4)       An authorised officer is not personally liable in respect of any act done by that
officer within the scope of his or her employment and in the execution or purported execution of
this Ordinance, if that act was done in the honest belief that the officer’s duty under this
Ordinance required or entitled the officer to do it.

      (5)        Nothing in subsection (4) is to be construed as relieving the Food Authority of
any liability in respect of the acts of their officers.

      (6)      If an action has been brought against an officer of the Food Authority in respect
of an act done by that officer in the execution or purported execution of this Ordinance, but
outside the scope of the officer’s employment, the Food Authority may indemnify that officer
against the whole or a part of any damages which the officer has been ordered to pay or any costs
                                               6

which the officer may have incurred, if the Food Authority is satisfied that the officer honestly
believed that the act complained of was within the scope of the officer’s employment.

      (7)      Any expenses which are incurred under this Ordinance by an authorised officer
in procuring samples, and causing samples to be analysed or examined, is to be defrayed by the
Food Authority.

Power to make regulations

      7.        (1)     The Governor in Council may make regulations generally for carrying
into effect the provisions of this Ordinance.

      (2)       Without limiting subsection (1), regulations may provide for forms to be used,
fees to be paid, and procedures to be adopted for or in connection with the operation of this
Ordinance, including but not limited to—
      (a) provisions regulating the food industry to secure food safety and ensure that food is
            fit for human consumption;
      (b) labelling, marking or advertising of food or food related items;
      (c) registration and licensing of food premises;
      (d) qualification requirements for appointment of authorised persons under section 6;
      (e) the official controls to be exercised by the Food Authority and authorised officers;
            and
      (f) the amount of any fixed penalties which may be imposed under section 16.

                                          PART 3
                                         OFFENCES

Food not complying with food safety requirements

     8.        (1)    Food must not be placed on the market if it is unsafe.

     (2)       Food is deemed to be unsafe if it is considered to be—
     (a)    injurious to health; or
     (b)    unfit for human consumption.

     (3)      In determining whether any food is unsafe, regard must be had to—
     (a)   the normal conditions of use of the food by the consumer and at each stage of
           production, processing and distribution; and
     (b)   the information provided to the consumer, including information on the label, or
           other information generally available to the consumer concerning the avoidance of
           specific adverse health effects from a particular food or category of foods.

     (4)       In determining whether any food is injurious to health, regard must be had—
     (a)   not only to the probable immediate, short-term or long-term effects of that food on
           the health of a person consuming it, but also on subsequent generations;
     (b)   to the probable cumulative toxic effects;
     (c)   to the particular health sensitivities of a specific category of consumers where the
           food is intended for that category of consumers.

      (5)      In determining whether any food is unfit for human consumption, regard must be
had to whether the food is unacceptable for human consumption according to its intended use
for reasons of—
                                                 7

      (a)   contamination, whether by extraneous matter or otherwise; or
      (b)   putrefaction, deterioration or decay.

       (6)      If any food which is unsafe is part of a batch, lot or consignment of food of the
same class or description, it is to be presumed that all the food in that batch, lot or consignment
is also unsafe, unless following a detailed assessment there is no evidence that the rest of the
batch, lot or consignment is unsafe.

      (7)       Conformity of a food with specific provisions applicable to that food does not bar
the competent authorities from taking appropriate measures to impose restrictions on it being
placed on the market or to require its withdrawal from the market where there are reasons to
suspect that, despite such conformity, the food is unsafe.

      (8)      A person who places on the market food which is found to be unsafe commits an
offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

Rendering food injurious to health

      9.        It is an offence for a person to render any food injurious to health by—
      (a) adding any article or substance to the food;
      (b) using any article or substance as an ingredient in the preparation of the food;
      (c) abstracting any constituent from the food; or
      (d) subjecting the food to any other process or treatment,
with intent that it shall be sold for human consumption.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

Consumer protection

      10.      (1)     A person who sells to the purchaser's prejudice any food which is not of
the nature, substance or quality demanded by the purchaser commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

     (2)      In subsection (1), the reference to sale is to be construed as a reference to sale for
human consumption; and in proceedings under that subsection it is not a defence that the
purchaser was not prejudiced because the purchaser bought for analysis or examination.

                                            PART 4
                                           DEFENCES

Offences due to fault of another person

      11.       If the commission by person A of an offence under this Ordinance is due to the
act or default of person B, then person B commits the offence; and person B may be convicted
of the offence by virtue of this section whether or not proceedings are taken against person A.

Defence of due diligence

       12.      (1)   In any proceedings for an offence under this Ordinance or any regulations,
it is, subject to subsection (5), a defence to prove that the defendant took all reasonable
precautions and exercised all due diligence to avoid the commission of the offence by the
defendant or by a person under the defendant’s control.
                                                8


       (2)      Without limiting subsection (1), a person accused of an offence of contravening
section 8 who —
       (a) did not prepare the food in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been
             committed; or
       (b) did not import it into St Helena,
is to be taken to have established the defence provided by subsection (1) if the requirements of
subsection (3) or (4) are satisfied.

      (3)     The requirements of this subsection are satisfied if it is proved that—
      (a) the commission of the offence was due to the act or default of some other person
          who was not under the control of the person accused, or to reliance on information
          supplied by such other person;
      (b) either—
          (i) the person accused carried out all such checks of the food in question as were
                reasonable in all the circumstances; or
          (ii) it was reasonable in all the circumstances for the person accused to rely on
                checks carried out by the person who supplied the person accused with that
                food; and
      (c) the person accused did not know and had no reason to suspect at the time the offence
          was committed that the act or omission would amount to an offence under this
          Ordinance.

     (4)       The requirements of this section are satisfied if the offence is one of placing on
the market and it is proved that—
     (a) the commission of the offence was due to the act or default of some other person
            who was not under the control of the person accused, or due to reliance on
            information supplied by such other person;
     (b) the placing on the market of which the offence consisted was not a placing on the
            market under the name or mark of the person accused; and
     (c) the person accused did not know and could not reasonably be expected to know at
            the time the offence was committed that the act or omission would amount to an
            offence under this Ordinance.

      (5)        If in any case the defence provided by subsection (1) involves the allegation that
the commission of the offence was due to the act or default of another person, or to reliance on
information supplied by another person, the person accused (‘A’) is not, without leave of the
court, entitled to rely on that defence, unless—
      (a) at least 7 clear days before the hearing; and
      (b) if A previously appeared before the court in connection with the alleged offence,
             within one month of the first such appearance,
A has served on the prosecutor a written notice giving such information identifying or assisting
in the identification of that other person as was then in A’s possession.

                                          PART 5
                                       ENFORCEMENT

Powers of entry

      13.      (1)   An authorised officer, on producing some duly authenticated document
showing authorisation, if so required, has a right to enter any premises at all reasonable hours
for the purpose of—
                                                  9

      (a)    ascertaining whether there is or has been any contravention of this Ordinance on the
             premises;
      (b) ascertaining whether there is any evidence on the premises of any such
             contravention; and
      (c) performing any of the officer’s functions under this Ordinance,
but admission to any premises used only as a private dwelling-house may not be demanded as
of right unless 24 hours’ notice of the intended entry has been given to the occupier.

       (2)       If a Justice of the Peace, on sworn information in writing, is satisfied that there is
reasonable ground for entry onto any premises for a purpose mentioned in subsection (1) and
that either—
       (a) admission to the premises has been refused, or a refusal is apprehended,expected and
             that notice of the intention to apply for a warrant has been given to the occupier; or
       (b) an application for admission, or the giving of such a notice, would defeat the object
             of the entry, or that the case is one of urgency, or the premises are unoccupied or the
             occupier is temporarily absent,
the Justice of the Peace may by warrant signed by him or her authorise the authorised officer to
enter the premises, if need be by reasonable force.

     (3)        Every warrant granted under this section continues in force for a period of one
month.

      (4)     An authorised officer entering any premises by virtue of this section, or of a
warrant issued under it, may be accompanied by such other persons as the officer considers
necessary, and on leaving any unoccupied premises which the officer has entered by virtue of
such a warrant must leave them as effectively secured against unauthorised entry as the officer
found them.

      (5)      An authorised officer entering premises by virtue of this section, or of a warrant
issued under it, may inspect any records (in whatever form they are held) relating to a food
business and, where any such records are stored in any electronic form—
      (a) may have access to, and inspect and check the operation of, any computer and any
           associated apparatus or material which is or has been in use in connection with the
           records; and
      (b) may require any person having charge of, or otherwise concerned with the operation
           of, the computer, apparatus or material to afford such assistance as the officer
           reasonably requires.

      (6)       An officer exercising any power conferred by subsection (5) may—
      (a)   seize and detain any records which the officer has reason to believe may be required
            as evidence in proceedings under any provision of this Ordinance; and
      (b)   if the records are stored in any electronic form, require the records to be produced in
            a form in which they may be taken away.

      (7)      A person who enters any premises by virtue of this section, or of a warrant issued
under it, must not disclose to any other person any information obtained on the premises with
regard to any trade secret, unless the disclosure was made in the performance of the person’s
duty.

     (8)       A person who fails to comply with subsection (7) commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.
                                                10

Hygiene improvement notices

     14.       (1)    An authorised officer who has reasonable grounds for believing that a
food business operator is failing to comply with any regulations referred to in subsection (3)
may, by a notice (a “hygiene improvement notice”) served on the operator—
     (a) state the officer's grounds for believing that the operator is failing to comply with the
           regulations;
     (b) specify the matters which constitute the operator's failure so to comply;
     (c) specify the measures which, in the officer's opinion, the operator must take in order
           to secure compliance; and
     (d) require the operator to take those measures, or measures which are at least equivalent
           to them, within a period (not being less than 14 days) specified in the notice.

     (2)       A person who fails to comply with an improvement notice commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

     (3)       This section and section 15 apply to any regulations made under section 7
which—
     (a)    require, prohibit or regulate the use of any process or treatment in the preparation of
            food; or
      (b)   make provision for securing the observance of hygienic conditions and practices in
            connection with the carrying out of commercial operations with respect to food or
            food sources.

Remedial action notices

      15.       (1)     If it appears to an authorised officer that in any food premises—
      (a)   any of the requirements of any regulations referred to in section 14(3) are being
            breached; or
      (b) an inspection under the Ordinance is being hampered,
the officer may, by a notice in writing (a “remedial action notice”) served on the relevant food
business operator or a duly authorised representative—
      (a) prohibit the use of any equipment or any part of the establishment specified in the
            notice;
      (b) impose conditions upon or prohibit the carrying out of any process; or
      (c) require the rate of operation to be reduced to such extent as is specified in the notice,
            or to be stopped completely.

     (2)       A remedial action notice must be served as soon as practicable and must state
why it is being served.

      (3)      A remedial action notice served under subsection (1)(a) must specify the breach
and the action needed to remedy it.

      (4)       An authorised officer who has served a remedial action notice on a food business
operator must, as soon as the officer is satisfied that such action has been taken, withdraw the
notice by a further notice in writing served on the food business operator or a duly authorised
representative.

     (5)      A person who fails to comply with a remedial action notice commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.
                                                   11

Fixed monetary penalty notices

      16.         (1)     This section applies to offences under the Ordinance as prescribed by
regulations.

      (2)      An authorised officer who has reasonable grounds to believe that a food business
operator has committed an offence to which this section applies, may give the operator a penalty
notice in respect of the offence (a “penalty notice”).

      (3)      A penalty notice is a notice offering the food business operator the opportunity to
discharge any liability to conviction for the offence to which the notice relates by paying a
penalty in accordance with this Ordinance.

      (4)      A penalty notice must specify—
      (a) the alleged offence;
      (b) such particulars of the circumstances alleged to constitute such offence as are
           necessary for giving reasonable information about it;
       (c) the amount of the prescribed penalty and the period for payment referred to in
           subsection (6);
      (d) the consequences of not paying the penalty before the end of the period mentioned
           in paragraph (c);
      (e) the person to whom and the address at which payment may be made;
      (f) by what method payment may be made;
      (g) the person to whom and the address at which any representations relating to the
           notice may be made.

      (5)         A penalty notice must also—
      (a)      inform the person to whom it is given of the person’s right to be tried for the alleged
               offence; and
      (b)      explain how that right may be exercised.

      (6)       The penalty must be paid within the period of 29 days from the day on which the
notice is given.

      (7)      Proceedings for the offence in respect of which a penalty notice was given may
not be brought before the end of the period for payment of the penalty.

     (8)       Subsection (7) does not apply if the person to whom the notice was given has
asked in accordance with subsections (12) and (13) to be tried for the alleged offence.

      (9)      If the penalty is paid in accordance with the penalty notice before the end of the
period mentioned in subsection (6), no proceedings for the offence may be brought, and
subsection (11) does not apply.

      (10)     If proceedings have been brought pursuant to a request under subsection (12), but
then the penalty is paid as mentioned in subsection (9), those proceedings may not be continued.

      (11)     In any proceedings, a certificate is evidence of the facts which it states, if it—
      (a) purports to be signed by or on behalf of the person responsible for the financial affairs
           of the Food Authority; and
      (b) states that payment of the penalty pursuant to the notice was or was not received by
           a date specified in the certificate.
                                               12


       (12)     If the person to whom a penalty notice has been given asks to be tried for the
alleged offence, the authorised officer must communicate this to the Attorney General who may
institute proceedings against the person.

     (13)    Any request to be tried must be made—
     (a) by notice given to the Food Authority before the end of the period for payment of
          the penalty; and
     (b) in the manner specified in the penalty notice.

      (14)     If the Food Authority considers that a penalty notice which an authorised officer
acting on its behalf has given to a food business operator ought not to have been given, the
Regulatory Authority may give notice to the operator withdrawing the penalty notice, in which
case—
      (a) the Regulatory Authority must repay any amount which has been paid by way of
            penalty pursuant to the penalty notice; and
      (b) no proceedings may be brought or continued against the operator for the offence in
            question.

Prohibition orders

     17.       (1)    If—
     (a)   a food business operator is convicted of an offence under this Ordinance; and
     (b)   the court by or before which the food operator is so convicted is satisfied that the
           health risk condition referred to in subsection (2) is fulfilled with respect to that
           business,
the court may make an order imposing the appropriate prohibition, as referred to in subsection
(3).

      (2)      The health risk condition is fulfilled with respect to any food business if any of
the following involves risk of injury to health:
      (a) the use for the purposes of the business of any process or treatment;
      (b) the construction of any premises used for the purposes of the business, or the use for
            those purposes of any equipment; and
      (c) the state or condition of any premises or equipment used for the purposes of the
            business.

     (3)       The appropriate prohibition is—
     (a)   in a case falling within subsection (2)(a) - a prohibition on the use of the process or
           treatment for the purposes of the business;
     (b)   in a case falling within subsection (2)(b - a prohibition on the use of the premises or
           equipment for the purposes of the business or any other food business of the same
           class or description;
     (c)   in a case falling within subsection (2)(c) - a prohibition on the use of the premises or
           equipment for the purposes of any food business.

     (4)      If—
     (a)   the food business operator is convicted of an offence under this Ordinance or any
           regulations made under it; and
      (b) the court by or before which the food business operator is so convicted thinks it
           proper to do so in all the circumstances of the case,
the court may, by an order, impose a prohibition on the operator from participating in the
                                                13

management of any food business, or any food business of a class or description specified in the
order.

     (5)      As soon as practicable after the making of an order under subsection (1) or (4) (a
“prohibition order”), the Food Authority must—
     (a) serve a copy of the order on the food business operator; and
    (b) in the case of an order under subsection (1), affix a copy of the order in a conspicuous
           position on any of the premises used for the purposes of the business as they consider
           appropriate.

     (5A)     A person who knowingly contravenes a prohibition order commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

      (6)       A prohibition order ceases to have effect—
      (a)   in the case of an order under subsection (1) - on the issue by the Food Authority of a
            certificate to the effect that the Food Authority is satisfied that the food business
            operator has taken sufficient measures to eliminate the health risk condition;
      (b)   in the case of an order under subsection (4) - on the giving by the court of a direction
            to that effect.

      (7)   Upon the food business operator notifying the Food Authority that a health risk
            condition is no longer in existence, the Food Authority must cause an authorised
            officer to carry out an inspection of the operator and—
            (a) if the Food Authority is satisfied that the risk condition is no longer in existence
                  it must, within 3 days of the inspection by the authorised officer, issue a
                  certificate under subsection (6)(a);
            (b) if the Food Authority is not satisfied that the health risk condition has been
                  eliminated, it must give notice to the food business operator of the reasons for
                  that determination.

      (8)      The court must give a direction under subsection (6)(b) if, on an application by
the food business operator, the court thinks it proper to do so having regard to all the
circumstances of the case, including in particular the conduct of the food business operator since
the making of the order; but no such application is to be entertained if it is made—
      (a) within 6 months after the making of the prohibition order; or
      (b) within 3 months after the making by the proprietor of a previous application for such
           a direction.

Inspection and seizure of food

      18.      (1)      An authorised officer may at all reasonable times inspect any food
intended for human consumption which—
      (a) has been sold or is offered or exposed for sale;
      (b) is in the possession of, or has been deposited with or consigned to, any person for
            the purpose of sale or of preparation for sale; or
      (c) is otherwise placed on the market,
and subsections (3) to (9) apply where, on such an inspection, it appears to the authorised officer
that any food fails to comply with food safety requirements.

      (2)     On an inspection of any food, an authorised officer may certify that such food has
not been produced, processed or distributed in compliance with regulations made under section
                                                14

7 and where any food has been so certified it must be treated for the purposes of this section as
failing to comply with food safety requirements:

      (2A)       If food certified under subsection (2) forms part of a batch, lot or
consignment of food of the same class or description, all the food in the batch, lot or consignment
must, until it is proved that it has been produced, processed or distributed in compliance with the
relevant regulations, be treated for the purposes of subsection (4) as having been so certified.

      (3)       If subsection (2) applies, the authorised officer may either—
      (a)   give notice to the person in charge of the food that, until the notice is withdrawn, the
            food or any specified portion of it—
            (i) is not to be used for human consumption; and
            (ii) either is not to be removed or is not to be removed except to some place
                   specified in the notice; or
      (b)   seize the food and remove it in order to have it dealt with by a justice of the peace.

     (3A)      A person who knowingly contravenes the requirements of a notice under
subsection (3)(a) commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

      (4)       An authorised officer who exercises the powers conferred by subsection (3)(a)
must, as soon as is reasonably practicable and in any event within 21 days, determine whether
or not he or she is satisfied that the food complies with food safety requirements and—
      (a) if so satisfied - forthwith withdraw the notice;
      (b) if not so satisfied - seize the food and remove it in order to have it dealt with by a
            Justice of the Peace.

      (5)       An authorised officer who exercises the powers conferred by subsection (3)(b) or
(4)(b) must inform the person in charge of the food of the officer’s intention to have it dealt with
by a Justice of the Peace and—
      (a) any person who under section 8 might be liable to a prosecution in respect of the
            food is, if the person attends before the Justice of the Peace by whom the food falls
            to be dealt with, entitled to be heard and to call witnesses; and
      (b) that Justice of the Peace may, but need not, be a member of the court before which
            any person is charged with an offence under that section in relation to that food.

      (6)        If it appears to a Justice of the Peace, on the basis of such evidence as he or she
considers appropriate in the circumstances, that any food falling to be dealt with under this
section fails to comply with food safety requirements, the Justice of the Peace must condemn the
food and order—
      (a) the food to be destroyed or to be so disposed of as to prevent it from being used for
             human consumption; and
      (b) any expenses reasonably incurred in connection with the destruction or disposal to
             be defrayed by the owner of the food.

      (7)      If a notice under subsection (3)(a) is withdrawn, or the Justice of the Peace by
whom any food falls to be dealt with under this section refuses to condemn it, the Food Authority
must compensate the owner of the food for any depreciation in its value resulting from the action
taken by the authorised officer.

     (8)      Any disputed question as to the right to or the amount of any compensation
payable under subsection (7) is to be determined by arbitration.
                                                15


     (9)       Subsections (3) to (8) also apply if, otherwise than on such an inspection, it
appears to an authorised officer that any food is likely to cause food poisoning or any disease
communicable to human beings.

Detention notice

      19.      (1)    An authorised officer may, by a notice in writing (a “detention notice”)
served on the relevant food business operator or duly authorised representative, require the
detention of any animal or food for the purpose of examination (including the taking of samples).

      (2)      An authorised officer must, as soon as satisfied that the animal or food need no
longer be detained, withdraw the notice by a further notice in writing served on the food business
operator or duly authorised representative.

     (3)      A person who fails to comply with a detention notice commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

Sampling, examination and analysis of food

      20.       (1)     An authorised officer may—
      (a)   purchase a sample of any food, or any substance capable of being used in the
            preparation of food;
      (b)   take a sample of any food, or any such substance, which—
            (i) appears to the officer to be intended for placing on the market or to have been
                   placed on the market, for human consumption; or
            (ii) is found by the officer on or in any premises which the officer is authorised to
                   enter by or under section 13;
      (c)   take a sample from any food source, or a sample of any contact material, which is
            found by the officer on or in any such premises; and
      (d)   take a sample of any article or substance which is found by the officer on or in any
            such premises and which the officer has reason to believe may be required as
            evidence in proceedings under any this Ordinance.

      (2)       An authorised officer who has procured a sample under subsection (1) must—
      (a)   if the officer considers that the sample should be analysed - submit it to be analysed;
      (b)   if the officer considers that the sample should be examined - submit it to be examined
            by a food examiner.

                                         PART 6
                                     ADMINISTRATION

Registration and licensing of premises

      21.       (1)    A person must not carry on a food business unless the person has
registered the food business with the Food Authority, has received a licence permitting the person
to carry on such a food business from the Food Authority, and has paid the prescribed fees.

     (2)       Whenever the Food Authority receives an application for registration from a food
business operator, an authorised officer must make an on-site visit and if the operator
demonstrates compliance with the relevant requirements of this Ordinance, the Food Authority
must grant the appropriate licence and approval, if required, under the regulations.
                                                 16


      (3)       The Food Authority—
      (a)   may grant a conditional licence or approval, if it appears from the on-site visit that
            the premises meet all the infrastructure and equipment requirements;
      (b)   a full licence or approval, if it is evident from a new on-site visit carried out within
            3 months of the granting of a conditional licence or approval, that the premises meet
            all other relevant requirements of this Ordinance and any relevant regulations made
            under it:

      (3A)      If clear progress has been made, but the premises still do not meet all the
requirements, a conditional licence or approval granted under subsection (3)(a) may be extended,
but this extension should not exceed a total of 6 months.

     (4)       If the food business operates at more than one site or premises, each site or
premises will require a separate licence and, if required, a separate approval number.

     (5)       The Food Authority must maintain up-to-date lists of licensed and approved
premises, with their respective approval numbers and other relevant information, which can be
made available to the public and other interested parties.

      (6)       A licence to carry on a food business is valid for a period of 12 months from the
date of issue, but may be suspended or withdrawn at any time by the Food Authority upon the
contravention of any provision of this Ordinance or regulations made under section 7 by the
person to whom the licence has been granted or by that person’s agent, if any, in charge of the
business.

      (7)      The licence must be displayed in some conspicuous place in the food premises.
If the licence is removed, damaged, hidden or obscured or allowed to become illegible, the
person to whom the licence was been granted, or the person’s agent, if any, in charge of the food,
each commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

      (8)     The prescribed fees is payable in respect of the registration and licencing
requirements.

      (9)     A person who carries on a food business without a valid licence commits an
offence.
Penalty: As provided by section 24.

Service of documents

      22.      (1)     Any document which is required or authorised under this Ordinance to be
served on a food business operator, may be served—
      (a) by delivering it to that operator;
      (b) by leaving it or sending it in a prepaid letter addressed to the operator at his or her
            usual or last known residence;
      (c) in the case of an incorporated company or body, by delivering it to the secretary at
            the registered or principal office, or by sending it in a prepaid letter addressed to the
            secretary at that office.

      (2)       If a document is to be served on a food business operator under this Ordinance
and it is not reasonably practicable to ascertain the name and address of the person on whom it
                                                17

should be served, or the premises of such operator are unoccupied, the document may be served
by addressing it to the operator in the capacity of occupier of those premises (naming them),
and—
     (a) by delivering it to some other person at the premises; and
     (b) if there is no other person at the premises to whom it can be delivered - by affixing
            it or a copy of it to some conspicuous part of the premises.

Time limit for prosecutions

      23.     A prosecution for an offence under this Ordinance which is punishable under
section 24 must be commenced within 3 years after the commission of the offence.

Punishment

       24.       A person who commits an offence under this Ordinance is liable on conviction to
a maximum penalty of a fine of £10,000 or imprisonment for a term of 18 months, or both, and,
in the case of a continuing offence a further fine of £30 for each day or part of a day during which
the offence continues after a conviction is first obtained.

Offences by body corporate

      25.       (1)    If an offence under this Ordinance which has been committed by a
corporate body is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be
attributable to any neglect on the part of,—
      (a) any director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body; or
      (b) any person who was purporting to act in any such capacity,
that person, as well as the corporate body commits that offence and is liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.

      (2)      In subsection (1)(a) “director” in relation to a corporate body established by or
under any enactment for the purpose of carrying on under national ownership any industry or
part of an industry or undertaking, being a corporate body whose affairs are managed by its
members, means a member of that body corporate.

Right of appeal

      26.      (1)     A person who is aggrieved by—
      (a)   a decision of an authorised officer to serve a hygiene improvement notice under
            section 14;
      (b)   a decision of an authorised officer to serve a remedial action notice under section 15;
            or
      (c)   a decision of an authorised officer to refuse a licence or approval or to withdraw or
            suspend a licence under section 21,
may appeal to the Magistrates’ Court.

     (2)     The procedure on an appeal to the Magistrates’ Court under subsection (1) is by
way of complaint for an order and the Magistrates’ Court Ordinance, 2011, applies to the
proceedings.

      (3)      The period within which an appeal under paragraph (1) may be brought is—
      (a)   30 days from the date on which notice of the decision was served on the person
            desiring to appeal; or
                                                 18

      (b)   in the case of an appeal against a decision to issue a hygiene improvement notice -
            the shorter of the period specified in paragraph (a) or the period specified in the
            notice pursuant to section 14(1)(d),
and the making of a complaint for an order is deemed for the purposes of this section to be the
bringing of the appeal.

      (4)      On an appeal against a hygiene improvement notice or a remedial action notice,
the court may cancel or affirm the notice and, if it affirms it, may do so either in its original form
or with any modifications the court in the circumstances thinks fit.

      (5)      If a period specified in a hygiene improvement notice pursuant to section 14(1)(d)
would otherwise include any day on which an appeal against that notice is pending, that day is
to be excluded from that period.

       (6)      An appeal is to be regarded as pending for the purposes of subsection (5) until it
is finally disposed of, withdrawn or struck out for want of prosecution.

Amendment of legislation and transitional provisions

      27.      (1)     The Public Health Ordinance, 1939 is amended by—
      (a)   repealing the definitions of “aerated water factory”, “bakehouse”, “dairy”,
            “dairyman”, “slaughterer” and “slaughterhouse”;
      (b)   repealing sections 12, 13, 14 ,15 ,16, 17, 18, 19, 43 and 54;
      (c)   deleting the word and character “bakehouse,” in section 58(1).

     (2)      The Fish and Fish Products Ordinance, 2010, is amended by deleting the words
“Public Health Ordinance, Cap. 49” in section 4(3) and substituting for them “Food Safety
Ordinance, 2016”.

      (3)      The Governor in Council may, in any regulations issued under this Ordinance,
make provisions for transitional measures which might be required in respect of the repeal of
any regulations issued under the Public Health Ordinance, 1939.
                                 _______________________
                                             19

                          FOOD SAFETY ORDINANCE, 2016

          FOOD SAFETY (PROCEDURE AND FEES) REGULATIONS, 2017
                              (Section 7)

                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                   PART 1
                       PRELIMINARY AND INTERPRETATION

1.    Citation and commencement
2.    Interpretation

                                  PART 2
                 OFFICIAL CONTROLS RELATING TO FRESH MEAT

3.    Ante-mortem inspection
4.    Animal welfare
5.    Post-mortem inspection
6.    Specified risk material and other animal by-products
7.    Laboratory testing
8.    Health marking
9.    Communication of inspection results
10.   Decisions concerning live animals
11.   Decisions concerning animal welfare
12.   Decisions concerning meat

                                 PART 3
              OFFICIAL CONTROLS RELATING TO IMPORTED FOODS

13.   Requirements for official controls
14.   Action in the case of suspicion
15.   Action in the case of non-compliance
16.   Criteria for physical checks

                                        PART 4
                                  FEES AND PENALTY

17.   Fees and fixed penalty
Schedule 1: Fees
Schedule 2: Fixed penalty

                                  PART 1
                      PRELIMINARY AND INTERPRETATION

Citation and commencement

     1.       These Regulations may be cited as the Food Safety (Procedure and Fees)
Regulations, 2017 and come into force on 1st April 2017.
                                                 20

Interpretation

      2.       Any word or expression to which a meaning has been assigned in the Ordinance,
or any other subsidiary legislation made under it, bears the meaning so assigned and for purposes
of these Regulations—
“documentary check” includes, but is not limited to, the examination of health certificates,
      commercial documents and bill of ladings or air freight documents accompanying a
      consignment;
“identity check” means a check by visual examination to ensure that the certificates or other
      documents provided coincide with the product itself;
“physical check” means a check on the product itself, which may include checks on packaging
      and temperature and also sampling and laboratory testing.

                                  PART 2
                 OFFICIAL CONTROLS RELATING TO FRESH MEAT

Ante-mortem inspection

      3.        (1)    An authorised officer or an operator authorised by him or her must carry
out ante-mortem inspection of all animals before slaughter within 24 hours of arrival of such
animals at the slaughterhouse and less than 24 hours before slaughter: but the authorised officer
may require inspection at any other time.

      (2)      Ante-mortem inspection must in particular determine whether, as regards the
particular animal inspected, there is any sign—
      (a) that welfare has been compromised; or
      (b) of any condition which might adversely affect human or animal health, paying
            particular attention to the list of notifiable diseases and detection of zoonotic
            diseases.

      (3)        In addition to routine ante-mortem inspection, the authorised officer must carry
out a clinical inspection of all animals that the food business operator or an official auxiliary may
have put aside.

Animal welfare

      4.       The authorised officer must verify compliance with relevant rules on animal
welfare, such as rules concerning the protection of animals at the time of slaughter and during
transport.

Post-mortem inspection

      5.       (1)     Carcasses and accompanying offal must be subjected, without delay, after
slaughter to post-mortem inspection. All external surfaces must be viewed. Minimal handling of
the carcass and offal or special technical facilities may be required for that purpose.

      (2)       Additional examinations must take place, such as palpation and incision of parts
of the carcass and offal and laboratory tests, whenever considered necessary—
      (a) to reach a definitive diagnosis; or
      (b) to detect the presence of—
            (i) an animal disease;
            (ii) residues or contaminants in excess of the levels laid down under legislation;
                                                  21

               (iii) non-compliance with microbiological criteria; or
               (iv) other factors that might require the meat to be declared unfit for human
                     consumption or restrictions to be placed on its use, particularly in the case of
                     animals having undergone emergency slaughter.

       (3)     Subject to sub-regulation (3A), the authorised officer must require carcasses of
bovine animals over 6 months old, and domestic swine over 4 weeks old to be submitted for
post-mortem inspection split lengthways into half carcasses down the spinal column and if the
inspection so necessitates, the authorised officer may also require any head or any carcass to be
split lengthways.

      (3A)      Taking account of particular eating habits, technological developments or specific
sanitary situations, the Regulatory Authority may authorise the submission for inspection of
carcasses of bovine animals over 6x months old, and domestic swine over 4 weeks old, not split
in half.

     (4)       During the inspection, precautions must be taken to ensure that contamination of
the meat by actions such as palpation, cutting or incision is kept to a minimum.

       (5)      In the event of an emergency slaughter, the carcass must be subjected to post-
mortem examination as soon as possible in accordance with sub-paragraphs (1) to (4) before it
is released for human consumption.

Specified risk material and other animal by-products

      6.          The authorised officer must—
      (a)      check the removal, separation and, if appropriate, marking of specified risk material
               and other animal by-products; and
      (b)      ensure that the food business operator takes all necessary measures to avoid
               contaminating meat with specified risk material during slaughter (including
               stunning) and removal of specified risk material.

Laboratory testing

      7.       (1)     The authorised officer must ensure when necessary that sampling takes
place and that samples are appropriately identified and handled and sent to the appropriate
laboratory within the framework of—
      (a) the monitoring and control of zoonoses and zoonotic agents;
      (b) the detection of unauthorised substances or products and the control of regulated
            substances;
      (c) the detection of symptoms suggestive of disease.

      (2)         The authorised officer must ensure that any other necessary laboratory testing
takes place.

Health marking

      8.          (1)    The authorised officer must supervise health marking and the marks used.

      (2)         The authorised officer must ensure, in particular, that—
      (a)      the health mark is applied only to animals (domestic ungulates, farmed game
               mammals other than lagomorphs) having undergone ante-mortem and post-mortem
                                                   22

              inspection in accordance with these Regulations and when there are no grounds for
              declaring the meat unfit for human consumption; and
      (b)     health-marking takes place on the external surface of the carcass, by stamping the
              mark in ink or hot branding, and in such a manner that, if carcasses are cut into half
              carcasses or quarters, or half carcasses are cut into 3 pieces, each piece bears a health
              mark.

      (3)     Meat from animals having undergone emergency slaughter outside the
slaughterhouse must bear a special health mark, which cannot be confused either with the health
mark provided for in this Chapter or with the identification mark provided for in the Food Safety
(Products of Animal Origin) Regulations, 2017.

Communication of inspection results

       9.        (1)     The authorised officer must record and evaluate the results of inspection
activities.

      (2)      The authorised officer —
       (a) must inform the food business operator and senior veterinary officer if inspections
           reveal the presence of any disease or condition that might affect public or animal
           health, or compromise animal welfare;
      (b) if the problem identified arose during primary production, must inform—
           (i) the authorised officer attending the holding of provenance;
           (ii) the food business operator responsible for the holding of provenance (provided
                 that such information would not prejudice subsequent legal proceedings); and
           (iii) if appropriate, the competent authority responsible for supervising the holding
                 of provenance or the hunting area.

      (3)        The results of inspections and tests are to be included in relevant databases.

      (4)      When the authorised officer, while carrying out ante-mortem or post-mortem
inspections or any other inspection activity, suspects the presence of an infectious disease, the
authorised officer must immediately notify the Agricultural Authority appointed under section
2A of the Animals (Diseases) Ordinance, 1944, and both must take all necessary measures and
precautions to prevent the possible spread of the infectious agent.

Decisions concerning live animals

      10.      (1)     The authorised officer must verify compliance with the food business
operator’s duty under the Food Safety (Products of Animal Origin) Regulations, 2017 to ensure
that animals that have such hide, skin or fleece conditions which pose an unacceptable risk of
contamination of the meat during slaughter, are not slaughtered for human consumption unless
they are cleaned beforehand.

     (2)      Animals with a disease or condition which may be transmitted to animals or
humans through handling or eating meat and, in general, animals showing clinical signs of
systemic disease or emaciation, must not be slaughtered for human consumption. Such animals
must be killed separately, under conditions such that other animals or carcasses cannot be
contaminated, and must be declared unfit for human consumption.

     (3)      The slaughter of animals suspected of having a disease or condition that may
adversely affect human or animal health must be deferred and such animals must undergo
                                                23

detailed ante-mortem examination in order to make a diagnosis. The authorised officer may in
addition require sampling and laboratory examinations to supplement post-mortem inspection.
If necessary, the animals must be slaughtered separately or at the end of normal slaughtering,
taking all necessary precautions to avoid contamination of other meat.

      (4)       Animals that might contain residues of veterinary medicinal products due to a
failure to observe licensed withdrawal periods as laid down in the product data sheets, or residues
of forbidden substances, must be dealt with as unfit for human consumption.

      (5)      The authorised officer must impose the conditions under which animals must be
dealt with under a specific scheme for the eradication or control of a specific disease, such as
brucellosis or tuberculosis, or zoonotic agents such as salmonella, under his or her direct
supervision. The Food Authority must determine the conditions under which such animals may
be slaughtered which conditions must have the aim of minimising contamination of other animals
and the meat of other animals.

       (6)       Animals that are presented to a slaughterhouse for slaughter must be slaughtered
there: except that in exceptional circumstances, such as a serious breakdown of the slaughter
facilities, the authorised officer may allow direct movements to another slaughterhouse.

Decisions concerning animal welfare


      11.      (1)     When the provisions concerning the protection of animals at the time of
slaughter or killing are not respected, the authorised officer must verify that the food business
operator immediately takes necessary corrective measures and prevents recurrence.

      (2)     The authorised officer must take a proportionate and progressive approach to
enforcement action, ranging from issuing directions to slowing down and stopping production,
depending on the nature and gravity of the problem.

Decisions concerning meat

      12.     (1)      Meat is to be declared unfit for human consumption if—
      (a) it derives from animals that have not undergone ante-mortem inspection;
      (b) it derives from animals the offal of which has not undergone post-mortem inspection;
      (c) it derives from animals which are dead before slaughter, stillborn, unborn or
          slaughtered under the age of 7 days;
      (d) it results from the trimming of sticking points;
      (e) it derives from animals showing symptoms of disease;
      (f) it exhibits parasitic infestation;
      (g) without affecting more specific legislation, it derives from animals or carcasses
          containing residues of forbidden substances or from animals that have been treated
          with forbidden substances;
      (h) it has been treated illegally with decontaminating substances;
      (i) it has been treated illegally with ionising or UV-rays;
      (j) it contains foreign bodies;
      (k) it indicates patho-physiological changes, anomalies in consistency, insufficient
          bleeding or organoleptic anomalies, in particular a pronounced sexual odour;
      (l) it derives from emaciated animals;
      (m) it contains specified risk material;
      (n) it shows soiling, faecal or other contamination;
                                                24

      (o)   it consists of blood that may constitute a risk to public or animal health owing to the
            health status of any animal from which it derives or contamination arising during the
            slaughter process;
      (p)   in the opinion of the authorised officer, after examination of all the relevant
            information, it may constitute a risk to public or animal health or is for any other
            reason not suitable for human consumption.

      (2)     The authorised officer may impose requirements concerning the use of meat
derived from animals having undergone emergency slaughter outside the slaughterhouse.

                                 PART 3
              OFFICIAL CONTROLS RELATING TO IMPORTED FOODS

Requirements for official controls

     13.     (1)     The Food Authority must carry out regular official controls on Imported
Foods, which must include at least—
     (a) a systematic documentary check;
     (b) a random identity check; and
     (c) if appropriate, a physical check.

      (2)      Physical checks must be carried out at a frequency depending on—
      (a)   the risks associated with different types of food;
      (b)   the history of compliance by the exporting country with the requirements of the
            product concerned, and the history of compliance of the establishment and food
            business operator importing and exporting the product;
      (c)   the controls the food business operator importing the food has carried out;
      (d)   any guarantees given by the competent authority of the exporting country.

Action in the case of suspicion

      14.       In the case of non-compliance, or if there is doubt as to the identity or the actual
destination or origin of the consignment, or as to the correspondence between the consignment
and the certification, the Food Authority must—
      (a) carry out official controls to confirm or to eliminate the suspicion or doubt; and
      (b) place the consignment concerned under official detention until it obtains the results
            of such official controls.

Action in the case of non-compliance

      15.       (1)      Any imported food which does not comply with the requirements of the
legislation relating to food safety must be placed under official detention by the Food Authority
and the Food Authority must, after consultation with the food business operator responsible for
importing the food,—
      (a) order that the food be destroyed or re-dispatched;
      (b) if the food has already been placed on the market, monitor or, if necessary, recall or
             withdraw the food before ordering destruction;
      (c) verify that the food has not given rise to any adverse effects on human health.

      (2)      The food Business Operator responsible for the consignment is liable for the costs
incurred by the Food Authority for any of the activities referred to in sub-paragraphs (1)(a) to
(c).
                                               25


Criteria for physical checks

      16.       (1)   The aim of the physical check of the animal products is to ensure that
the products are acceptable for importation into St Helena, by means of—
      (a) sensory examinations: smell, colour, consistency, taste;
      (b) simple physical or chemical tests: cutting, thawing, cooking;
      (c) laboratory tests to detect—
            (i) residues;
            (ii) pathogens;
            (iii) contaminants;
            (iv) evidence of alteration.

     (2)       Whatever the type of product, the following must be carried out:
     (a)   a check on the conditions and means of transport to identify in particular any
           shortcomings or breaks in the cold chain;
     (b)   the real weight of the consignment and that indicated on the certificate or
           document must be compared, and the whole consignment weighed if necessary;
     (c)   the wrapping materials and all markings (stamps, labels) thereon must be
           checked to ensure their conformity with legislation relating to food safety;
     (d)   the temperature required by legislation relating to food safety must be checked to
           ensure compliance during transport;
     (e)   an entire set of packages, or samples in the case of bulk products must be examined
           before undergoing sensory examination and physical, chemical and laboratory
           tests and—
           (i) these tests must be carried out on a whole range of samples drawn from the
                  entire consignment, which may be partially unloaded if necessary to ensure
                  that all parts of it are reached;
           (ii) the examination must cover 1% of the items or packages in a consignment,
                  from a minimum of two items or packages to a maximum of ten, but
                  depending on the products and the circumstances, the authorised officer may
                  insist on more extensive checks;
           (iii) in the case of bulk goods, at least five samples must be taken from various
                  parts of the consignment;
     (f)   if random laboratory tests are undertaken which cannot provide immediate results,
           and there is no immediate danger to public or animal health, the consignment may
           be released, but if the laboratory tests have been carried out because of a suspicion
           of irregularity or previous tests have given positive results, the consignments may
           not be released until the test results are negative;
     (g)   the means of transport must be fully unloaded only in the following cases:
           (i) loading was done in such a way as to make access to the entire consignment
                  impossible by partial unloading alone;
           (ii) sample checks have revealed irregularities;
           (iii) the previous consignment has shown irregularities; or
           (iv) the authorised officer suspects irregularities;
     (h)   once the physical check has been completed, the competent authority must certify
           the check by closing and officially stamping all the opened packages and by
           resealing all the containers.

                                         PART 4
                                   FEES AND PENALTY
                                                 26

Fees and fixed penalty

         17.   (1)    The fees set out in Schedule 1 are payable in respect of the matters set
out in it.

      (2)      The fixed penalty contemplated by section 16 of the Ordinance is as set out in
Schedule 2.
                                     __________________

                                        SCHEDULE 1
                                       (Regulation 17(1))

                                                FEES

Registration of a food business (one-off fee)
       Individual part-time operator                                       £10
       All other food business operators                                   £27

Licence to carry on a food business
(for a period of 12 months):
        Category A – Individual part-time operator                         £5
        Category B – less than 6 full-time equivalent employees            £20
        Category C – between 7 and 11 full-time equivalent employees       £50
        Category D - 12 or more full-time equivalent employees             £86

Licence for movable or temporary premises for occasional events
including stalls                                                           £2.50 per day

Slaughterhouse certification                                               £129 per annum
Home slaughter facility approval                                           £10 per annum

Meat inspection fees (per animal):
       Cattle                                                              £7
       Pigs                                                                £4
       Goats/Sheep                                                         £2.50

                                        SCHEDULE 2
                                       (Regulation 17(2))

Fixed monetary penalty (section 16 of the Ordinance)                       £30
                               _________________________
                                            27

                          FOOD SAFETY ORDINANCE, 2016

     FOOD SAFETY (PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN) REGULATIONS, 2017
                             (Section 7)

                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                    PART 1
                        PRELIMINARY AND INTERPRETATION

1.     Citation and commencement
2.     Application
3.     Interpretation

                                   PART 2
                  OBLIGATIONS ON FOOD BUSINESS OPERATORS

4.    General Obligation
5.    Approval of premises
6.    Identification marking
7.    Products of animal origin from outside St Helena
8.    Revocation and transitional provision
Schedule I: Definitions
      1. Meat
      2. Eggs
      3. Processed Products
      4. Other Definitions
Schedule II: Requirements Concerning Several Products of Animal Origin
      Part I: Identification Marking
      Part IL: Objectives Of Haccp-Based Procedures
Schedule III: Specific Requirements
      Part I: Meat of Domestic Ungulates
      Part II: Meat from Poultry and Lagomorphs
      Part III: Minced Meat, Meat Preparations and Mechanically Separated Meat (MSM)
      Part IV: Meat Products
      Part V: Eggs Aad Egg Products
      Part VI: Raw Milk and Dairy Products

                                  PART 1
                      PRELIMINARY AND INTERPRETATION

Citation and commencement

     1.       These Regulations may be cited as the Food Safety (Products of Animal Origin)
Regulations, 2017, and come into force on 1st April 2017.

Application

     2.       These Regulations do not apply to—
     (a)   primary production for private domestic use;
     (b)   the domestic preparation, handling or storage of food for private domestic
           consumption; or
                                                28

      (c)     retail sale, except where the operations in paragraph (b) —
              (i) are carried out with a view to the supply of food of animal origin to another
                     establishment; or
              (ii) include the slaughter of animals for sale for human consumption.

Interpretation

      3.       Any word or expression to which a meaning has been assigned in the
Ordinance, or any other subsidiary legislation made under it, bears the meaning so assigned
and the words and expressions in Schedule 1 are defined for purposes of these Regulations.

                                    PART 2
                    OBLIGATIONS ON FOOD BUSINESS OPERATORS

General Obligation

      4.         Food business operators must comply with the relevant provisions of Schedules
II and III.

Approval of premises

     5.        (1)     Food business operators must place products of animal origin, for which
Schedule III lays down requirements, on the market only if they have been prepared and handled
exclusively in establishments which—
     (a) meet the relevant requirements of the Food Safety (General Food Hygiene
            Regulations), those of Schedules II and III and other relevant requirements of the
            laws relating to food safety: and
     (b) have been approved by the Regulatory Authority.

      (2)      An establishment subject to approval in accordance with subsection (1) must not
operate unless the Regulatory Authority has—
      (a) granted the establishment approval to operate following an on-site visit; or
      (b) provided the establishment with conditional approval.

      (3)      Food business operators must co-operate with the Regulatory Authority and in
particular, food business operators must ensure that an establishment ceases to operate if the
Regulatory Authority withdraws or suspends its approval or, in the case of conditional approval,
does not prolong it or fails to grant full approval.

Identification marking

      6.        (1)    Food business operators must not place on the market a product of animal
origin handled in an establishment subject to approval in accordance with Regulation 5, unless
an identification mark is applied in accordance with Part 1 of Schedule II.

      (2)      Food business operators may apply an identification mark to a product of animal
origin only if the product has been manufactured in accordance with these Regulations in
establishments meeting the requirements of regulation 4.

      (3)      Food business operators may not remove an identification mark from meat unless
they cut or process it or work upon it in another manner.
                                               29

Products of animal origin from outside St Helena

      7.      Food business operators importing products of animal origin for use in approved
establishments must ensure that importation takes place only from countries approved by the
Regulatory Authority.

Revocation and transitional provision

       8.      (1)    The Slaughterhouse Regulations, Cap. 49, and the Dairy Regulations,
Cap. 49, are revoked.

      (2)     Notwithstanding the provision of these Regulations, food business operators may
continue to use stocks and equipment that they ordered before the entry into force of these
Regulations until they are exhausted or require replacement.
                               ___________________________

                                        SCHEDULE I

                                        DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of these Regulations—

1. MEAT

1.1. “meat” means edible parts of the animals referred to in items 1.2 to 1.8, including blood;

1.2. “domestic ungulates” means domestic bovine (including Bubalus and Bison species),
porcine, ovine and caprine animals;

1.3. “poultry” means farmed birds, including birds that are not considered as domestic but which
are farmed as domestic animals, with the exception of ratites;

1.4. “lagomorphs” means rabbits and hares;

1.5. “carcass” means the body of an animal after slaughter and dressing;

1.6. “fresh meat” means meat that has not undergone any preserving process other than chilling,
freezing or quick-freezing, including meat that is vacuum-wrapped or wrapped in a controlled
atmosphere;

1.7. “offal” means fresh meat other than that of the carcass, including viscera and blood;

1.8. “viscera” means the organs of the thoracic, abdominal and pelvic cavities, as well as the
trachea and oesophagus and, in birds, the crop;

1.9. “minced meat” means boned meat that has been minced into fragments and contains less
than 1% salt;

1.10. “mechanically separated meat” or “MSM” means the product obtained by removing
meat from flesh-bearing bones after boning or from poultry carcasses, using mechanical means
resulting in the loss or modification of the muscle fibre structure;
                                               30

1.11.“meat preparations” means fresh meat, including meat that has been reduced to fragments,
which has had foodstuffs, seasonings or additives added to it or which has undergone processes
insufficient to modify the internal muscle fibre structure of the meat and thus to eliminate the
characteristics of fresh meat;

1.12. “slaughterhouse” means an establishment accredited and certified used for slaughtering
and dressing animals, the meat of which is intended for human consumption;

1.13. “cutting plant” means an establishment used for boning and/or cutting up meat.

2. EGGS

2.1. “eggs” means eggs in shell (other than broken, incubated or cooked eggs) that are produced
by farmed birds and are fit for direct human consumption or for the preparation of egg products;

2.2. “liquid egg” means unprocessed egg contents after removal of the shell;

2.3. “cracked eggs” means eggs with damaged shell and intact membranes;

2.4. “packing centre” means an establishment where eggs are graded by quality and weight.

3. PROCESSED PRODUCTS

3.1. “meat products” means processed products resulting from the processing of meat or from
the further processing of such processed products, so that the cut surface shows that the product
no longer has the characteristics of fresh meat;

 3.2. “dairy products” means processed products resulting from the processing of raw milk or
from the further processing of such processed products;

3.3. “egg products” means processed products resulting from the processing of eggs, or of
various components or mixtures of eggs, or from the further processing of such processed
products;

4. OTHER DEFINITIONS

4.1. “products of animal origin” means—
      (a)      food of animal origin, including honey and blood;
      (b) live bivalve molluscs, live echinoderms, live tunicates and live marine gastropods
           intended for human consumption; and
      (c) other animals destined to be prepared with a view to being supplied live to the final
           consumer.
                                        ______________
                                                31

                                         SCHEDULE II

REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING SEVERAL PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN

                                         PART I
                                IDENTIFICATION MARKING

When required in accordance with Regulation 6, and subject to the provisions of Schedule III,
food business operators must ensure that products of animal origin have an identification mark
applied in compliance with the following provisions.

A. APPLICATION OF THE IDENTIFICATION MARK

1. The identification mark must be applied before the product leaves the establishment.

2. However, a new mark need not be applied to a product unless its packaging and/or wrapping
is removed or it is further processed in another establishment, in which case the new mark must
indicate the approval number of the establishment where these operations take place.

3. Food business operators must, in accordance with Regulation 6 of the Food Safety (General
Food Hygiene) Regulations, have in place systems and procedures to identify food business
operators from whom they have received, and to whom they have delivered, products of animal
origin.

B. FORM OF THE IDENTIFICATION MARK

4. The mark must be legible and indelible, and the characters easily decipherable. It must be
clearly displayed for the competent authorities.


5. The mark must indicate the approval number of the establishment. If an establishment
manufactures both food to which this Regulation applies and food to which it does not, the food
business operator may apply the same identification mark to both types of food.

C. METHOD OF MARKING

6. The mark may, depending on the presentation of different products of animal origin, be applied
directly to the product, the wrapping or the packaging, or be printed on a label affixed to the
product, the wrapping or the packaging. The mark may also be an irremovable tag made of a
resistant material.

7. In the case of packaging containing cut meat or offal, the mark must be applied to a label fixed
to the packaging, or printed on the packaging, in such a way that it is destroyed when the
packaging is opened. This is not necessary, however, if the process of opening destroys the
packaging. When wrapping provides the same protection as packaging, the label may be affixed
to the wrapping.

8. For products of animal origin that are placed in transport containers or large packages and are
intended for further handling, processing, wrapping or packaging in another establishment, the
mark may be applied to the external surface of the container or packaging.
                                               32

9. When products of animal origin are placed in a package destined for direct supply to the final
consumer, it is sufficient to apply the mark to the exterior of that package only.

10. When the mark is applied directly to products of animal origin, the colours used must be
authorised.

                                     PART II
                     OBJECTIVES OF HACCP-BASED PROCEDURES

1. Food business operators operating slaughterhouses must ensure that the procedures that they
have put in place are in accordance with the general requirements of Regulation 5 of the Food
Safety (General Food Hygiene) Regulations.

2. The procedures must guarantee that each animal or, if appropriate, each lot of animals accepted
onto the slaughterhouse premises—
      (a) is properly identified;
      (b) does not come from a holding or an area subject to a movement prohibition or other
            restriction for reasons of animal or public health, except when the Regulatory
            Authority so permits;
      (c) is clean;
      (d) is healthy, as far as the food business operator can judge; and
      (e) is in a satisfactory state as regards welfare on arrival at the slaughterhouse.

3. In the event of failure to comply with any of the requirements listed under section 2, the food
business operator must notify the authorised officer and take appropriate measures.
                                     ____________________

                                        SCHEDULE III

                                SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS

                                      PART I
                            MEAT OF DOMESTIC UNGULATES

                                           Chapter I
                        Transport of live animals to the slaughterhouse

Food business operators transporting live animals to slaughterhouses must ensure compliance
with the following requirements:

1. During collection and transport, animals must be handled carefully without causing
unnecessary distress.

2. Animals showing symptoms of disease or originating in herds known to be contaminated with
agents of public health importance may only be transported to the slaughterhouse when the
Regulatory Authority so permits.

                                         Chapter II
                               Requirements for slaughterhouses

Food business operators must ensure that the construction, layout and equipment of
slaughterhouses in which domestic ungulates are slaughtered meet the following requirements:
                                                 33


1. (a) Slaughterhouses must have adequate and hygienic lairage facilities or, climate permitting,
waiting pens that are easy to clean and disinfect. These facilities must be equipped for watering
the animals and, if necessary, feeding them. The drainage of the wastewater must not
compromise food safety.
(b) They must also have separate lockable facilities or, climate permitting, pens for sick or
suspect animals with separate draining and sited in such a way as to avoid contamination of other
animals, unless the Regulatory Authority considers that such facilities are unnecessary.
(c)The size of the lairage facilities must ensure that the welfare of the animals is respected. Their
layout must facilitate ante-mortem inspections, including the identification of the animals or
groups of animals.

2. To avoid contaminating meat, they must—
(a)     have a sufficient number of rooms, appropriate to the operations being carried out;
(b) have a separate room for the emptying and cleaning of stomachs and intestines, unless the
      Regulatory Authority authorises the separation in time of these operations within a specific
      slaughterhouse on a case-by-case basis;
(c)     ensure separation in space or time of the following operations:
      (i)      stunning and bleeding;
      (ii)     in the case of porcine animals, scalding, depilation, scraping and singeing;
      (iii)    evisceration and further dressing;
      (iv)     handling clean guts and tripe;
      (v)      preparation and cleaning of other offal, particularly the handling of skinned heads
               if it does not take place at the slaughter line;
      (vi)     packaging offal; and
      (vii)    dispatching meat;
(d) have installations that prevent contact between the meat and the floors, walls and fixtures;
      and
(e) have slaughter lines (where operated) that are designed to allow constant progress of the
      slaughter process and to avoid cross-contamination between the different parts of the
      slaughter line. If more than one slaughter line is operated in the same premises, there must
      be adequate separation of the lines to prevent cross-contamination.

3. They must have facilities for disinfecting tools with hot water supplied at not less than 82ºC
or an alternative system having an equivalent effect.

4. The equipment for washing hands used by the staff engaged in handling exposed meat must
have taps designed to prevent the spread of contamination.

5. There must be lockable facilities for the refrigerated storage of detained meat and separate
lockable facilities for the storage of meat declared unfit for human consumption.

6. There must be a separate place with appropriate facilities for the cleaning, washing and
disinfection of means of transport for livestock. However, slaughterhouses need not have these
places and facilities if the Regulatory Authority so permits and official authorised places and
facilities exist nearby.

7. The access paths and roads to slaughterhouse must be kept clean and in good repair and
adequately drained so as to minimise as far as is reasonably possible the entry into the
slaughterhouse of soil and other contamination carried on the wheels of vehicles and the footwear
of pedestrians.
                                               34

8. They must have lockable facilities reserved for the slaughter of sick and suspect animals. This
is not essential if this slaughter takes place in other establishments authorised by the competent
authority for this purpose, or at the end of the normal slaughter period.

9. If manure or digestive tract content is stored in the slaughterhouse, there must be a special
area or place for that purpose.

10. They must have an adequately equipped lockable facility or, if needed, room for the exclusive
use of the regulatory service.

                                        Chapter III
                                Requirements for cutting plants

Food business operators must ensure that cutting plants handling meat of domestic ungulates—
(a)    are constructed so as to avoid contamination of meat, in particular by—
     (i)       allowing constant progress of the operations; or
     (ii)      ensuring separation between the different production batches;
(b) have rooms for the separate storage of packaged and exposed meat, unless stored at
     different times or in such a way that the packaging material and the manner of storage
     cannot be a source of contamination for the meat;
(c) have cutting rooms equipped to ensure compliance with the requirements laid down in
     Chapter V;
(d) have equipment for washing hands with taps designed to prevent the spread of
     contamination, for use by staff engaged in handling exposed meat; and
(e) have facilities for disinfecting tools with hot water supplied at not less than 82ºC, or an
     alternative system having an equivalent effect.

                                          Chapter IV
                                       Slaughter hygiene

Food business operators operating slaughterhouses in which domestic ungulates are slaughtered
must ensure compliance with the following requirements:

1. An occupier of a slaughterhouse must not permit an animal intended to provide meat for sale
for human consumption to be slaughtered, unless—
(a)     the occupier has given an authorised officer at least 48 hours’ notice of the occupier’s
intention to do so; or
(b) the occupier has a written standing arrangement with an authorised officer to slaughter
      animals at an arranged time, and the occupier is slaughtering at that time; or
(c) the animal is slaughtered in accordance with this Chapter.

2. An occupier of a slaughterhouse and any person engaged in the movement of lairaging of
animals must ensure that—
(a) every animal is unloaded as soon as possible after its arrival and, if delay in unloading is
     unavoidable, it is protected from adverse weather conditions and is provided with adequate
     ventilation;
(b) when unloaded, every animal is protected from adverse weather conditions and is provided
     with adequate ventilation;
(c) if any animal has been subjected to high temperatures in humid weather, it is cooled by
     appropriate means;
(d) any animals which might injure each other on account of their species, sex, age or origin
     or for any other reason are kept and lairaged apart from each other;
                                                35

(e)   pending the slaughter or killing of any sick or disabled animal in the slaughterhouse, it is
      kept apart from any animal which is not sick or disabled.

3. After arrival of the animals in the slaughterhouse, their slaughter must not be unduly delayed.
However, if required for welfare reasons, animals must be given a resting period before
slaughter.

4. During slaughter, the operator of a slaughterhouse must ensure that an animal—
(a)    is brought or followed to the place of slaughter quietly; and
(b)    is adequately restrained so that it retains its composure and dignity; and
(c)    is slaughtered humanely using a stunning gun or electrolethaler; and
(d)    is released from its restraints as soon as possible after stunning; and
(e)    is bled efficiently as soon as it is suspended; and
(f)    commences dressing as soon as bleeding is completed; and
(g)    the above operations are not carried out in sight of another living animal.

5. (a) Meat from animals other than those referred to in paragraphs (b) and (c) must not be used
for human consumption if they die otherwise than by being slaughtered in the slaughterhouse.
(b) Only live animals intended for slaughter may be brought into the slaughter premises, with
the exception of animals that have undergone emergency slaughter outside the slaughterhouse in
accordance with Chapter VI;
(c) Meat from animals that undergo slaughter following an accident in a slaughterhouse may be
used for human consumption if, on inspection, no serious lesions other than those due to the
accident are found.

6. The animals or, if appropriate, each batch of animals sent for slaughter must be identified so
that their origin can be traced.

7. Animals must be clean.

8. Slaughterhouse operators must follow the instructions of the authorised officer appointed by
the Regulatory Authority to ensure that ante-mortem inspection of every animal to be slaughtered
is carried out under suitable conditions.

9. Animals brought into the slaughter hall must be slaughtered without undue delay.

10. Stunning, bleeding, skinning, evisceration and other dressing must be carried out without
undue delay and in a manner that avoids contaminating the meat. In particular—
(a) the trachea and oesophagus must remain intact during bleeding, except in the case of
      slaughter according to a religious custom;
(b) during the removal of hides and fleece—
      (i)       contact between the outside of the skin and the carcass must be prevented; and
      (ii) operators and equipment coming into contact with the outer surface of hides and
            fleece must not touch the meat;
(c) measures must be taken to prevent the spillage of digestive tract content during and after
      evisceration and to ensure that evisceration is completed as soon as possible after stunning;
      and
(d) removal of the udder must not result in contamination of the carcass with milk or
      colostrum.

11. Complete skinning of the carcass and other parts of the body intended for human
consumption must be carried out, except for porcine animals and the heads and feet of ovine and
                                                36

caprine animals and calves. Heads and feet must be handled so as to avoid contamination of
other meat.

12. Porcine animals must have their bristles removed immediately. The risk of contamination of
the meat with scalding water must be minimised. Only approved additives may be used for this
operation. Porcine animals must be thoroughly rinsed afterwards with potable water.

13. The carcases must not contain visible faecal contamination. Any visible contamination must
be removed without delay by trimming or alternative means having an equivalent effect.

14. Carcasses and offal must not come into contact with floors, walls or work stands.

15. Slaughterhouse operators must follow the instructions of the Regulatory Authority to ensure
that post-mortem inspection of all slaughtered animals is carried out under suitable conditions.

16. Until post-mortem inspection is completed, parts of a slaughtered animal subject to such
inspection must—
(a)     remain identifiable as belonging to a given carcass; and
(b) come into contact with no other carcass, offal or viscera, including those that have already
      undergone post-mortem inspection.

17. Both kidneys must be removed from their fatty covering. In the case of bovine and porcine
animals, the peri-renal capsule must also be removed.

18. If the blood or other offal of several animals is collected in the same container before
completion of post-mortem inspection, the entire contents must be declared unfit for human
consumption if the carcass of one or more of the animals concerned has been declared unfit for
human consumption.

19. After post-mortem inspection—
(a)    the tonsils of bovine animals must be removed hygienically;
(b) parts unfit for human consumption must be removed as soon as possible from the clean
     sector of the establishment;
(c) meat detained or declared unfit for human consumption and inedible by-products must not
     come into contact with meat declared fit for human consumption; and
(d) viscera or parts of viscera remaining in the carcass, except for the kidneys, must be
     removed entirely and as soon as possible, unless the Regulatory Authority authorises
     otherwise.

20. After completion of slaughter and post-mortem inspection, the meat must be stored in
accordance with the requirements laid down in Chapter VII.

21. When destined for further handling—
(a)   stomachs must be scalded or cleaned;
(b)   intestines must be emptied and cleaned; and
(c)   heads and feet must be skinned or scalded and depilated.

22. If establishments are approved for the slaughter of different animals, precautions must be
taken to prevent cross-contamination by separation either in time or in space of operations carried
out on the different species.
                                                37

23. If the slaughterhouse does not have lockable facilities reserved for the slaughter of sick or
suspect animals, the facilities used to slaughter such animals must be cleaned, washed and
disinfected under official supervision before the slaughter of other animals is resumed.

                                          Chapter V
                               Hygiene during cutting and boning

Food business operators must ensure that cutting and boning of meat of domestic ungulates takes
place in accordance with the following requirements:

1. Carcasses of domestic ungulates may be cut into half-carcases or quarters, and half carcasses
into no more than three wholesale cuts, in slaughterhouses.

2. The work on meat must be organised in such a way as to prevent or minimise contamination.
To this end, food business operators must ensure in particular that—
(a)     meat intended for cutting is brought into the workrooms progressively as needed;
(b) during cutting, boning, trimming, slicing, dicing, wrapping and packaging, the meat is
      maintained at not more than 3ºC for offal and 7ºC for other meat, by means of an ambient
      temperature of not more than 12ºC or an alternative system having an equivalent effect;
      and
(c) if the premises are approved for the cutting of meat of different animal species, precautions
      are taken to avoid cross-contamination, if necessary by separation of the operations on the
      different species in either space or time.

3. However, meat may be boned and cut before it reaches the temperature referred to in section
2(b) in accordance with Chapter VII, section 3.

4. Meat may also be boned and cut prior to reaching the temperature referred to in section 2(b)
when the cutting room is on the same site as the slaughter premises. In this case, the meat must
be transferred to the cutting room either directly from the slaughter premises or after a waiting
period in a chilling or refrigerating room. As soon as it is cut and, if appropriate, packaged, the
meat must be chilled to the temperature referred to in section 2(b).

                                        Chapter VI
                        Emergency slaughter outside the slaughterhouse

Food business operators must ensure that meat from domestic ungulates that have undergone
emergency slaughter outside the slaughterhouse may be used for human consumption only if it
complies with all the following requirements:

1. An otherwise healthy animal must have suffered an accident that prevented its transport to the
slaughterhouse for welfare reasons.

2. An authorised officer must carry out an ante-mortem inspection of the animal.

3. The slaughtered and bled animal must be transported to the slaughterhouse hygienically and
without undue delay. Removal of the stomach and intestines, but no other dressing, may take
place on the spot, under the supervision of the authorised officer. Any viscera removed must
accompany the slaughtered animal to the slaughterhouse and be identified as belonging to that
animal.
                                               38

4. If more than two hours elapse between slaughter and arrival at the slaughterhouse, the animal
must be refrigerated. If climatic conditions so permit, active chilling is not necessary.

5. A declaration by the food business operator who reared the animal, stating the identity of the
animal and indicating any veterinary products or other treatments administered to the animal,
dates of administration and withdrawal periods, must accompany the slaughtered animal to the
slaughterhouse.

6. A declaration issued by the authorised officer recording the favourable outcome of the ante-
mortem inspection, the date and time of, and reason for, emergency slaughter, and the nature of
any treatment administered by a veterinarian to the animal, must accompany the slaughtered
animal to the slaughterhouse.

7. The slaughtered animal must be fit for human consumption following post-mortem inspection
carried out in the, including any additional tests required in the case of emergency slaughter.

8. Food business operators must follow any instructions that the authorised officer may give after
post-mortem inspection concerning the use of the meat.

9. Food business operators may not place meat from animals having undergone emergency
slaughter on the market unless it bears an identification mark.

                                          Chapter VII
                                     Storage and transport

Food business operators must ensure that the storage and transport of meat of domestic ungulates
takes place in accordance with the following requirements.

1. (a) Unless other specific provisions provide otherwise, post-mortem inspection must be
followed immediately by chilling in the slaughterhouse to ensure a temperature throughout the
meat of not more than 3ºC for offal and 7ºC for other meat along a chilling curve that ensures a
continuous decrease of the temperature. However, meat may be cut and boned during chilling in
accordance with Chapter V, section 4.
(b) During the chilling operations, there must be adequate ventilation to prevent condensation
on the surface of the meat.

2. Meat must attain the temperature specified in section 1 and remain at that temperature during
storage.

3. Meat must attain the temperature specified in section 1 before transport, and remain at that
temperature during transport. However, transport may also take place if the competent authority
so authorises to enable the production of specific products, provided that—
(a) such transport takes place in accordance with the requirements that the Regulatory
      Authority specifies in respect of transport from one given establishment to another; and
(b) the meat leaves the slaughterhouse, or a cutting room on the same site as the slaughter
      premises, immediately and transport takes no more than two hours.

4. Meat intended for freezing must be frozen without undue delay, taking into account if
necessary a stabilisation period before freezing.

5. Exposed meat must be stored and transported separately from packaged meat, unless stored
or transported at different times or in such a way that the packaging material and the manner of
                                               39

storage or transport cannot be a source of contamination for the meat.

                                        Chapter VIII
            Slaughter of domestic ungulates on premises other than slaughterhouse

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Part, food business operators may slaughter sheep, goats
and pigs on premises other than a slaughterhouse only with authorisation of the Regulatory
Authority and in compliance with the requirements prescribed by the authority from time to time.

                                   PART II
                      MEAT FROM POULTRY AND LAGOMORPHS

                                           Chapter I
                        Transport of live animals to the slaughterhouse

Food business operators transporting live animals to slaughterhouses must ensure compliance
with the following requirements:

1. During collection and transport, animals must be handled carefully without causing
unnecessary distress.

2. Animals showing symptoms of disease or originating in flocks known to be contaminated with
agents of public-health importance may only be transported to the slaughterhouse when
permitted by the Regulatory Authority.

3. Crates for delivering animals to the slaughterhouse and modules, where used, must be made
of non-corrodible material and be easy to clean and disinfect. Immediately after emptying and,
if necessary, before re-use, all equipment used for collecting and delivering live animals must be
cleaned, washed and disinfected.

                                         Chapter II
                               Requirements for slaughterhouses

Food business operators must ensure that the construction, layout and equipment of
slaughterhouses in which poultry or lagomorphs are slaughtered meet the following
requirements:

1. They must have a room or covered space for the reception of the animals and for their
inspection before slaughter.

2. To avoid contaminating meat, they must—
(a)     have a sufficient number of rooms, appropriate to the operations being carried out;
(b) have a separate room for evisceration and further dressing, including the addition of
      seasonings to whole poultry carcases, unless the Regulatory Authority authorises
      separation in time of these operations within a specific slaughterhouse on a case-by-case
      basis;
(c) ensure separation in space or time of the following operations:
        (i)    stunning and bleeding;
      (ii)     plucking or skinning, and any scalding; and
      (iii)    dispatching meat;
(d) have installations that prevent contact between the meat and the floors, walls and fixtures;
      and
                                               40

(e)   have slaughter lines (where operated) that are designed to allow a constant progress of the
      slaughter process and to avoid cross-contamination between the different parts of the
      slaughter line. If more than one slaughter line is operated in the same premises, there must
      be adequate separation of the lines to prevent cross-contamination.

3. They must have facilities for disinfecting tools with hot water supplied at not less than 82ºC
or an alternative system having an equivalent effect.

4. The equipment for washing hands used by the staff engaged in handling exposed meat must
have taps designed to prevent the spread of contamination.

5. There must be lockable facilities for the refrigerated storage of detained meat and separate
lockable facilities for the storage of meat declared unfit for human consumption.

6. There must be a separate place with appropriate facilities for the cleaning, washing and
disinfection of—
(a)     transport equipment such as crates; and
(b)     means of transport.

These places and facilities are not compulsory for item (b) if officially authorised places and
facilities exist nearby.

7. They must have an adequately equipped lockable facility or, if needed, room for the exclusive
use of the regulatory service.

                                        Chapter III
                                Requirements for cutting plants

1. Food business operators must ensure that cutting plants handling meat from poultry or
lagomorphs—
(a)    are constructed so as to avoid contamination of meat, in particular by—
     (i)       allowing constant progress of the operations; or
     (ii)      ensuring separation between the different production batches;
(b) have rooms for the separate storage of packaged and exposed meat, unless stored at
     different times or in such a way that the packaging material and the manner of storage
     cannot be a source of contamination for the meat;
(c) have cutting rooms equipped to ensure compliance with the requirements laid down in
     Chapter V;
(d) have equipment for washing hands used by staff handling exposed meat with taps designed
     to prevent the spread of contamination; and
(e) have facilities for disinfecting tools with hot water supplied at not less than 82ºC, or an
     alternative system having an equivalent effect.

2. If the following operations are undertaken in a cutting plant:
(a) the evisceration of geese and ducks reared for the production of "foie gras", which have
       been stunned, bled and plucked on the fattening farm; or
(b) the evisceration of delayed eviscerated poultry,
food business operators must ensure that separate rooms are available for that purpose.

                                          Chapter IV
                                       Slaughter hygiene
                                               41

Food business operators operating slaughterhouses in which poultry or lagomorphs are
slaughtered must ensure compliance with the following requirements:

1. A food business operator must not permit an animal intended to provide meat for sale for
human consumption to be slaughtered unless—
(a) he has given an authorised officer at least 48 hours’ notice of his intention to do so; or
(b) he has a written standing arrangement with an authorised officer to slaughter animals at an
      arranged time, and he is slaughtering at that time; or
(c) the animal is slaughtered in accordance with Chapter VI.

2. The occupier of a slaughterhouse and any person engaged in the movement of lairaging of
animals must ensure that—
(a) every animal is unloaded as soon as possible after its arrival and, if delay in unloading is
     unavoidable, it is protected from adverse weather conditions and is provided with adequate
     ventilation;
(b) when unloaded, every animal is protected from adverse weather conditions and is provided
     with adequate ventilation;
(c) if any animal has been subjected to high temperatures in humid weather, it is cooled by
     appropriate means;
(d) any animals which might injure each other on account of their species, sex, age or origin
     or for any other reason are kept and lairaged apart from each other;
(e) pending the slaughter or killing of any sick or disabled animal in the slaughterhouse, such
     animal is kept apart from any animal which is not sick or disabled.

3. After arrival in the slaughterhouse, the slaughter of the animals must not be unduly delayed.
However, if required for welfare reasons, animals must be given a resting period before
slaughter.

4. During slaughter, the operator of a slaughterhouse must ensure that an animal—
(a)    is brought or followed to the place of slaughter quietly; and
(b)    is adequately restrained so that it retains its composure and dignity; and
(c)    is slaughtered humanely; and
(d)    is released from its restraints as soon as possible after stunning; and
(e)    is bled efficiently as soon as it is suspended; and
(f)    commences dressing as soon as bleeding is completed; and
(g)    the above operations are not carried out in sight of another living animal.

5. (a) Meat from animals other than those referred to in item (b) must not be used for human
consumption if they die otherwise than by being slaughtered in the slaughterhouse.
(b) Only live animals intended for slaughter may be brought into the slaughter premises, with
the exception of delayed eviscerated poultry, geese and ducks reared for the production of "foie
gras" and birds that are not considered as domestic but which are farmed as domestic animals, if
slaughtered at the farm in accordance with Chapter VI.

6. Slaughterhouse operators must follow the instructions of the Regulatory Authority to ensure
that ante-mortem inspection is carried out under suitable conditions.

7. If establishments are approved for the slaughter of different animal species precautions must
be taken to prevent cross contamination by separation either in time or in space of the operations
carried out on the different species.

8. Animals brought into the slaughter room must be slaughtered without undue delay.
                                               42


9. Stunning, bleeding, skinning or plucking, evisceration and other dressing must be carried out
without undue delay in such a way that contamination of the meat is avoided. In particular,
measures must be taken to prevent the spillage of digestive tract contents during evisceration.

10. Slaughterhouse operators must follow the instructions of the Regulatory Authority to ensure
that the post-mortem inspection is carried out under suitable conditions, and in particular that
slaughtered animals can be inspected properly.

11. After post-mortem inspection—
(a) parts unfit for human consumption must be removed as soon as possible from the clean
     sector of the establishment;
(b) meat detained or declared unfit for human consumption and inedible by-products must not
     come into contact with meat declared fit for human consumption; and
(c) viscera or parts of viscera remaining in the carcass, except for the kidneys, must be
     removed entirely, if possible, and as soon as possible, unless otherwise authorised by the
     competent authority.

12. After inspection and evisceration, slaughtered animals must be cleaned and chilled to not
more than 4ºC as soon as possible, unless the meat is cut while warm.

13. When carcasses are subjected to an immersion chilling process, account must be taken of the
following:
(a) Every precaution must be taken to avoid contamination of carcasses, taking into account
parameters such as carcass weight, water temperature, volume and direction of water flow and
chilling time.
(b) Equipment must be entirely emptied, cleaned and disinfected whenever this is necessary and
at least once a day.

14. Sick or suspect animals, and animals slaughtered in application of disease eradication or
control programmes, must not be slaughtered in the establishment except when permitted by the
Regulatory Authority. In that event, slaughter must be performed under official supervision and
steps taken to prevent contamination; the premises must be cleaned and disinfected before being
used again.

                                          Chapter V
                          Hygiene during and after cutting and boning

Food business operators must ensure that cutting and boning of poultry’s and lagomorphs’ meat
takes place in accordance with the following requirements:

1. The work on meat must be organised in such a way as to prevent or minimise contamination.
To this end, food business operators must ensure in particular that—
(a)     meat intended for cutting is brought into the workrooms progressively as needed;
(b) during cutting, boning, trimming, slicing, dicing, wrapping and packaging, the temperature
      of the meat is maintained at not more than 4ºC by means of an ambient temperature of
      12ºC or an alternative system having an equivalent effect; and
(c) if the premises are approved for the cutting of meat of different animal species, precautions
      are taken to avoid cross-contamination, if necessary, by separation of the operations on the
      different species in either space or time.
                                                43

2. However, meat may be boned and cut prior to reaching the temperature referred to in section
1(b) when the cutting room is on the same site as the slaughter premises, provided that it is
transferred to the cutting room either—
(a)     directly from the slaughter premises; or
(b)     after a waiting period in a chilling or refrigerating room.

3. As soon as it is cut and, if appropriate, packaged, the meat must be chilled to the temperature
referred to in section 1(b).

4. Exposed meat must be stored and transported separately from packaged meat, unless stored
or transported at different times or in such a way that the packaging material and the manner of
storage or transport cannot be a source of contamination for the meat.

                                          Chapter VI
                        Slaughter on premises other than slaughterhouse

Food business operators may slaughter poultry referred to in Chapter IV, section 1(b), on
premises other than a slaughterhouse only with the authorisation of the Regulatory Authority and
in compliance with the following requirements:

1. The farm must undergo regular veterinary inspection.

2. The food business operator must inform the Regulatory Authority in advance of the date and
time of slaughter.

3. The holding must have facilities for concentrating the birds to allow an ante-mortem inspection
of the group to be made.

4. The holding must have premises suitable for the hygienic slaughter and further handling of
the birds.

5. Animal welfare requirements must be complied with.

6. In the case of poultry reared for the production of "foie gras", the uneviscerated birds must be
transported immediately and, if necessary, refrigerated to a slaughterhouse or cutting plant. They
must be eviscerated within 24 hours of slaughter under the supervision of the Food Authority.

7. Delayed eviscerated poultry obtained at the farm of production may be kept for up to 15 days
at a temperature of not more than 4ºC.


                            PART III
MINCED MEAT, MEAT PREPARATIONS AND MECHANICALLY SEPARATED MEAT
                             (MSM)

                                          Chapter I
                          Requirements for production establishments

Food business operators operating establishments producing minced meat, meat preparations or
MSM must ensure that they—
(a)    are constructed so as to avoid contamination of meat and products, in particular by—
     (i) allowing constant progress of the operations; or
                                               44

      (ii) ensuring separation between the different production batches;
(b)   have rooms for the separate storage of packaged and exposed meat and products, unless
      stored at different times or in such a way that the packaging material and the manner of
      storage cannot be a source of contamination for the meat or products;
(c)   have rooms equipped to ensure compliance with the temperature requirements laid down
      in Chapter III;
(d)   have equipment for washing hands used by staff handling exposed meat and products with
      taps designed to prevent the spread of contamination; and
(e)   have facilities for disinfecting tools with hot water supplied at not less than 82ºC, or an
      alternative system having an equivalent effect.

                                         Chapter II
                                 Requirements for raw material

Food business operators producing minced meat, meat preparations or MSM must ensure that
the raw materials used satisfy the following requirements:

1. The raw material used to prepare minced meat must meet the following requirements:
(a)     it must comply with the requirements for fresh meat;
(b)     it must derive from skeletal muscle, including adherent fatty tissues;
(c)     it must not derive from—
        (i)     scrap cuttings and scrap trimmings (other than whole muscle cuttings);
      (ii)      MSM;
      (iii)     meat containing bone fragments or skin; or
      (iv) meat of the head with the exception of the masseters, the non-muscular part of the
            linea alba, the region of the carpus and the tarsus, bone scrapings and the muscles of
            the diaphragm (unless the serosa has been removed).

2. The following raw material may be used to prepare meat preparations:
(a)     fresh meat;
(b)     meat meeting the requirements of section 1; and
(c) if the meat preparation is clearly not intended to be consumed without first undergoing
      heat treatment—
      (i) meat derived from the mincing or fragmentation of meat meeting the requirements
             of section 1 other than section 1(c)(i); and
      (ii) MSM meeting the requirements of Chapter III, section 3.

3. The raw material used to produce MSM must meet the following requirements:
(a)    it must comply with the requirements for fresh meat;
(b)    the following material must not be used to produce MSM:
     (i) for poultry, the feet, neckskin and head; and
     (ii) for other animals, the bones of the head, feet, tails, femur, tibia, fibula, humerus,
            radius and ulna.

                                          Chapter III
                              Hygiene during and after production

Food business operators producing minced meat, meat preparations or MSM must ensure
compliance with the following requirements:

1. The work on meat must be organised in such a way as to prevent or minimise contamination.
To this end, food business operators must ensure in particular that the meat used is—
                                                45

(a)   at a temperature of not more than 4ºC for poultry, 3ºC for offal and 7ºC for other meat; and
(b)   brought into the preparation room progressively as needed.

2. The following requirements apply to the production of minced meat and meat preparations:
(a) unless the Regulatory Authority authorises boning immediately before mincing, frozen or
      deep-frozen meat used for the preparation of minced meat or meat preparations must be
      boned before freezing. It may be stored only for a limited period.
(b) when prepared from chilled meat, minced meat must be prepared—
      (i)      in the case of poultry, within no more than 3 days of their slaughter;
      (ii) in the case of animal other than poultry, within no more than 6 days of their slaughter;
            or
      (iii) within no more than 15 days from the slaughter of the animals in the case of boned,
            vacuum-packed beef and veal.
(c) immediately after production, minced meat and meat preparations must be wrapped or
      packaged and be—
      (i) chilled to an internal temperature of not more than 2ºC for minced meat and 4°Cfor
            meat preparations; or
      (ii) frozen to an internal temperature of not more than -18°C.
These temperature conditions must be maintained during storage and transport.

3. The following requirements apply to the production and use of MSM produced using
techniques that do not alter the structure of the bones used in the production of MSM and the
calcium content of which is not significantly higher than that of minced meat:
(a) raw material for deboning from an on-site slaughterhouse must be no more than 7 days
      old; otherwise, raw material for deboning must be no more than 5 days old. However,
      poultry carcases must be no more than 3 days old;
(b) mechanical separation must take place immediately after deboning;
(c) if not used immediately after being obtained, MSM must be wrapped or packaged and then
      chilled to a temperature of no more than 2°C or frozen to an internal temperature of no
      more than -18°C. These temperature requirements must be maintained during storage and
      transport.

4. The following requirements apply to the production and use of MSM produced using
techniques other than those mentioned in section 3:
(a) raw material for deboning from an on-site slaughterhouse must be no more than seven days
      old; otherwise, raw material for deboning must be no more than 5 days old. However,
      poultry carcasses must be no more than three days old;
(b) if mechanical separation does not take place immediately after deboning the flesh-bearing
      bones must be stored and transported at a temperature of no more than 2°C or, if frozen, at
      a temperature of no more than -18°C;
(c) flesh-bearing bones obtained from frozen carcases must not be refrozen;
(d) if not used within one hour of being obtained, MSM must be chilled immediately to a
      temperature of not more than 2°C;
(e) if, after chilling, MSM is not processed within 24 hours, it must be frozen within 12 hours
      of production and reach an internal temperature of no more than -18°C within six hours;
(f) frozen MSM must be wrapped or packaged before storage or transport, must not be stored
      for more than three months and must be maintained at a temperature of not more than –
      18ºC during storage and transport;
(g) MSM may be used only to manufacture heat-treated meat products in establishments
      approved in accordance with this Regulation.

5. Minced meat, meat preparations and MSM must not be re-frozen after thawing.
                                               46


                                           Chapter IV
                                           Labelling

1. Packages intended for supply to the final consumer containing minced meat from poultry or
meat preparations containing MSM must bear a notice indicating that such products should be
cooked before consumption.

                                         PART IV
                                      MEAT PRODUCTS

                                           Chapter I
                                         Raw materials

1. Food business operators must ensure that the following items are not used in the preparation
of meat products:
(a)    genital organs of either female or male animals, except testicles;
(b)    urinary organs, except the kidneys and the bladder;
(c)    the cartilage of the larynx, the trachea and the extra-lobular bronchi;
(d)    eyes and eyelids;
(e)    the external auditory meatus;
(f)    horn tissue; and
(g) in poultry, the head – except the comb and the ears, the wattles and caruncles – the
      oesophagus, the crop, the intestines and the genital organs.

2. All meat, including minced meat and meat preparations, used to produce meat products must
meet the requirements of these regulations.

                                          Chapter II
                          Requirements for production establishments

Food business operators operating establishments producing meat products must ensure that
they—

(a)    are constructed so as to avoid contamination of meat and meat products, in particular
by—
      (i)       allowing constant progress of the operations; or
      (ii)      ensuring separation between the different production batches;
(b)   have rooms for the separate storage of packaged and exposed meat and meat products,
      unless stored at different times or in such a way that the packaging material and the manner
      of storage cannot be a source of contamination for the meat or meat products;
(c)   have equipment for washing hands used by staff handling exposed meat and products with
      taps designed to prevent the spread of contamination; and
(d)   have facilities for disinfecting tools with hot water supplied at not less than 82ºC, or an
      alternative system having an equivalent effect.

                                          Chapter III
                                         Heat treatment

The following requirements apply only to food placed on the market in hermetically sealed
containers:
                                               47

(a)   any heat treatment process used to process an unprocessed product or to process further a
      processed product is—
      (i) to raise every party of the product treated to a given temperature for a given period
            of time; and
      (ii) to prevent the product from becoming contaminated during the process;
(b)   to ensure that the process employed achieves the desired objectives, food business
      operators are to check regularly the main relevant parameters (particularly temperature,
      pressure, sealing and microbiology), including by the use of automatic devices;
(c)   the process used should conform to an internationally recognised standard (for example,
      pasteurisation, ultra-high temperature or sterilisation).

                                         Chapter IV
                             Hygiene during and after production

Food business operators producing meat products must ensure compliance with the following
requirements:
1. The work on meat must be organised in such a way as to prevent or minimise contamination.
To this end, food business operators must ensure in particular that the meat used is—
(a)     at a temperature of no more than 4ºC for poultry, 3ºC for offal and 7ºC for other meat;
and
(b)     brought into the preparation room progressively as needed.

2. Immediately after production, meat products must be wrapped or packaged and, unless the
processing, wrapping or packaging renders the meat product stable at ambient temperature, must
be—
(a)    chilled to an internal temperature of no more than 5°C; or
(b)    frozen to an internal temperature of no more than -18°C.
These temperature conditions must be maintained during storage and transport.

                                       PART V
                                EGGS AND EGG PRODUCTS

                                           Chapter I
                                             Eggs

1. Eggs must be kept at the producer's premises, effectively protected from shocks and out of
direct sunshine, clean, dry and free of extraneous odour until sold.

2. Eggs must be stored and transported at a temperature, preferably constant, that is best suited
to assure optimal conservation of their hygiene properties.

3. Eggs must be delivered to the consumer within a maximum time limit of 14 days of laying.

                                          Chapter II
                                         Egg products

A. REQUIREMENTS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS

Food business operators must ensure that establishments for the manufacture of egg products are
constructed, laid out and equipped so as to ensure separation of the following operations:
1.     washing, drying and disinfecting dirty eggs, where carried out;
2.     breaking eggs, collecting their contents and removing parts of shells and membranes; and
                                               48

3.     operations other than those referred to in sections 1 and 2.

B. RAW MATERIALS FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF EGG PRODUCTS

Food business operators must ensure that raw materials used to manufacture egg products
comply with the following requirements:

1. The shells of eggs used in the manufacture of egg products must be fully developed and contain
no breaks. However, cracked eggs may be used for the manufacture of egg products if the
establishment of production or a packing centre delivers them directly to a processing
establishment, where they must be broken as soon as possible.

2. Liquid egg obtained in an establishment approved for that purpose may be used as raw
material. Liquid egg must be obtained in accordance with the requirements of sections 1, 2, 3, 4
and 7 of Part C.

C. SPECIAL HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF EGG
PRODUCTS

Food business operators must ensure that all operations are carried out in such a way as to avoid
any contamination during production, handling and storage of egg products, in particular by
ensuring compliance with the following requirements.

1. Eggs must not be broken unless they are clean and dry.

2. Eggs must be broken in a manner that minimises contamination, in particular by ensuring
adequate separation from other operations. Cracked eggs must be processed as soon as possible.

3. Eggs other than those of hens, turkeys or guinea fowl must be handled and processed
separately. All equipment must be cleaned and disinfected before processing of hens', turkeys'
and guinea fowls' eggs is resumed.

4. Egg contents may not be obtained by the centrifuging or crushing of eggs, nor may
centrifuging be used to obtain the remains of egg whites from empty shells for human
consumption.

5. After breaking, each particle of the egg product must undergo processing as quickly as possible
to eliminate microbiological hazards or to reduce them to an acceptable level. A batch that has
been insufficiently processed may immediately undergo processing again in the same
establishment, if this processing renders it fit for human consumption. When a batch is found to
be unfit for human consumption, it must be denatured so as to ensure that it is not used for human
consumption.

6. Processing is not required for egg white intended for the manufacture of dried or crystallised
albumin destined subsequently to undergo heat treatment.

7. If processing is not carried out immediately after breaking, liquid egg must be stored either
frozen or at a temperature of not more than 4 °C. The storage period before processing at 4 °C
must not exceed 48 hours. However, these requirements do not apply to products to be de-
sugared, if de-sugaring process is performed as soon as possible.
                                                49

8. Products that have not been stabilised so as to be kept at room temperature must be cooled to
not more than 4 °C. Products for freezing must be frozen immediately after processing.

D. ANALYTICAL SPECIFICATIONS

1. The concentration of 3-OH-butyric acid must not exceed 10 mg/kg in the dry matter of the
unmodified egg product.

2. The lactic acid content of raw material used to manufacture egg products must not exceed
1g/kg of dry matter. However, for fermented products, this value must be the one recorded before
the fermentation process.

3. The quantity of eggshell remains, egg membranes and any other particles in the processed egg
product must not exceed 100 mg/kg of egg product.

E. LABELLING AND IDENTIFICATION MARKING

1. In addition to the general requirements for identification marking laid down in Part I of
Schedule II, consignments of egg products, destined not for retail but for use as an ingredient in
the manufacture of another product, must have a label giving the temperature at which the egg
products must be maintained and the period during which conservation may thus be assured.

2. In the case of liquid eggs, the label referred to in section 1 must also bear the words:
“non-pasteurised egg products - to be treated at place of destination” and indicate the date and
hour of breaking.

                                      PART VI
                            RAW MILK AND DAIRY PRODUCTS

                                           Chapter I
                                 Raw milk – Primary production

Food business operators producing or, as appropriate, collecting raw milk must ensure
compliance with the requirements laid down in this Chapter.

A. HEALTH REQUIREMENTS FOR RAW MILK PRODUCTION

1. Raw milk must come from animals—
(a) that do not show any symptoms of infectious diseases communicable to humans through
     milk;
(b) that are in a good general state of health, present no sign of disease that might result in the
     contamination of milk and, in particular, are not suffering from any infection of the genital
     tract with discharge, enteritis with diarrhoea and fever, or a recognisable inflammation of
     the udder;
(c) that do not have any udder wound likely to affect the milk;
(d) to which no unauthorised substances or products have been administered; and
(e) in respect of which, if authorised products or substances have been administered, the
     withdrawal periods prescribed for these products or substances have been observed.

2.(a) In particular, as regards brucellosis, raw milk must come from—
     (i) cows belonging to a herd which are free or officially free of brucellosis;
     (ii) sheep or goats belonging to a holding free or officially free of brucellosis;
                                                 50

      (iii) females of other species belonging, for species susceptible to brucellosis, to herds
            regularly checked for that disease under a control plan that the Regulatory Authority
            has approved.
(b)     As regards tuberculosis, raw milk must come from—
      (i) cows belonging to a herd which is officially free of tuberculosis; or
      (ii) females of other species belonging, for species susceptible to tuberculosis, to herds
            regularly checked for this disease under a control plan that the Regulatory Authority
            has approved.
(c)   If goats are kept together with cows, such goats must be inspected and tested for
      tuberculosis.

3. However, raw milk from animals that do not meet the requirements of section 2 may be used
with the authorisation of the Regulatory Authority—
(a) in the case of cows that do not show a positive reaction to tests for tuberculosis or
      brucellosis, nor any symptoms of these diseases, after having undergone a heat treatment
      such as to show a negative reaction to the phosphatase test;
(b) in the case of sheep or goats that do not show a positive reaction to tests for brucellosis, or
      which have been vaccinated against brucellosis as part of an approved eradication
      programme, and which do not show any symptom of that disease, either—
      (i) for the manufacture of cheese with a maturation period of at least two months; or
      (ii) after having undergone heat treatment such as to show a negative reaction to the
            phosphatase test; and
(c) in the case of females of other species that do not show a positive reaction to tests for
      tuberculosis or brucellosis, nor any symptoms of these diseases, but belong to a herd where
      brucellosis or tuberculosis has been detected after the checks referred to in section 2(a)(iii)
      or 2(b)(ii), if treated to ensure its safety.

4. Raw milk from any animal not complying with the requirements of sections 1 to 3, in
particular, any animal showing individually a positive reaction to the prophylactic tests vis-à-vis
tuberculosis, must not be used for human consumption.

5. The isolation of animals that are infected, or suspected of being infected, with any of the
diseases referred to in section 1 or 2 must be effective to avoid any adverse effect on other
animals' milk.

B. HYGIENE ON MILK PRODUCTION HOLDINGS

1. Requirements for premises and equipment

(a) Milking equipment, and premises where milk is stored, handled or cooled must be located
and constructed so as to limit the risk of contamination of milk.

(b) Premises for the storage of milk must be protected against vermin, have adequate separation
from premises where animals are housed and, if necessary to meet the requirements laid down
in Part 2, have suitable refrigeration equipment.

(c) Surfaces of equipment that are intended to come into contact with milk (utensils, containers,
tanks, etc. intended for milking, collection or transport) must be easy to clean and, if necessary,
disinfect and be maintained in a sound condition. This requires the use of smooth, washable and
non-toxic materials.
                                               51

(d) After use, such surfaces must be cleaned and, if necessary, disinfected. After each journey,
or after each series of journeys when the period of time between unloading and the following
loading is very short, but in all cases at least once a day, containers and tanks used for the
transport of raw milk must be cleaned and disinfected in an appropriate manner before re-use.

2. Hygiene during milking, collection and transport

(a)     Milking must be carried out hygienically, ensuring in particular—
      (i) that, before milking starts, the teats, udder and adjacent parts are clean;
      (ii) that milk from each animal is checked for organoleptic or physico-chemical
            abnormalities by the milker or a method achieving similar results and that milk
            presenting such abnormalities is not used for human consumption;
      (iii) that milk from animals showing clinical signs of udder disease is not used for human
            consumption otherwise than in accordance with the instructions of a veterinarian;
      (iv) the identification of animals undergoing medical treatment likely to transfer residues
            to the milk, and that milk obtained from such animals before the end of the prescribed
            withdrawal period is not used for human consumption; and
      (v) that teat dips or sprays are used only if the Regulatory Authority has approved them
            and in a manner that does not produce unacceptable residue levels in the milk.
(b)   Immediately after milking, milk must be held in a clean place designed and equipped to
      avoid contamination. It must be cooled immediately to not more than 8 °C in the case of
      daily collection, or not more than 6 °C if collection is not daily.

(c)   During transport the cold chain must be maintained and, on arrival at the establishment of
      destination, the temperature of the milk must not be more than 10ºC.

(d)   Food business operators need not comply with the temperature requirements laid down in
      sections 2 and 3 if the milk meets the criteria provided for in Part C and either—
      (i) the milk is processed within 2 hours of milking; or
      (ii) a higher temperature is necessary for technological reasons related to the
            manufacture of certain dairy products and the competent authority so authorises.

3. Staff hygiene

(a) Persons performing milking and/or handling raw milk must wear suitable clean clothes.

(b) Persons performing milking must maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness. Suitable
facilities must be available near the place of milking to enable persons performing milking and
handling raw milk to wash their hands and arms.

C. CRITERIA FOR RAW MILK

1. A representative number of samples of raw milk collected from milk production holdings
taken by random sampling must be checked for compliance with sections 2 and 3.

2. (a) Food business operators must initiate procedures to ensure that raw milk meets the
following criteria:
       (i)     for raw cows' milk:
                  Plate count at 30 °C (per ml)
                  Somatic cell count (per ml)
                  ≤ 100 000 (*)
                  ≤ 400 000 (**)
                                              52


       (ii)    for raw milk from other species:
               Plate count at 30 °C (per ml) ≤ 1 500 000 (*)

(b) However, if raw milk from species other than cows is intended for the manufacture of
products made with raw milk by a process that does not involve any heat treatment, food business
operators must take steps to ensure that the raw milk used meets the following criterion:

     Plate count at 30 °C (per ml) ≤ 500 000 (*)

(*) Rolling geometric average over a two-month period, with at least two samples per month.
(**) Rolling geometric average over a three-month period, with at least one sample per month,
unless the competent authority specifies another methodology to take account of seasonal
variations in production levels.

3. When raw milk fails to comply with section 2, the food business operator must inform the
Regulatory Authority and take measures to correct the situation.

                                         Chapter II
                           Requirements concerning dairy products

A. TEMPERATURE REQUIREMENTS

1. Food business operators must ensure that, upon acceptance at a processing establishment, milk
is quickly cooled to not more than 6 °C and kept at that temperature until processed.

2. However, food business operators may keep milk at a higher temperature if—
(a) processing begins immediately after milking, or within 4 hours of acceptance at the
     processing establishment; or
(b) the Regulatory Authority authorises a higher temperature for technological reasons
     concerning the manufacture of certain dairy products.

B. REQUIREMENTS FOR HEAT TREATMENT

1. When raw milk or dairy products undergo heat treatment, food business operators must ensure
that this satisfies the Food Authority sampling requirements.

2. When considering whether to subject raw milk to heat treatment, food business operators must
have regard to the procedures developed in accordance with the HACCP principles.

C. CRITERIA FOR RAW COWS' MILK

1. Food business operators manufacturing dairy products must initiate procedures to ensure that,
immediately before processing—
(a) raw cows' milk used to prepare dairy products has a plate count at 30ºC of less than 300 000
      per ml; and
(b) processed cows' milk used to prepare dairy products has a plate count at 30ºC of less than
      100 000 per ml.

2. When milk fails to meet the criteria laid down in section 1, the food business operator must
inform the Regulatory Authority and take measures to correct the situation.
                                               53

                                        Chapter III
                                   Wrapping and packaging

Sealing of consumer packages must be carried out immediately after filling in the establishment
where the last heat treatment of liquid dairy products takes place, by means of sealing devices
that prevent contamination. The sealing system must be designed in such a way that, after
opening, the evidence of its opening remains clear and easy to check.

                                           Chapter IV
                                           Labelling

1. Labelling must clearly show—
(a)     in the case of raw milk intended for direct human consumption, the words "raw milk";
(b) in the case of products made with raw milk, the manufacturing process for which does not
      include any heat treatment or any physical or chemical treatment, the words "made with
      raw milk".

2. The requirements of section 1 apply to products destined for retail trade. The term "labelling"
includes any packaging, document, notice, label, ring or collar accompanying or referring to such
products.

                                           Chapter V
                                     Identification marking

By way of derogation from the requirements of Part I of Schedule II, rather than indicating the
approval number of the establishment, the identification mark may include a reference to where
on the wrapping or packaging the approval number of the establishment is indicated.
                               __________________________
                                              54

                           FOOD SAFETY ORDINANCE, 2016

        FOOD SAFETY (GENERAL FOOD HYGIENE) REGULATIONS, 2017
                              (Section 7)

                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                     PART 1
                         PRELIMINARY AND INTERPRETATION

1.     Citation and commencement
2.     Interpretation
                                    PART 2
                    OBLIGATIONS ON FOOD BUSINESS OPERATOR

3.     General obligation
4.     General and specific requirements
5.     Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point principles
6.     Traceability
7.     Recall
8.     Durability labelling

                                         PART 3
                                     MISCELLANEOUS

9.    Official guides
10.   Amendment and revocation of legislation
Schedule 1: Primary Production
Schedule II: General Hygiene Requirements for all Food Business Operators
Schedule III: Parameters for Potable Water: Prescribed Concentrations and Values

                                   PART 1
                       PRELIMINARY AND INTERPRETATION

Citation and commencement

     1.       These Regulations may be cited as the Food Safety (General Food Hygiene)
Regulations, 2017, and come into force on 1st April 2017.

Interpretation

      2.       (1)     For the purposes of these Regulations, any word or expression to which a
meaning has been assigned in the Ordinance, or any other subsidiary legislation made under it,
bears the meaning so assigned, and—
“clean seawater” means natural, artificial or purified seawater or brackish water that does not
      contain micro-organisms, harmful substances or toxic marine plankton in quantities
      capable of directly or indirectly affecting the health quality of food;
                                               55

“clean water” means clean seawater and fresh water of a similar quality;
“contamination” means the presence or introduction of a hazard;
“establishment” means any unit of a food business;
“final consumer” means the ultimate consumer of food stuff who will not use the food
        as part of any food business operation or activity;
“food handler” means any person engaged in the handling of food for the purposes of a
        food business;
“food hygiene” means the measures and conditions necessary to control hazards and to
        ensure fitness for human consumption of a foodstuff taking into account its intended use;
“HACCP principles” means the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point principles
        referred to in regulation 5;
“hazard” means a biological, chemical or physical agent in, or condition of, food or feed
        with the potential to cause an adverse health effect;
“open food” means food not enclosed and protected in containers so as to exclude all
        risk of contamination;
“packaging” means the placing of one or more wrapped foodstuffs in a second
        container, and the latter container itself;
“potable water” means water meeting the minimum requirements on the quality of
        water intended for human consumption laid down in Schedule III;
“primary products” means products of primary production including products of the
        soil, of stock farming, of hunting and fishing;
“processed products” means foodstuffs resulting from the processing of unprocessed
        products and these products may contain ingredients that are necessary for their
        manufacture or to give them specific characteristics;
“unprocessed products” means foodstuffs that have not undergone processing, and includes
        products that have been divided, parted, severed, sliced, boned, minced, skinned, ground,
        cut, cleaned, trimmed, husked, milled, chilled, frozen, deep-frozen or thawed;
“wrapping” means the placing of a foodstuff in a wrapper or container in direct contact with
        the foodstuff concerned, and the wrapper or container itself.

        (2)     The terms ‘if necessary’, ‘if appropriate’, ‘adequate’ and ‘sufficient’ bear such
meaning so as to achieve the objective of these Regulations of achieving a high level of
protection for human health.

                                   PART 2
                   OBLIGATIONS ON FOOD BUSINESS OPERATOR

General obligation

      3.       Food business operators must ensure that all stages of production, processing
and distribution of food under their control satisfy the relevant hygiene requirements laid down
in these Regulations.

General and specific requirements

      4.       (1)     A food business operator carrying out primary production and any
associated operations listed in Schedule I must comply with the general hygiene provisions laid
down in that Schedule and any additional requirements provided for in the Food Safety (Products
of Animal Origin) Regulations which may also apply.

     (2)       All food business operators carrying out any stage of production, processing,
                                                 56

distribution or sale of food after those stages to which paragraph 1 applies, must comply with
the general hygiene requirements laid down in Schedule II and any additional
requirements provided for in the Food Safety (Products of Animal Origin) Regulations, 2017,
which may also apply.

      (3)       Food business operators may only import food which complies with the relevant
requirements of the Ordinance and subsidiary legislation made thereunder or with conditions
equivalent to it.

      (4)        Food business operators must give the Food Authority at least 3 days’ notice of
the importation of food by the submission of either health certificates, commercial invoices, bill
of lading, air freight document or any combination of these.

Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point principles

      5.       (1)    A food business operator must put in place, implement and maintain a
permanent procedure or procedures based on Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP)
principles and which must be commensurate with and reflect the nature, size and food safety risk
of the business.

      (2)       The HACCP principles referred to in paragraph (1) consist of the following:
      (a)   identifying any hazards that must be prevented, eliminated or reduced to acceptable
            levels;
      (b)   identifying the critical control points at the step or steps at which control is essential
            to prevent or eliminate a hazard or reduce it to acceptable levels;
      (c)   establishing critical limits at critical control point which separate acceptability form
            unacceptability for the prevention, elimination or reduction of identified hazards;
      (d)   establishing and implementing effective monitoring procedures at critical control
            points;
      (e)   establishing corrective actions when monitoring indicates that a critical control point
            is not under control;
      (f)   establishing procedures which shall be carried out regularly to verify that the
            measures outlined in items (a) to (e) are working effectively; and
      (g)   establishing documents and records commensurate with the nature and size of the
            food business to demonstrate the effective application of the measures outlined in
            paragraphs (a) to (f).

     (3)       Food business operators must review the procedure and make any necessary
changes to it whenever a modification is made in the product, process or any step.

      (4)       Food business operators must—
      (a)   provide the Food Authority with evidence of their compliance with paragraph (1);
      (b)   ensure that all documents and records describing the procedures are accurate and up
            to date at all times;
      (c)   retain all documents and records for an appropriate time as agreed with the Food
            Authority.

Traceability

      6.       Food and feed business operators must—
                                                 57

      (a)      be able to identify any person or business from whom they have been supplied with
               a food, a food-producing animal or any substance intended to be, or expected to be,
               incorporated into a food;
      (b)      be able to identify any other businesses to which their products have been supplied;
      (c)      have in place systems and procedures which allow for this information to be made
               available to the Food Authority; and
               (d) make this information available to the Food Authority on demand.

Recall

       7.     (1)     If a food business operator considers or has reason to believe that a food
which he has imported, produced, processed, manufactured, distributed or sold is not in
compliance with the food safety requirements, the food business operator must—
       (a) if the food has left the control of that initial food business operator—
              (i)     immediately initiate procedures to withdraw the food in question from
                      the market; and
              (ii)    inform the Food Authority about this;
       (b) if the product may have reached the consumer, the operator must—
              (i)     effectively and accurately inform the consumers of the reason for its
                      withdrawal; and
              (ii)    if necessary, recall from consumers products already supplied to them
                      when other measures are not sufficient to achieve a high level of health
                      protection; and
              (iii) inform the Food Authority about this.

         (2)      A food business operator must—
         (a)      immediately inform the Food Authority if the operator considers or has reason
                 to believe that a food which the operator has placed on the market may be
                 injurious to human health; and
         (b)      inform the Food Authority of the action taken to prevent risks to the final
                 consumer; and
         (c)      not prevent or discourage any person from co-operating, in accordance with the
                 requirements of the Ordinance, with the Food Authority if this may prevent,
                 reduce or eliminate a risk arising from the food.

      (3)      Food business operators must collaborate and co-operate with the Food Authority
      on any action taken to avoid or reduce risks posed by a food which they supply or have
      supplied.

Durability labelling

      8.        (1)    The Food business operator must ensure that any food ready for delivery
to the final consumer or a catering establishment is marked or labelled with—
      (a) the name of the food;
      (b) a list of ingredients and allergens;
      (c) subject to paragraph (3), the appropriate durability indication referred to in paragraph
             (2);
      (d) any special storage conditions or conditions of use;
      (e) instructions for use, if required;
      (f) the name or business name.

      (2)         For purposes of paragraph (1)(c), the appropriate durability indication means—
                                               58

     (a)   in the case of a food which, from the microbiological point of view, is highly
           perishable and in consequence likely after a short period to constitute a danger to
           health, a ‘use by’ date;
     (b)   for food other than that specified in paragraph (a), a minimum durability indicated
           by the words ‘best before’ followed by—
           (i) the date up to and including which the food can reasonably be expected to
                 retain its specific properties if properly stored; and
           (ii) any storage conditions which need to be observed if the food is to retain its
                 specific properties:
           Provided that the date in the indication of appropriate durability must be expressed
           in terms of a day, month and year in that order.

     (3)        The following foods need not be marked or labelled with an appropriate
durability indication:
     (a) Fresh fruit and vegetables (including potatoes but not including sprouting seeds,
             legume sprouts and similar products) which have not been peeled or cut into pieces;
     (b) wine, liqueur wine, sparkling wine, aromatised wine and any similar drink obtained
             from fruit other than grapes;
     (c) any drink with an alcoholic strength by volume of 10 per cent or more;
     (d) any flour, confectionery and bread which, given the nature of its content, is normally
             consumed within 24 hours of its preparation;
     (e) vinegar;
     (f) cooking and table salt;
     (g) solid sugar and products consisting almost solely of flavoured or coloured sugars;
     (h) chewing gums and similar products;
     (i) edible ices in individual portions.

      (4)     Food which is placed on the market or found to be offered for sale after the date
shown in a ‘use by’ durability marking relating to it may be certified under section 18(2) of the
Ordinance as not having been distributed in accordance with the regulations under section 7 of
the Ordinance and any food so certified fails to comply with food safety requirements.

     (5)      No person may remove or alter the durability indication of a food without
permission from the Food Authority.

                                         PART 3
                                     MISCELLANEOUS

Official guides

      9.      (1)      The Food Authority may adopt or develop official guides to good practice
for hygiene and for the application of HACCP principles.

      (2)       The guides under paragraph (1) may be adopted from existing guidance used
elsewhere or may be developed or adapted for St Helena and if these guides are so adopted, they
should be developed and disseminated by the Food Authority having regard to the relevant codes
of practice of Codex Alimentarius established by the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.

      (3)     Food Business Operators may obtain the guides referred to in paragraph (1)
from the Food Authority.
                                                59

Amendment and revocation of legislation

      10.      (1)    The following Regulations issued under the Public Health Ordinance,
Cap. 49, are revoked:
      (a) the Public Health (Food Hygiene) Regulations;
      (b) the Bakehouse Regulations; and
      (c) the Aerated Water Factory Regulations, Cap. 49.

     (2)        The Fish and Fish Products Regulations, 2011, are amended—
     (a)     by deleting the words “the Public Health Ordinance, Cap. 49” in regulation 3(4)
             and substituting “the Food Safety Ordinance, 2016” therefor;
      (b) by deleting regulation 16(2)(b) and substituting the following therefor:
                   “(b) the Senior Medical Officer/Clinical Director or an authorised officer
                   pursuant to section 18 of the Food Safety Ordinance, 2016”;
       (c) by deleting paragraph 1(a) of Part II of Schedule 3 and substituting the following
              therefor:
                   “(a) undergo an annual medical examination and possess a certificate of good
                   health issued by a medical officer in the form approved by the Senior
                   Medical Officer; and”;
      (d) by deleting the paragraph 4(a) of Part C of Schedule 8 and substituting the
            following therefor:
                   “(a) that persons handling fishery products undergo an annual medical
                   examination and possess a certificate of good health issued by a medical officer
                   in the form approved by the Senior Medical Officer; and”;
     (e) by deleting the reference to “section 54 of the Public Health Ordinance, Cap. 49” in
           paragraph 4 of Schedule 13 and substituting “section 18 of the Food Safety
           Ordinance, 2016” therefor.

                                         SCHEDULE I
                                        (Regulation 4(1)

                                 PRIMARY PRODUCTION

           General Hygiene Provisions for Primary Production and Associated Operations

1.     Scope

This Schedule applies to primary production and the following associated operations:
(a)    The transport, storage and handling of primary products at the place of production,
       provided that this does not substantially alter their nature;
(b)    the transport of live animals, if this is necessary to achieve the objectives of this
       Regulation; and
(c)    in the case of products of plant origin and wild game, transport operations to deliver
       primary products, the nature of which has not been substantially altered, from the place
       of production to an establishment.
                                                60

2.     Hygiene provisions

(1)      As far as possible, food business operators must ensure that primary products are
protected against contamination, having regard to any processing that primary products will
subsequently undergo.
(2)      The general duty laid down in subparagraph (1) is in addition to any requirement to
comply with legislative provisions relating to the control of hazards in primary production and
associated operations, including—
         (a) measures to control contamination arising from the air, soil, water, feed, fertilisers,
             veterinary medicinal products, plant protection products and biocides and the
             storage, handling and disposal of waste; and
        (b) measures relating to animal health and welfare and plant health that have
             implications for human health, including programmes for the monitoring and control
             of zoonoses and zoonotic agents.
(3) Food business operators rearing, harvesting or hunting animals or producing primary
      products of animal origin are to take adequate measures, as appropriate—
      (a) to keep any facilities used in connection with primary production and associated
             operations, including facilities used to store and handle feed, clean and, if necessary
             after cleaning, to disinfect them in an appropriate manner;
      (b) to keep clean and, if necessary after cleaning, to disinfect, in an appropriate manner,
             equipment, containers, crates, vehicles and vessels;
      (c) as far as possible to ensure the cleanliness of animals going to slaughter and, if
             necessary, production animals;
      (d) to use potable water, or clean water, whenever necessary to prevent contamination;
      (e) to ensure that staff handling foodstuffs are in good health and undergo training on
             health risks;
      (f) as far as possible to prevent animals and pests from causing contamination;
      (g) to store and handle waste and hazardous substances so as to prevent contamination;
      (h) to prevent the introduction and spread of contagious diseases transmissible to
             humans through food, including by taking precautionary measures when
             introducing new animals and reporting suspected outbreaks of such diseases to the
             competent authority;
      (i) to take account of the results of any relevant analyses carried out on samples taken
             from animals or other samples that have importance to human health; and
      (j) to use feed additives and veterinary medicinal products correctly, as required by the
             relevant legislation.
(4) Food business operators producing or harvesting plant products must take adequate
      measures, as appropriate—
      (a) to keep clean and, if necessary after cleaning, to disinfect, in an appropriate manner,
             facilities, equipment, containers, crates, vehicles and vessels;
      (b) to ensure, if necessary, hygienic production, transport and storage conditions for, and
             the cleanliness of plant products;
      (c) to use potable water, or clean water, whenever necessary to prevent
             contamination;
      (d) to ensure that staff handling foodstuffs are in good health and undergo training on
             health risks;
      (e) as far as possible to prevent animals and pests from causing contamination;
      (f) to store and handle wastes and hazardous substances so as to prevent
             contamination;
      (g) to take account of the results of any relevant analyses carried out on samples taken
             from plants or other samples that have importance to human health; and
     (h)      to use plant protection products and biocides correctly, as required by the relevant
                                               61

           legislation.
(5)    Food business operators are to take appropriate remedial action when informed of
problems identified during official controls.

3.     Record-keeping

(1)     Food business operators are to keep and retain records relating to measures put in place
to control hazards in an appropriate manner and for an appropriate period, commensurate with
the nature and size of the food business as determined by the Food Authority. Food business
operators are to make relevant information contained in these records available to the Regulatory
Authority and receiving food business operators on request.
(2)     Food business operators rearing animals or producing primary products of animal origin
must keep records on—
        (a)     the nature and origin of feed fed to the animals;
        (b)     veterinary medicinal products or other treatments administered to the animals,
                dates of administration and withdrawal periods;
        (c)     the occurrence of diseases that may affect the safety of products of animal
                origin;
        (d)     the results of any analyses carried out on samples taken from animals or other
                samples taken for diagnostic purposes, that have importance for human health;
                and
        (e)     any relevant reports on checks carried out on animals or products of animal
                origin.
(3)     Food business operators producing or harvesting plant products must keep records on—
        (a)     any use of plant protection products and biocides;
        (b)     any occurrence of pests or diseases that may affect the safety of products of
                 plant origin; and
        (c)      the results of any relevant analyses carried out on samples taken from plants or
                other samples that have importance to human health.
(4)     The food business operators may be assisted by other persons, such as veterinarians,
agronomists and farm technicians, with the keeping of records.
                                   ________________________

                                        SCHEDULE II
                                       (Regulation 4(2))

           GENERAL HYGIENE REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FOOD BUSINESS
                               OPERATORS
                       (Except when Schedule I applies)

     INTRODUCTION

     The Chapters in this Schedule apply as follows:
       Chapter I applies to all food premises, except premises to which Chapter III applies;
       Chapter II applies to all rooms where food is prepared, treated or processed, except
          dining areas and premises to which Chapter III applies;
       Chapter III applies to those premises listed in the heading to the Chapter and
       Chapter IV applies to all transportation.
       Chapters V to XI apply to all stages of production, processing and distribution of
          food.
                                               62

                                    CHAPTER I
     General requirements for food premises (other than those specified in Chapter III)

1.  All parts of a food premises must be kept clean and maintained in good repair and
    condition.
2. The layout, design, construction, siting and size of food premises must—
           (a)         permit adequate maintenance, cleaning and/or disinfection, avoid or
                       minimise air-borne contamination, and provide adequate working space
                       to allow for the hygienic performance of all operations;
           (b)         be such as to protect against the accumulation of dirt, contact with toxic
                       materials, the shedding of particles into food and the formation of
                       condensation or undesirable mould on surfaces;
           (c)         permit good food hygiene practices, including protection against
                       contamination and, in particular, pest control; and
           (c)         if necessary, provide suitable temperature-controlled handling and
                       storage conditions of sufficient capacity for maintaining foodstuffs at
                       appropriate temperatures and designed to allow those temperatures to be
                       monitored and, if necessary, recorded.
3. Food premises must have adequate natural and/or artificial lighting.
4.  There must be suitable and sufficient means of natural or mechanical ventilation.
    Mechanical airflow from a contaminated area to a clean area must be avoided. Ventilation
    systems must be so constructed as to enable filters and other parts requiring cleaning or
    replacement to be readily accessible. Such parts should be regularly cleaned commensurate
    with their use and the nature of the premises.
5.  An adequate number of flush lavatories must be available and connected to an effective
    drainage system. Lavatories must be kept clean and must not open directly into rooms in
    which food is handled.
6.  Sanitary conveniences must have adequate natural or mechanical ventilation. In every
    sanitary convenience there must be a clearly legible notice requesting users to wash their
    hands after using a sanitary convenience.
7.  An adequate number of washbasins must be available, if appropriate none hand operable,
    suitably located and designated for cleaning hands. Washbasins for cleaning hands must
    be provided with hot and cold running water, or hot water at a suitable controlled
    temperature, materials for cleaning hands and for hygienic drying. Washbasins for cleaning
    hands must be kept clean and the taps connected with them must be kept clean and in
    efficient working order. If necessary, the facilities for washing food must be separate from
    the hand-washing facility.
8.  Drainage facilities must be adequate for the purpose intended. They must be designed and
    constructed to avoid the risk of contamination. If drainage channels are fully or partially
    open, they must be so designed as to ensure that waste does not flow from a contaminated
    area towards or into a clean area, in particular an area where foods likely to present a high
    risk to the final consumer are handled.
9.  If necessary, adequate changing facilities for personnel must be provided, including
    sufficient cupboards or locker accommodation, if needed.
10. Cleaning agents and disinfectants must not be stored in areas where food is handled.

                                     CHAPTER II
Specific requirements in rooms where foodstuffs are prepared, treated or processed
(excluding dining areas and those premises specified in Chapter III)

1.   In rooms where food is prepared, treated or processed (excluding dining areas and those
     premises specified in Chapter III, but including rooms contained in means of transport) the
                                                63

       design and layout must permit good food hygiene practices, including protection against
       contamination between and during operations. In particular—
             (a) floor surfaces must be maintained in a sound condition and be easy to clean
                  and, if necessary, to disinfect. This will require the use of impervious, non-
                  absorbent, washable and non-toxic materials unless food business operators
                  can satisfy the Food Authority that other materials used are appropriate. If
                  appropriate, floors must allow adequate surface drainage;
             (b) wall surfaces must be maintained in a sound condition and be easy to clean
                  and, if necessary, to disinfect. This will require the use of impervious, non-
                  absorbent, washable and non-toxic materials and require a smooth surface up
                  to a height appropriate for the operations unless food business operators can
                  satisfy the Food Authority that other materials used are appropriate;
             (c) ceilings (or, if there are no ceilings, the interior surface of the roof) and
                  overhead fixtures must be constructed and finished so as to prevent the
                  accumulation of dirt and to reduce condensation, the growth of undesirable
                  mould and the shedding of particles;
             (d) windows and other openings must be constructed to prevent the accumulation
                  of dirt. Those which can be opened to the outside environment must be fitted,
                  if necessary, with insect-proof screens which can be easily removed for
                  cleaning. If open windows would result in contamination, windows must
                  remain closed and fixed during production;
             (e) doors must be easy to clean and, if necessary, to disinfect. This will require the
                  use of smooth and non-absorbent surfaces unless food business operators can
                  satisfy the Food Authority that other materials used are appropriate; and
             (f) surfaces (including surfaces of equipment) in areas where foods are handled
                  and in particular those in contact with food must be maintained in a sound
                  condition and be easy to clean and, if necessary, to disinfect. This will require
                  the use of smooth, washable corrosion-resistant and non-toxic materials, unless
                  food business operators can satisfy the Food Authority that other materials used
                  are appropriate.
2.      Adequate facilities must be provided, if necessary, for the cleaning, disinfecting and
storage of working utensils and equipment. These facilities must be constructed of corrosion-
resistant materials, be easy to clean and be kept clean. These facilities must have an adequate
supply of hot and cold water or water at a suitable controlled temperature.
3.      Adequate provision must be made, if necessary, for washing food. Every sink or other
such facility provided for the washing of food must have an adequate supply of hot and/or cold
potable water consistent with the requirements of Chapter VII and be kept clean and, if necessary,
disinfected.

                                         CHAPTER III
      Requirements for movable and/or temporary premises (such as marquees, market
      stalls, mobile sales vehicles), premises used primarily as a private dwelling-house but
      where foods are regularly prepared for placing on the market and vending machines

1.      Premises and vending machines must be, so far as is reasonably practicable, so sited,
designed, constructed and kept clean and maintained in good repair and condition as to avoid the
risk of contamination, in particular by animals and pests.2. In particular, if necessary—
            (a) appropriate facilities must be available to maintain adequate personal hygiene
                 (including facilities for the hygienic washing, drying and cleansing of hands,
                 hygienic sanitary arrangements and changing facilities);
            (b) surfaces in contact with food must be in a sound condition and be easy to clean
                 and, if necessary, to disinfect. This will require the use of smooth, washable,
                                                64

                 corrosion-resistant and non-toxic materials, unless food business operators can
                 satisfy the Food Authority that other materials used are appropriate;
           (c)   adequate provision must be made for the cleaning and, if necessary,
                 disinfecting of working utensils and equipment;
           (d)    if foodstuffs are cleaned as part of the food business operations,
                  adequate provision must be made for this to be undertaken hygienically;
           (e)    an adequate supply of hot and/or cold potable water must be available;
           (f)     adequate arrangements and/or facilities for the hygienic storage and disposal
                 of hazardous and/or inedible substances and waste (whether liquid or solid)
                 must be available;
           (g)     adequate facilities and/or arrangements for maintaining and monitoring
                 suitable food temperature conditions must be available;
           (h)     foodstuffs must be so placed as to avoid the risk of contamination so far as is
                 reasonably practicable.

                                         CHAPTER IV
                                          Transport

1.   Conveyances and/or containers used for transporting foodstuffs must be kept clean and
     maintained in good repair and condition to protect foodstuffs from contamination and, if
     necessary, must be designed and constructed to permit adequate cleaning and/or
     disinfection.
2.   Receptacles in vehicles and/or containers must not be used for transporting anything other
     than foodstuffs if this may result in contamination.
3.   If conveyances and/or containers are used for transporting anything in addition to
     foodstuffs or for transporting different foodstuffs at the same time, if necessary, there must
     be effective separation of products.
4    Bulk foodstuffs in liquid, granulate or powder form must be transported in receptacles
     and/or containers/tankers reserved for the transport of foodstuffs. Such containers must be
     marked in a clearly visible and indelible fashion, to show that they are used for the transport
     of foodstuffs, or must be marked ‘for foodstuffs only’.
5.   If conveyances and/or containers have been used for transporting anything other than
     foodstuffs or for transporting different foodstuffs, there must be effective cleaning between
     loads to avoid the risk of contamination.
6.   Foodstuffs in conveyances and/or containers must be so placed and protected as to
     minimise the risk of contamination.
7.   If necessary, conveyances and/or containers used for transporting foodstuffs must be
     capable of maintaining foodstuffs at appropriate temperatures and allow those
     temperatures to be monitored.

                                       CHAPTER V
                                 Equipment requirements

1.    All articles, fittings and equipment with which food comes into contact must—
              (a)       be effectively cleaned and, if necessary, disinfected. Cleaning and
                        disinfection must take place at a frequency sufficient to avoid any risk of
                        contamination;
              (b)        be so constructed, be of such materials and be kept in such good order,
                        repair and condition as to minimise any risk of contamination;
              (c)       with the exception of non-returnable containers and packaging, be so
                                               65

                     constructed, be of such materials and be kept in such good order, repair
                     and condition as to enable them to be kept clean and, if necessary, be
                     disinfected; and
             (d)     be installed in such a manner as to allow adequate cleaning of the
                     equipment and the surrounding area.
2.    If chemical additives have to be used to prevent corrosion of equipment and containers,
      they must be used in accordance with good Health and Safety practice.

                                        CHAPTER VI
                                        Food waste

1.   Food waste, non-edible by-products and other refuse must be removed from rooms where
     food is present as quickly as possible, so as to avoid their accumulation, and at least at the
     end of each working day or shift.
2.   Food waste, non-edible by-products and other refuse must be deposited in closable
     containers, unless food business operators can demonstrate to the Food Authority that other
     types of containers or evacuation systems used are appropriate. These containers should
     be appropriately labelled, of an appropriate construction, kept in sound condition, be easy
     to clean and, if necessary, to disinfect.
3.   Adequate provision must be made for the storage and disposal of food waste, non-edible
     by-products and other refuse. Refuse stores must be designed and managed in such a way
     as to enable them to be kept clean and, if necessary, free of animals and pests.
4.   All waste must be eliminated in a hygienic and environmentally friendly way in accordance
     with St Helena legislation, and must not constitute a direct or indirect source of
     contamination.

                                        CHAPTER VII
                                        Water supply

1.   There must be an adequate supply of potable water, which must be used whenever
     necessary to ensure that foodstuffs are not contaminated and—
                (a)     clean water may be used with whole fishery products;
                (b)     clean seawater may be used with live bivalve molluscs, echinoderms,
                        tunicates and marine gastropods; clean water may also be used for
                        external washing. When such water is used, adequate facilities must be
                        available for its supply.
2.   If non-potable water is used, for example for fire control, steam production, refrigeration
     and other similar purposes, it must circulate in a separate duly identified system. Non-
     potable water must not connect with, or allow reflux into, potable water systems.
3.   Recycled water used in processing or as an ingredient must not present a risk of
     contamination. It must be of the same standard as potable water, unless the competent
     authority is satisfied that the quality of the water cannot affect the wholesomeness of the
     foodstuff in its finished form.
4.   Ice which comes into contact with food or which may contaminate food must be made
     from potable water or, when used to chill whole fishery products, clean water. It must be
     made, handled and stored under conditions that protect it from contamination.
5.   Steam used directly in contact with food must not contain any substance that presents a
     hazard to health or is likely to contaminate the food.
6.   If heat treatment is applied to foodstuffs it must be ensured that any water used to cool the
     containers or food stuffs after heat treatment is not a source of contamination for the
     foodstuff.
                                               66

                                       CHAPTER VIII
                                       Personal hygiene

1.   Every person working in a food-handling area must maintain a high degree of personal
     cleanliness and must wear suitable, clean and, if necessary, protective clothing.
2.   No person may smoke or use any form of tobacco, including snuff, while working in a
     food handling area or handling open food.
3.   Food handlers must refrain from eating, drinking and/or spitting while working in a food
     handling area or handling open food.
4.   Food handlers must keep any open cut or abrasion on any exposed part of his or her person
     covered with a conspicuously coloured waterproof dressing.
5.   A person suffering from cold or flu like symptoms or being a carrier of a disease likely to
     be transmitted through food or afflicted, for example, with infected wounds, skin
     infections, sores or diarrhoea must not be permitted to handle food or enter any food-
     handling area in any capacity if there is any likelihood of direct or indirect contamination,
     and—
               (a)    any person so affected and employed in a food business who is likely to
                      come into contact with food must report immediately the illness or
                      symptoms, and if possible their causes, to the food business operator;
               (b)    the food business operator must inform the Food Authority of the actions
                      taken to prevent transmission of the disease.
6.   If the Food Authority has any reason to believe that a food handler is suffering from cold
     or flu like symptoms, or is a carrier of a disease likely to be transmitted through food or is
     afflicted, for example, with infected wounds, skin infections, sores or diarrhoea, an
     authorised officer may require that food handler to submit to a medical examination by a
     medical officer, and—
               (a)    the medical officer must issue a certificate stating whether the person is
                      fit or unfit to come into contact with food;
               (b)    the food handler must cease handling food during the process of medical
                      examination, including the time required for processing of any specimens;
                      and
               (c)    if the certificate states the person is unfit to handle food that person must
                      cease work until he or she has obtained a certificate of good health from
                      a medical officer.

                                      CHAPTER IX
                             Provisions applicable to foodstuffs

1.   A food business operator must not accept raw materials or ingredients, other than live
     animals, or any other material used in processing products, if they are known to be, or
     might reasonably be expected to be, contaminated with parasites, pathogenic
     microorganisms or toxic, decomposed or contain foreign substances to such an extent that,
     even after the food business operator had hygienically applied normal sorting and/or
     preparatory or processing procedures, the final product would be unfit for human
     consumption.
2.   Raw materials and all ingredients stored in a food business must be kept in appropriate
     conditions designed to prevent harmful deterioration and protect them from contamination.
3.   At all stages of production, processing and distribution, food must be protected against any
     contamination likely to render the food unfit for human consumption, injurious to health
     or contaminated in such a way that it would be unreasonable to expect it to be consumed
     in that state.
                                                67

4.   Adequate procedures must be in place to control pests. Adequate procedures must also be
     in place to prevent domestic animals from having access to places where food is prepared,
     handled or stored (or, if the Food Authority so permits or authorise in special cases, to
     prevent such access from resulting in contamination).
5.   Raw materials, ingredients, intermediate products and finished products likely to support
     the reproduction of pathogenic micro-organisms or the formation of toxins must not be
     kept at temperatures that might result in a risk to health and the following requirements
     apply:
           (a)          Chill Holding Requirements:
                   (i) Any food which is likely to support the growth of pathogenic micro-
                         organisms or the formation of toxins held in a food premises which does
                         not require approval under the Food Safety (Products of Animal Origin)
                         Regulations must be kept at or below 50C, but if the food is for service
                         or on display for sale it may be held above 50C for a single period, not
                         exceeding 4 hours.
                  (ii) Any food which is likely to support the growth of pathogenic micro-
                         organisms or the formation of toxins which is held in an establishment
                         requiring approval under the Food Safety (Products of Animal Origin)
                         Regulations must comply with the chill holding requirements of that
                         Regulation.
                  (iii) The cold chain must not be interrupted; however, limited periods outside
                         temperature control are permitted to accommodate the practicalities of
                         handling during preparation, transport and storage, of food, provided that
                         it does not result in a risk to health.
           (b)          Hot Holding Requirements:
                  (i) Food in a food premises which has been cooked or re-heated, which is
                         for service or on display for sale and which is likely to support the growth
                         of pathogenic micro-organisms or the formation of toxins must be kept
                         at or above 630C, but if the food is for service or on display for sale it
                         may be held below 630C for a single period, not exceeding 2 hours.
6.   Food businesses manufacturing, handling and wrapping processed foodstuffs must have
     suitable rooms, large enough for the separate storage of raw materials from processed
     material and sufficient separate refrigerated storage.
7.   If foodstuffs are to be held or served at chilled temperatures they must be cooled as quickly
     as possible following the heat-processing stage, or final preparation stage if no heat process
     is applied, to a temperature which does not result in a risk to health.
8.   The thawing of foodstuffs must be undertaken in such a way as to minimise the risk of
     growth of pathogenic microorganisms or the formation of toxins in the foods. During
     thawing, foods must be subjected to temperatures that would not result in a risk to health.
     If run-off liquid from the thawing process is likely to present a risk to health, the liquid
     must be adequately drained. Following thawing, food must be handled in such a manner
     as to minimise the risk of growth of pathogenic microorganisms or the formation of toxins.
9.   Hazardous and/or inedible substances, including animal feed, must be adequately labelled
     and stored in separate and secure containers.

                                       CHAPTER X
            Provisions applicable to the wrapping and packaging of foodstuffs

1.   Material used for wrapping and packaging must not be a source of contamination.
2.   Wrapping materials must be stored in such a manner that they are not exposed to a risk of
     contamination.
                                                68

3.   Wrapping and packaging operations must be carried out so as to avoid contamination of
     the products. If appropriate and in particular in the case of cans and glass jars, the integrity
     of the container’s construction and its cleanliness must be assured. Any container not
     originally used for food should not be used for storage of food.
4.   Wrapping and packaging material re-used for foodstuffs must be easy to clean and, if
     necessary, to disinfect.

                                         CHAPTER XI
                                           Training

1.    Food business operators must ensure—
            (a)     that food handlers are supervised and instructed and/or trained in food
                    hygiene matters commensurate with their work activity;
            (b)     that those responsible for the development and maintenance of the
                    procedure referred to in Regulation 5(1) have received adequate training
                    in the application of the HACCP principles; and
            (c)     compliance with any requirements of the law concerning training
                    programmes for persons working in certain food sectors.

                                        SCHEDULE III
                                         (Regulation 2)

                       PARAMETERS FOR POTABLE WATER
                   PRESCRIBED CONCENTRATIONS AND VALUES

TABLE A
MICROBIOLOGICAL PARAMETERS
                            Concentration or Value                  Units of             Point of
  Item        Name
                                 maximum)                         Measurement          compliance
 1.    Enterococci          0                                   number/100ml         Consumers' taps
       Escherichia coli (E.
 2.                         0                                   number/100ml         Consumers' taps
       coli)


TABLE B
CHEMICAL PARAMETERS
Item Name                                            Concentration or         Units of         Point of
                                                     Value maximum)           Measurement      compliance

1.                   Acrylamide                      0.10                     μg/l             (i)


2.                   Antimony                        5.0                      μgSb/l           Consumers'
                                                                                               taps

3.                   Arsenic                         10                       μgAs/l           Consumers'
                                                                                               taps

4.                   Benzene                         1.0                      μg/l             Consumers'
                                                                                               taps

5.                   Benzo(a)pyrene                  0.010                    μg/l             Consumers'
                                                                                               taps
                             69

6.    Boron                       1.0     mgB/l      Consumers'
                                                     taps

7.    Bromate                     10      μgBrO3/l   Consumers'
                                                     taps

8.    Cadmium                     5.0     μgCd/l     Consumers'
                                                     taps

9.    Chromium                    50      μgCr/l     Consumers'
                                                     taps

10.   Copper                      2.0     mgCu/l     Consumers'
                                                     taps

11.   Cyanide                     50      μgCN/l     Consumers'
                                                     taps

12.   1, 2 dichloroethane         3.0     μg/l       Consumers'
                                                     taps




13.   Epichlorohydrin             0.10    μg/l       (i)


14.   Fluoride                    1.5     mgF/l      Consumers'
                                                     taps

15.   Lead                        10      μgPb/l     Consumers'
                                                     taps

16.   Mercury                     1.0     μgHg/l     Consumers'
                                                     taps

17.   Nickel                      20      μgNi/l     Consumers'
                                                     taps

18.   Nitrate                     50      mgNO3/l    Consumers'
                                                     taps

19.   Nitrite                     0.50    mgNO2/l    Consumers'
                                                     taps

                                  0.10               Treatment
                                                     works

20.   Pesticides (ii)(iii)

      Aldrin                      0.030   μg/l       Consumers'
                                                     taps
      Dieldrin

      Heptachlor

      Heptachlor epoxide
                                                   70

                         other pesticides               0.10                   μg/l             Consumers'
                                                                                                taps

    21.                  Pesticides: Total (iv)         0.50                   μg/l             Consumers'
                                                                                                taps

    22.                  Polycyclic aromatic            0.10                   μg/l             Consumers'
                         hydrocarbons (v)                                                       taps

    23.                  Selenium                       10                     μgSe/l           Consumers'
                                                                                                taps

    24.                  Tetrachloroethene and          10                     μg/l             Consumers'
                         Trichloroethene (vi)                                                   taps

    25.                  Trihalomethanes: Total (vii) 100                      μg/l             Consumers'
                                                                                                taps

    26.                  Vinyl chloride                 0.50                   μg/l             (i)




    Notes:
    (i)

    The parametric value refers to the residual monomer concentration in the water as calculated according
    to specifications of the maximum release from the corresponding polymer in contact with the water.
    This is controlled by product specification.
    (ii)

    Pesticides means:
    organic insecticides
    organic herbicides
    organic fungicides
    organic nematocides
    organic ascaricides
    organic algicides
    organic rodenticides
    organic slimicides
    related products (inter alia, growth regulators) and their relevant metabolites, degradation and
    reaction products.
    (iii)

    The parametric value applies to each individual pesticide.
    (iv)

    “Pesticides: Total” means the sum of the concentrations of the individual pesticides detected and
    quantified in the monitoring procedure.
    (v)

    The specified compounds are:
   benzo(b)fluoranthene
   benzo(k)fluoranthene
   benzo(ghi)perylene
   indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene.
                                                  71

    The parametric value applies to the sum of the concentrations of the individual compounds detected and
    quantified in the monitoring process.
    (vi)

    The parametric value applies to the sum of the concentrations of the individual compounds detected and
    quantified in the monitoring process.
    (vii)

    The specified compounds are:
   chloroform
   bromoform
   dibromochloromethane
   bromodichloromethane.
    The parametric value applies to the sum of the concentrations of the individual compounds detected and
    quantified in the monitoring process.



    PART II: NATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
                              Concentration              or Units                of Point               of
     Item          Parameters Value                         Measurement             compliance
                              (maximum)
     1.                       200                            μgAl/l                  Consumers’ taps
     Aluminium
     2.            Colour     20                             mg/l Pt/Co              Consumers’ taps

       3.
       4.   Iron                     200                     μgFe/l                     Consumers’
                                                                                        taps
       5.   Manganese                50                      μgMn/l                     Consumers’
                                                                                        taps
       6.              Odour         Acceptable to consumers and no abnormal          Consumers’ taps
                                     change
       7.   Sodium                  200                  mgNa/l                         Consumers’
                                                                                        taps
       8.              Taste         Acceptable to consumers and no abnormal          Consumers’ taps
                                     change
       9.   Tetrachloromethane       3                    μg/l                           Consumers’
                                                                                         taps
       10. Turbidity                 4                     NTU                           Consumers’
                                                                                         taps
72
