                                     TRISTAN DA CUNHA

                         REVISED EDITION OF THE LAWS, 2017

                   CONSTITUTIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW

           ISLAND COUNCIL (TRISTAN DA CUNHA) ORDINANCE, 19851

Ordinance T1 of 1985
In force 3 April 1985

Amended by Ordinances T1 of 1988, T1 of 1990, T2 of 1994, T3 of 1994, T1 of 1997, T1 of
2008 and L.N.1/2009

Subsidiary legislation:
INCOME TAX AND MEDICAL CONTRIBUTIONS ORDER, 2008
Made under section 16
In force on 1 June 2008

TRISTAN DA CUNHA BY-LAWS

Calf Pen By-Laws

Children’s Playground By-Laws

Disposal of Animal Carcasses By-Laws

Dogs Control By-Laws
   (Made in 1983 and replaced by the Dogs (Control) By-Laws of 1 May 1995 and 7
   November 2003)

Donkeys Limitation By-Laws

Education By-Laws
   (Amended by the Education (Amendment) By-Laws, 2008)

Fire Prevention By-Laws

Fishing Boats Safety By-Laws

Library By-Laws

1
  Under section 10 of the Revised Edition of the Laws Ordinance, 1999 this text is authoritative and is
the sole authentic edition in respect of the law contained in it as at 1 November 2017.
                                           2



Litter By-Laws
    (Amended by the Litter (Amendment) By- Laws, 2008)

Livestock Limitation By-Laws

Livestock, Forestry and Poultry By-Laws

Motor Cycle Prohibition By-Laws

Prince Philip Hall Management By-Laws

Public Health By-Laws

Public Holidays By-Laws

School Children Medical and Dental By-Laws

Slaughterhouse By-Laws

Wood Control By-Laws

Youth Club By-Laws
                                  __________________

          ISLAND COUNCIL (TRISTAN DA CUNHA) ORDINANCE, 1985

1.      Short title
2.      Interpretation
3.      Island Council
4.      Qualification for election as members
5.      Disqualifications for elected membership
6.      Tenure of office of members of Council
7.      Rules governing elections to Island Council
8.      Deputy President of Council
9.      Chief Islander
10.     Ballot Papers
11.     Administrator to consult Island Council
12.     Meetings of and proceedings in Council, etc
13.     Voting
14.     Direction to public officers to assist Council
15.     Power of Administrator to make By-Laws
16.     Power of Administrator to levy and assess taxes
17.     Rules of Procedure of Council
18.     Council committees
19.     Functions of Council committees
20.     Rules of Procedure etc. of Council committees
21.     Reports of committees
22.     Oaths by members of Council or committees thereof
23.     Dissolution of Council
                                              3


24.    General election
Schedule 1 – Election Rules
Schedule 2 – Ballot papers
Schedule 3 – By-laws powers
Schedule 4 – Rules of Procedure of Committees
Schedule 5 – Forms of Oaths and Affirmations

AN ORDINANCE to provide for a Council and for the making of By-Laws and levying of
taxes in Tristan da Cunha.

Short title
      1.      This Ordinance may be cited as the Island Council (Tristan da Cunha)
Ordinance, 1985.

Interpretation
       2.       (1)   In this Ordinance and in all By-Laws made under it, unless inconsistent
with the context—
“by-law” means any by-law made in accordance with this Ordinance;
“election offence” means any offence specified in rule 5 (1) of Schedule 1 to this Ordinance;
“general election” means a general election of the elected members of the Island Council;
“Island Council” or “Council” means the Council established by section 3(1) of this
       Ordinance;
“official seal” means an official seal of Tristan da Cunha;
“public office” means an office of emolument in the public service;
“public officer” means the holder of any public office, and includes a person appointed to
       act in any public office;
“the public service” means the service of the Crown in a civil capacity in respect of the
       government of Tristan da Cunha.
       (2) For the purposes of this Ordinance, a person is not considered to hold a public
office by reason only that the person is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in
respect of service under the Crown.

Island Council
       3.       (1)    There is to be a council in and for Tristan da Cunha, to be known as
“the Island Council”, having such functions as are conferred on it by this Ordinance or by any
other law in force in Tristan da Cunha.
       (2)      The Island Council is to consist of—
               (a)     the Administrator, who is to be the President;
               (b)     3 appointed members, who must be British Overseas Territories
                       Citizens, British Overseas Citizens or British Citizens and are to be
                       appointed by the Administrator in writing under his or her hand and the
                       official seal and with the prior approval of the Governor; and
               (c)     8 elected members, of whom not less than one must be a woman, who
                       must be persons qualified for election in accordance with this
                       Ordinance, and elected in the manner provided by the Rules for the
                       time being in force in Schedule 1 to this Ordinance.
                                                4


Qualification for election as members
    4.        Subject to the next following section, a person is qualified to be elected as a
member of the Council if, and is not so qualified unless the person—
             (a)     has attained the age of 21 years; and
             (b)     is a British Overseas Territories Citizen, British Overseas Citizen or
                     British Citizen who:
                     (i)     was born in Tristan da Cunha; or
                     (ii)    is domiciled in Tristan da Cunha and has been resident there for
                             a period of at least 3 years immediately preceding the date of
                             his or her nomination for election.

Disqualifications for elected membership
      5.        No person is qualified to be elected as a member of the Council—
               (a)     who has been convicted of an election offence and is disqualified from
                       voting as an elector; or
               (b)     who holds, or is acting in, any public office designated by the
                       Administrator for the purpose of this section.

Tenure of office of members of Council
       6.       (1)     The seat of an appointed member or of an elected member of the
Council becomes vacant—
               (a)      in the event of the member’s death or if the member resigns his or her
                        seat by writing under his or hand addressed to the Administrator; or
               (b)      on a dissolution of the Council.
       (2)      The seat of an appointed member of the Council also becomes vacant if the
member’s appointment is revoked by the Administrator by writing under his or her hand and
with the prior approval of the Governor.
       (3)      The seat of an elected member of the Council also becomes vacant if any
circumstance arises that, if the person were not a member of the Council, would cause him or
her not to be qualified for election to the Council under section 5.

Rules governing elections to Island Council
       7.      (1)    The qualifications and disqualifications of persons to be electors, the
preparation and publication of a register or list of electors, the nomination of candidates for
election as members of the Council and the method and conduct of an election are as
provided by the Rules for the time being in force in Schedule 1 to this Ordinance.
       (2)     With the prior approval of the Governor by Order, the Administrator may
revoke, vary or amend the Rules in Schedule 1 to this Ordinance.

Deputy President of Council
       8.       (1)    When the Council first meets after any general election and before it
proceeds to the despatch of any other business, it must elect a person to be Deputy President
of the Council; and if the office of Deputy President falls vacant at any time before the next
dissolution of the Council, the Council may, if it thinks fit, elect another person to that office.
       (2)      The Deputy President must be elected from among the members of the
Council other than the Chief Islander.
                                              5


      (3)      In respect of any election of a person to be Deputy President, every member of
the Council present at the meeting is entitled to vote:
      Provided that where 2 or more persons equally receive the greatest number of votes the
Administrator or other member presiding has and must exercise a casting vote.

Chief Islander
       9.       (1)     The Administrator must appoint, as occasion may require, a person to
be Chief Islander.
       (2)      The person appointed must that person who at the election has declared
himself or herself willing to act as Chief Islander and who receives the greatest number of
votes for Chief Islander out of the declared candidates for that post:
       Provided that where 2 or more of the declared candidates equally receive the greatest
number of votes, the Administrator must as soon as reasonably practicable hold a further
ballot of the electorate, to determine which of the tied candidates is to be elected Chief
Islander, and the candidate that receives the greatest number of votes at such election must be
so appointed.
       (3)      The office of a person appointed as Chief Islander under subsection (2),
without affecting vacation of that office for any other cause, becomes vacant upon the
dissolution of Council next after such appointment, or at any time upon the holder of that
office submitting his or her resignation in writing to the Administrator.
       (4)      Whenever a vacancy arises under subsection (3), the Administrator must
appoint as Chief Islander that elected member of Council—
               (i) who received the next greatest number of votes at the election held under
                    the proviso to subsection (2); or, if there is no such person -
              (ii) who received the next greatest number of votes cast for the position of
                   Chief Islander at the general election.
       (5)     Any appointment by the Administrator of a person to be Chief Islander must
be in writing under his or her hand and the official seal.
       (6)     The Chief Islander takes precedence in Tristan da Cunha after the
Administrator and is, by virtue of the office, the Island Council leader.

Ballot Papers
     10.       (1)    Ballot papers and their counterfoils must be in the form set out in
Schedule 2 to this Ordinance.
     (2)       Every ballot paper must—
              (a)     be capable of being folded;
              (b)     contain a list of candidates described as in their respective nomination
                      papers and arranged alphabetically in the order of their surnames, and,
                      if there are 2 or more candidates with the same surname, of their other
                      names; and
              (c)     contain a list of candidates for the position of Chief Islander described
                      and arranged as for candidates in the preceding paragraph.

Administrator to consult Island Council
      11.     (1)     The Administrator must consult with the Island Council in the exercise
of all powers relating to the government of Tristan da Cunha conferred upon the
Administrator by any law for the time being in force in Tristan da Cunha except—
             (a)      in the exercise of any power conferred upon the Administrator by any
                      provision of section 3(2)(b), section 5(2), section 6(2), section 7(2),
                                                6


                        section 18(1), (2)(a) and (c), (3)(c),(4) or section 23(1) of this
                        Ordinance; or
                (b)     in the exercise of any power that in the Administrator’s opinion relates
                        to defence, external affairs, internal security, the police, the public
                        service or labour relations.
        (2)      The Administrator is not obliged to consult with the Council in any case which
is, in his or her opinion, too unimportant to require the advice of the Council or in which, in
his or her opinion, the urgency of the matter requires the Administrator to act before the
Council can be consulted.
        (3)      In any case in which the Administrator is required by subsection (1) of this
section to consult the Council, the Administrator may, if he or she thinks it is right to do so,
act against the advice given to him or her by the Council.

Meetings of and proceedings in Council, etc
       12.      (1)    The Council must not be summoned to meet except by the
Administrator, and notice of such meetings must, subject to section 17, be given by notice
affixed to the public notice board at the Office of the Administrator.
       (2)      A meeting of the Council must be held as soon as practicable after the holding
of any general election and thereafter so far as practicable the Council must meet at intervals
of not less than once in every 3 months and, in any event as soon as practicable after the
expiration of any such period.
      (3)       The Administrator or, in his or her absence, the Deputy President, or in their
absence a member of the Council elected by the Council for that meeting, must preside at
every meeting of the Council.
      (4)      If the office of Deputy President is vacant, subsection (3) applies as if a person
holding that office were absent.
      (5)      The quorum of the Council is 6 members in addition to the person presiding
and no business except that of adjournment is to be transacted at a meeting of the Council
unless a quorum is present.
      (6)      The Island Council is not disqualified for the transaction of business by reason
only of any vacancy in its membership.

Voting
       13.    (1)    All questions proposed for decision at any meeting of the Council must
be determined by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting.
       (2)     Subject to section 8(3), neither the Administrator nor the Deputy President
when presiding in the Administrator’s absence nor other member of the Council when
presiding in their absence has an original vote at any proceedings of the Council but, if upon
any question before the Council the votes are equally divided, the Administrator or, as the
case may be, the Deputy President or other member presiding has, but need not exercise, a
casting vote.

Direction to public officers to assist Council
       14.      The Administrator may direct any public officer to attend any meeting of the
Council, notwithstanding that such officer is not a member of the Council, if in the opinion of
the Administrator the business before the Council renders the presence of such officer
desirable; and such officer is entitled to take part in the proceedings of the Council relating to
the matters in respect of which he or she was directed to attend as if he or she were a member
of the Council, but does not have the right to vote.
                                               7


Power of Administrator to make By-Laws
       15.      (1)    Subject to subsection (9), the Administrator may make By-Laws to
have the force of law in Tristan da Cunha or any part of it for or with respect to any matter
that is included in Schedule 3 to this Ordinance and with respect to any matter incidental to
any matter so included.
       (2)      The Administrator may in making any by-law under this section prescribe the
fine with which a contravention of it is punishable, but such fine must not exceed for any one
offence the sum of £250 or, in the case of a continuing offence, the sum of £20 for every day
during which such offence is continued.
       (3)      Any contravention of any by-law may be heard and dealt with in a summary
way by a Magistrate or Justice of the Peace, and if any forfeiture, penalty, due, sum of
money, or expenses imposed or made payable under this Ordinance is not immediately paid,
the Magistrate or Justice of the Peace may order the levying thereof by distress and sale.
       (4)      The Administrator must submit a draft of any proposed by-law to the Island
Council for their consideration and advice before making any by-law under this section.
       (5)      Every by-law made by the Administrator under this section must be published
by being affixed to the public notice board at the Office of the Administrator and comes into
force on the date on which it is so published:
      Provided that—
             (a)     the Administrator may in the by-law or by notice published at the same
                     time as the by-law prescribe that the by-law or any provision of it
                     comes into force on a date after such publication in which event the
                     by-law or provision comes into force on the date so prescribed; and
              (b)       different dates may be prescribed in relation to different provisions of
                        the by-law and such provisions come into force accordingly on the
                        different dates so prescribed.
        (6)     Upon the publication in accordance with subsection (5) of any by-law, the
Administrator must as soon as practicable transmit to the Governor a copy of the by-law
certified by the Administrator to be a true copy of it and notice of the date of publication and
of the date on which the by-law is to come into force or, if different dates have been
prescribed in relation to different provisions of the by-law, such dates:
        Provided that the validity of any by-law is not affected by the non-transmission of the
certified copy of the by-law to the Governor.
       (7)      A copy of every by-law must be available for public inspection during office
hours at the Office of the Administrator.
        (8)      The production of a copy of any by-law purporting to be certified by the
Administrator to be a true copy of a by-law for the time being in force is evidence of the by-
law and of the due making of the by-law and of its being in force.
        (9)      If any by-law made under this section is inconsistent with any enactment by
the Governor and for the time being in force in Tristan da Cunha, that enactment, to the
extent of the inconsistency, prevails over the by-law.
       (10)      The Governor may within 12 months of a by-law made under this section
taking effect revoke or amend the by-law by notice published in accordance with subsection
(5).
       (11)      A notice given by the Governor in accordance with subsection (10) has effect
as if it were a by-law properly made by the Administrator under this section.
                                              8


Power of Administrator to levy and assess taxes
       16.     (1)        The Administrator may with the approval of the Governor and after
obtaining the advice of the Island Council levy and assess general or specific taxes for the
purpose of meeting expenditure incurred in furtherance of—
              (a)      the matters in respect of which the Administrator may make By-Laws
                       under this Ordinance; and
              (b)      the general purpose of this Ordinance.
      (2)      A tax levied under this section is payable—
              (a)      by such person, persons or class of persons; and
              (b)      in such amount; and
               (c)     at such place; and
               (d)     at such intervals,
as is specified by the Administrator in a notice published by the Administrator and affixed to
the public notice board at the Office of the Administrator.
       (3)      A tax payable by a person in accordance with this section is a debt due to the
Crown and may be sued for by the Administrator in any court of competent jurisdiction.

Rules of Procedure of Council
      17.     (1)    The regulation and conduct of the proceedings of the Island Council
and the despatch of its business are to be as provided in the Rules of Procedure of the
Council.
      (2)    Subject to the approval of the Governor, the Administrator may by order
make, amend or revoke Rules of Procedure for the purposes of subsection (1).

Council committees
       18.      (1)     Subject to this section and to sections 19, 20, 21 and 22, the
Administrator may, by directions in writing, establish one or more committees of the Island
Council for such general or special purposes as aree prescribed by such directions, and may
from time to time revoke or amend any such directions.
       (2)      A committee of the Council, other than any committee appointed to deal with
finance and general purposes must consist of—
               (a)      the Administrator, or such person as the Administrator may appoint
                        from among the members of the Council or from among persons who
                        are not members, as Chair;
               (b)      3 persons elected by the members of the Council; and
               (c)      2 persons appointed by the Administrator.
      (3)       If a committee is appointed to be a Finance and General Purpose Committee it
must consist of—
               (a)      the Administrator, as Chair;
               (b)      the Chief Islander; and
               (c)      every person who is the Chair of a committee of the Council or, if any
                        such person is not a member of the Council, a person appointed by the
                        Administrator from among those members of that committee who are
                        members of the Council.
      (4)     The Administrator may at any time by writing under his or her hand revoke
the appointment of an appointed member of a committee of the Council.
                                               9


      (5)      A member of any committee appointed or elected from among the members of
the Council must vacate his or her seat as a member of the committee if he or she ceases to be
a member of the Council for any reason other than a dissolution of the Council, and must also
vacate his or her seat as a member of the committee on the date when the Council first meets
following a general election.

Functions of Council committees
       19.     In relation to any committee of the Council, without affecting any other
provision of this Ordinance requiring the Administrator to obtain the advice of the committee,
the Administrator must refer any matter concerning any purpose for which the committee was
established to the committee for their consideration and advice and the committee must
advise the Administrator accordingly, but the Administrator is not bound to act in accordance
with the advice of the committee.

Rules of Procedure etc. of Council committees
       20.      (1)     The regulation and conduct of the proceedings of any committee of the
Council and the despatch of its business are to be as provided in the Rules of Procedure set
out in Schedule 4 to this Ordinance.
       (2)      The Administrator may revoke, vary or amend any of the Rules of Procedure
for the time being in force.

Reports of committees
       21.     (1)     Subject to subsections (2) and (3), any committee of the Council must,
at such times and either in writing or orally as determined by the Council, report to the
Council on the exercise by the committee of its functions in respect of all matters entrusted to
the committee.
      (2)      With respect to any matter on which the Administrator has consulted and
obtained the advice of any committee, the Administrator may, if in his or her judgement it is
desirable so to do, exercise his or her powers in respect of such matter prior to the report of
the committee on it to the Council.
      (3)      Subsection (2) does not apply where the matter is the estimates of the revenues
and expenditure of Tristan da Cunha for any financial year or is one in respect of which the
approval of the Council is required by, or under, this Ordinance or any other enactment.

Oaths by members of Council or committees thereof

       22.       (1)     No appointed or elected member of the Council shall be permitted to
take part in the proceedings of the Council (other than proceedings necessary for the purposes
of this subsection) until he has made and subscribed before the Council—
          an oath or affirmation for the due execution of his office in the form set out in
                                Schedule 5 to this Ordinance; and
      (b)        an oath of secrecy in the form set out in Schedule 5 to this Ordinance:
            Provided that the election of a Deputy President of the Council may take place
            before the members of the Council have made such oath or affirmation.

     (2)      Before a person who, not being an appointed or an elected member of the
  Council, has been appointed as the Chair or other member of a committee of the Council
under paragraph (a) or (c) of section 18(2) may assume the functions of the office of Chair or
    other member, he or she must make before the Administrator, or some other person
                      authorised by the Administrator for the purpose—
       an oath or affirmation for the due execution of the office in the form set out in
                               Schedule 5 to this Ordinance; and
                                              10


       (a)     an oath of secrecy in the form set out in Schedule 5 to this Ordinance.

Dissolution of Council
      23.       (1)   Subject to the approval of the Governor, the Administrator may at any
time dissolve the Council.
      (2)       The Administrator must dissolve the Council—
               (a)    unless the Governor otherwise directs - at the expiration of 3 years
                      from the date the Council first meets after the last dissolution of the
                      Council; or
               (b)    on a date, whether before or after the expiration of the period of 3
                      years referred to in paragraph (a) that the Governor directs.
       (3)      Every dissolution of the Council must be by notice given by the Administrator
in writing under his or her hand and the official seal and affixed to the public notice board at
the Office of the Administrator.

General election
       24.      A general election must be held within one month of every dissolution of the
Council, as appointed by the Administrator by notice in writing under his or her hand and the
official seal and affixed to the public notice board at the Office of the Administrator.

                                       SCHEDULE 1
                                      (Sections 3 and 7)

             RULES GOVERNING ELECTIONS TO ISLAND COUNCIL
       1.       All persons of or over 18 years of age resident on Tristan da Cunha are
qualified to be electors and to vote. A person is considered “resident” only if he or she has
been born on the Island or has lived there for an aggregate period of at least 3 years before
the date of the election.
       2.       (1)     Each year the head of every house on the Island must submit to the
Administrator on or before the 15th October a list showing the names of all persons of or
over 18 years of age living in the house. The list must indicate those persons who are over 21
years of age.
       (2)      A list of all persons qualified to be electors must be prepared from the lists
submitted, and the list so prepared is, subject to the proviso to this sub-rule, the list of
registered voters (hereinafter referred to as the “electors”) and must be published in the place
the Administrator directs not later than 22nd October in each year:
        Provided that on the day preceding the date fixed for the receipt of nominations under
rule 4 (2) the Administrator must add to the list of electors the names of all persons who have
attained the age of 18 years and are otherwise qualified to be electors, and must indicate on
the list of electors those persons who have attained the age of 21 years, since the immediately
preceding 15th October.
        3.       The date of any general election to the Council must be fixed by the
Administrator, in accordance with section 24 of the Ordinance.
        4.       The method and conduct of elections is as follows—
        (1)      The Administrator must give notice in writing under his or her hand and the
official seal of the date fixed for the election at least one calendar month before the date.
        (2)      The Administrator must appoint a public officer to be Presiding Officer at the
election who must fix a date and place for receipt of nominations, which must not be more
than 21 days or less than 14 days before the date fixed for holding the election.
                                                 11


      (3)       (a)      The nomination of any person qualified to be an elected member of the
                         Council must be made in writing to the Presiding Officer by 2 electors
                         and must bear the signature of the person nominated as consent to
                         nomination. No elector may nominate more than 8 candidates.
                (b)      In the event that no candidates are nominated or the number of
                         candidates nominated is less than the number of seats prescribed for
                         elected members (that is to say, 8 elected members of whom not less
                         than one must be a woman), the retiring councillors are deemed to
                         have been duly nominated, excepting any such councillor who signifies
                         in writing his or her unwillingness to serve, and they must be declared
                         to have been returned unopposed or, as the case may be, a poll must be
                         held in respect of any seat not filled.
       (4)       A list of persons nominated must be published on the day following the date
fixed for receipt of nominations.
       (5)       If not more than 8 candidates are nominated and at least one of those
candidates is a female candidate, they must be returned unopposed. In any other case, a poll
must be taken on the date fixed for the election between the hours of 8 a.m. and 6 p.m.
       (6)       All persons voting as electors must do so in person except that in respect of
any elector who is unable through physical incapacity to go to the polling station or who is
blind or makes an oral declaration of inability to read, the Presiding Officer must cast the
vote of such elector if requested by him or her so to do, in which case the Presiding Officer
must cast the vote in the manner directed by the elector; and all other electors must obtain
from the Presiding Officer a ballot paper bearing the names of candidates, and in some
convenient secret place in the place fixed by the Presiding Officer as a polling station each
voter must mark an X against the names of not more than 8 candidates. On completion of
marking, the elector must fold the ballot paper and place it in the locked ballot box provided.
Before handing a ballot paper to an elector, the Presiding Officer must mark his or her name
in the register and stamp the ballot paper with the official mark.
      (7)        (a)     At 6 p.m. on the day of the poll, the poll must be closed. The Presiding
                         Officer must then count the votes. Any ballot paper bearing any mark
                         other than the official mark or more than 8 crosses is invalid.
                (b)      The 8 candidates who obtain the greatest number of votes validly cast
                         must be declared elected provided that at least one of them is a female
                         candidate. If no female candidate is included among such 8 candidates,
                         the first 7 only must be declared elected and the eighth seat must be
                         filled by the female candidate who has obtained the greatest number of
                         votes validly cast irrespective of her position in the ballot in relation to
                         the remaining male candidates, and she must be declared elected. If no
                         female candidate is included among the nominated candidates, a by-
                         election must be held to fill the eighth seat and, in respect of such by-
                         election, a female candidate or candidates only may be nominated and
                         a poll must be taken only if more than one such candidate is
                         nominated.
                (c)      The Presiding Officer must certify the result to the Administrator in a
                         list showing the total votes validly cast for each candidate. This list
                         must be countersigned by 2 other persons present at the counting of the
                         votes.
                (d)      If 2 or more candidates receive the same number of votes validly cast,
                         the Administrator may determine the result in his or her discretion by a
                         casting vote, or may determine by lot which of those candidates is
                         deemed to be elected.
                                              12


       (8)      The results of the election, signed by the Administrator, must be posted on the
public notice board at the Office of the Administrator as soon as possible after the counting of
votes is completed.
       5.       (1)    A person commits an election offence if, without lawful authority or
excuse—
               (a)     the person enters more than one ballot paper or uses the ballot paper of
                       another person; or
               (b)     the person prevents another person from exercising his or her right to
                       vote; or
               (c)     by force, threat or bribery the person induces or attempts to induce
                       another person to vote for any particular candidate or group of
                       candidates; or
              (d)      by inducing another person by force or threat to reveal how he or she
                       has voted or by any other act, the person infringes the secrecy of the
                       ballot.
       (2)     Any person convicted of an offence under paragraph (1) the immediately
preceding paragraph is liable to a fine not exceeding £50 and to be disqualified from voting
for a period not exceeding 3 years.

                                    SCHEDULE 2
                                     (Section 10)
                              BALLOT PAPER
                         ISLAND COUNCIL ELECTION



   No……………            ADAMS, John Peter
   …
   Ballot Paper       BROWN, Peter Anthony
                      BUCKLEY, Sylvia Jean
                      CLINGHAM, John Oswald
                      EDWARDS, Barbara Jane
                      HENRY, Margaret Louise
                      JOHN, Robert Alexander
                      KNIPE, Edwin Charles
                      LEO, Peter Robert
   Elector’s Serial   MORRIS, William Patrick
   No……………            PRIOR, James
   …
                      YARROW, Basil Andrew

                          CHIEF ISLANDER

                              Ballot Paper

                      ADAMS, John Peter
                                             13


                   CLINGHAM, John Oswald
                   MORRIS, William Patrick
                   PRIOR, James




                                       SCHEDULE 3
                                        (Section 15)

            MATTERS WHICH MAY BE THE SUBJECT OF BY-LAWS

Health
         (a) Sanitation and cleanliness, including the control and supervision of privies,
             cess-pools, septic tanks and other sewage purification plants;
         (b) the seizure, collection, removal and disposal of unwholesome flesh, fish, or
             other provisions or of rubbish, night-soil, trade or garden refuse or other filth;
         (c) the control, destruction and licensing of dogs and cats;
         (d) the control of vermin;
         (e) public health and medical services, the supply of medical equipment and drugs
             and medicines (including the provision of such equipment, drugs and
             medicines by the Government for the use of the public) and the prevention and
             control of infections and contagious diseases;
         (f) the control, regulation, restriction or prohibition of the importation into Tristan
             da Cunha, or of the movement or use after importation, of plants and animals
             whether alive or dead, which are or may be diseased or which may carry
             disease and the destruction of such plants and animals at the time of or after
             importation.

Works
         (g) The use to which particular areas of land may be put, the construction of pens
             or folds, the erection of buildings and the enclosure of land;
         (h) the drainage of storm water and of refuse water;
         (i) the construction, maintenance and cleaning of roads;
         (j) the supply of water, including the control and supervision of wells, water-tanks
             and cisterns;
         (k) the establishment, care and maintenance of cemeteries, including the
             prohibition of burials other than in specific localities;
         (l) the performing of public work.

Amenities
         (m) The planting of trees;
         (n) public holidays.

Administration
         (o) The provision, use and maintenance of public property;
                                              14


            (p) the provision, use and maintenance of a public school, attendance at, and the
                general management of, such school;
            (q) the levy, assessment, payment and collection of general or specific taxes
                referred to in section 16 of the Ordinance.

General
            (r) The prevention and abatement of nuisances;
            (s) the control of livestock, including branding or marking and the recording of
                brands and marks;
            (t) all other matters necessary for or conductive to the public safety, health or
                convenience, as to the Administrator shall seem fit;
            (u) any other matter which the Governor may from time to time declare by notice
                published in the Gazette.

                                       SCHEDULE 4
                                        (Section 20)

            RULES OF PROCEDURE OF COMMITTEES OF THE COUNCIL

Application
       1.       These Rules apply to all Committees of the Council.

Time and place of meetings
       2.     A Committee must meet at times and places the Chair directs. Except in an
emergency, not less than 2 clear days’ notice must be given of any meeting. Notice of the
meeting must be sent to each member of the Committee by the Committee Secretary.

Members may requisition meeting
      3.       (1)     Any 3 or more members of a Committee may requisition a meeting by
giving notice of their request to the Chair in writing. The notice must be signed by all the
members requisitioning the meeting and must state the business to be considered. The Chair
must call a meeting of the Committee as soon as practicable after the receipt of such notice.
      (2)      At a meeting of a Committee requisitioned under this rule no business is to be
considered other than that stated in the notice requisitioning the meeting.

Agenda
      4.      (1)    The Chair in consultation with the Administrator must decide the
Agenda for the meeting (other than a meeting requisitioned under rule 3) and a copy of the
agenda paper must be sent to each member together with the notice of the meeting.
      (2)     No other business, unless the Chair judges it urgent, may be brought before
the meeting.

Presiding in Committee
     5.       (1)     The Chair must, so far as is practicable, preside at meetings of a
Committee.
     (2)      In the absence of the Chair, there must preside at the meeting a member, being
a member of the Island Council, that the Administrator selects from among them.
                                              15


Quorum
      6.     The quorum of a Committee is 3 members and no business except that of
adjournment may be transacted at a meeting of a Committee unless a quorum is present.

Minutes
       7.       (1)     Minutes of a meeting of a Committee must be drawn up and entered in
a book kept for that purpose and must be signed at the same or any subsequent meeting of the
Committee by the Chair or other person presiding at the meeting.
       (2)      Minutes may be challenged only on accuracy and before they are signed.
       (3)      Copies of the minutes must be sent to the Administrator and to each member
of the Island Council. If, however, the Chair considers that on account of their confidential
nature distribution of the minutes to persons other than members of the Committee should be
withheld, the Chair must withhold such distribution until he or she has obtained the directions
of the Administrator.

Questions to be decided by majority vote
      8.       All questions for the decision of a Committee must be determined by the
majority of the votes of the members present and voting.

Method of Voting
       9.     (1)     Voting is by show of hands. If when the result is declared at least 2
members so require, a roll call must be taken of the members present and the individual votes
must be listed in the minutes. If the roll call differs from the show of hands, the roll call
prevails.
      (2)       The Chair or other member presiding has an original vote and, in the event of
an equality of votes, has and must exercise a casting vote.

Pecuniary interest
      10.     A member who has any pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, in any matter
under consideration by a Committee must, as soon as practicable after such business is
entered upon, disclose the fact and must not take part in the discussion of, or vote on, that
matter.

Position of Committee in relation to staff of Government Departments
       11.    If the Administrator has charged a Committee with responsibility for advising
the Administrator on matters relating to any Department of the Government, the discussion of
any matter relating to the appointment, promotion or disciplining of the staff of such
Department, or their management, remuneration or conditions of service, is out of order. It is,
nevertheless, within the competence of a Committee to consider matters relating to the
methods of working and the training of such staff, and the numbers and grades of staff
required.

Privacy of documents, etc.
       12.     If any document submitted for the consideration of a Committee is marked
“Secret” or “Confidential” or “In Confidence” its contents must in no circumstances be
communicated to or divulged to any member of the public, nor may such document be
alluded to in conversation with any person, other than a member of the Committee. This rule
applies equally to confidential information orally imparted to a Committee.
                                               16


Officials may be invited to assist Committee
       13.      The Administrator may direct any public officer to attend a meeting of a
Committee, even if the officer is not a member of the Committee, if in the Administrator’s
opinion the business before the Committee renders the presence of such officer desirable; and
the officer is entitled to take part in the proceedings of the Committee relating to the matters
in respect of which he or she was directed to attend as if the officer were a member of the
Committee but does not have the right to vote.

Matters which are the responsibility of more than one Committee
       14.       (1)    Where the business before a Committee touches upon any matter for
which some other Council Committee is responsible, the Committee must not proceed to a
decision on such business until such other Committee has been informed of the matter and its
views on it, if any, have been received and considered.
       (2)      It is open to such Committees, if their respective Chairs so agree, to hold a
joint meeting to consider any such matter. At any joint meeting the Chair of the Committee in
which the business originated must preside.
       (3)      In the event of 2 or more Committees being unable to resolve any point of
difference, the matter must be referred to the Administrator for directions.

Chair may act on Committee’s behalf between meetings
      15.       Between meetings of a Committee, the Administrator may consult the Chair of
the Committee on matters which are of a routine nature or will not admit of delay. The Chair
must report all such action at the next meeting of the Committee.

                                          SCHEDULE 5
                                           (Section 22)

                          FORMS OF OATH AND AFFIRMATION

Oath for due execution of office

I ..........……………...........………. do swear that I will well and truly serve Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her Heirs and Successors, in the office of (here insert the
description of the office). So help me God.

Affirmation for due execution of office

I .....................………..………... do solemnly and sincerely affirm and declare that I will well
and truly serve Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her Heirs and Successors, in the
office of (here insert the description of the office).

Oath of secrecy

I …………………………………… do swear that except with the authority of the
Administrator, I will not directly or indirectly reveal the business or proceedings of the Island
Council or the nature or contents of any document communicated to me as a member of the
Council or as member of any committee of the Council, or any matter coming to my
knowledge in my capacity as a member of the Council or of such committee, and that in all
things I will be a true and faithful Councillor or committee member. So help me God.
                                     _____________________
                                            17


         ISLAND COUNCIL (TRISTAN DA CUNHA) ORDINANCE, 1985

         INCOME TAX AND MEDICAL CONTRIBUTIONS ORDER, 2008
                            (Section 16)

                                TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                        PART I
                                     PRELIMINARY

1.    Citation and commencement
2.    Interpretation

                                    PART II
                             LEVYING OF INCOME TAX

3.    Income Tax
4.    Taxable Income
5.    Tax rates
6.    Exempt income

                                    PART III
                             MEDICAL CONTRIBUTIONS

7.    Levying of medical contributions
8.    Exemption from medical contributions

                             PART IV
         PAYMENT AND ASSESSMENT OF TAX AND CONTRIBUTIONS

9.    Payment of tax and medical contribution
10.   Annual calculation
11.   Administrator to make assessment
12.   Payment of outstanding amount and refund
13.   Additional or revised assessments

                                   PART V
                       OBJECTION AND APPEAL PROVISIONS

14.   Objection against assessment
15.   Appeals against assessments

                                PART VI
              INFORMATION, NOTICES AND BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS

16.   Notices and returns
17.   Books of account
18.   Signature and service of notices

                                         PART VII
                                              18


                                 TRUSTEES AND AGENTS

19.    Trustees of incapacitated persons
20.    Manager of bodies of persons
21.    Indemnification of representative
22.    Deceased persons

                                      PART VIII
                               OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

23.    Failure to furnish a return or information
24.    Penalty for non-payment of income tax or medical contribution
25.    False statements and returns
26.    Administrator may remit tax or contribution

SCHEDULE 1
Part A - Income From Employment
Part B - Profits of a Trade or Business
Part C - Non-Permissible Deductions

SCHEDULE 2
Part A - Tax and contribution table
PART B - Deduction calculation for June
PART C - Deduction calculation for December
PART D - Calculation of medical contribution
PART E - Calculation of monthly tax and medical contribution payments in respect of
profits

                                         PART I
                                      PRELIMINARY

Citation and commencement

       1.     (1)     This Order may be cited as the Income Tax and Medical Contributions
Order, 2008, and, subject to subparagraph (2), come into operation on 1 June 2008.

      (2)      The following provisions come into operation on 1 January 2009:
      (a)      paragraphs 4(1)(b), 5(b) and 7(3)(c);
      (b)      Part B of Schedule 1 (and the reference in paragraph 7(3)(a) to Part B); and
      (b)      Note 5 and Part E of Schedule 2.

Interpretation

      2.        In this Order, unless the context otherwise requires—
“employment” includes any work performed or services rendered under a contract for
       services;
“permanent resident” means a person who is domiciled on Tristan da Cunha and who has
       been resident on the island for at least 5 years;
“resident” means a person who is or will be resident in Tristan da Cunha for a period of at
       least 4 months during the relevant year of assessment;
                                             19


“taxable income” has the meaning given in paragraph 4;
“year of assessment” means the period of 12 months commencing on the first day of
      January in any year: Provided that the first year of assessment under this Order in
      respect of income earned from employment means the period of 6 months
      commencing on 1 June 2008.

                                     PART II
                              LEVYING OF INCOME TAX

Income Tax

     3.         (1)   There is to be charged, levied and collected in accordance with this
Order, a tax to be known as Income Tax.

      (2)     Subject to this Order, income tax is payable in respect of every year of
assessment upon the taxable income of any person for that year.

Taxable Income

     4.        The taxable income of a person in respect of any year of assessment—
     (a)   from or in respect of any employment or office as referred to in Part A of
           Schedule 1 - is the total amount of the person’s income arising in or derived from
           Tristan da Cunha during that year of assessment, as determined in accordance
           with Schedule 1; and
     (b) from carrying on any trade, business, profession or vocation referred to in Part B
           of Schedule 1 - is the total amount of the person’s income arising in or derived
           from Tristan da Cunha during that year of assessment, as determined in
           accordance with Schedule 1,
reduced in each case by the amount of the medical contribution payable in respect of such
income in that year under paragraph 7.

Tax rates

       5.    Income tax is to be charged at the following rates:
     (a) in respect of income derived from employment referred to in paragraph 4(a),
          where the total annual taxable income from employment for the relevant year of
          assessment—

            does not exceed £1,500                0%
            exceeds £1,500 but does not           10 % on the income exceeding £1,500
            exceed £3,000
            exceeds £3,000                        £150 plus 13 % on all income
                                                  exceeding £3,000

     (b)    in respect of income derived from any trade, business, profession or vocation
            referred to in paragraph 4(b), 10% per cent of the total annual taxable income
            from such trade, business, profession or vocation.

Exempt income
                                             20


      6.        Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, there are excluded
from the taxable income—
      (a) the official emoluments received by any person from—
            (i) the government of any other country or any international aid organisation;
                  or
            (ii) any other foreign employer if such emoluments are taxed in another
                  country;
      (b) the income of any ecclesiastical or charitable institution of a public character to
            the extent that such income is derived otherwise than from a trade or business
            carried on by such institution;
      (c) any pensions paid, whether or not in respect of past employment, and including
            any wound, disability or military pensions;
      (d) the income of the Savings Bank referred to in the Savings Bank (Tristan da
            Cunha) Ordinance, 1968 and any income arising as interest earned by any person
            on monies deposited with the Savings Bank.

                                    PART III
                             MEDICAL CONTRIBUTIONS

Levying of medical contributions

       7.     (1)     There is to be charged, levied and collected in accordance with this
Order, an annual contribution towards the medical services which i, subject to paragraph 8,
payable by every resident.

      (2)    The medical contribution is to be charged at a rate of 4% of the chargeable
amount of such person as determined under subparagraph (3) for the relevant year of
assessment.

     (3)       The chargeable amount of a person for purposes of this paragraph is—
     (a)   in the case of a permanent resident—
           (i) the total taxable employment income of the person determined for the
                 relevant year of assessment under Part A of Schedule 1; or
           (ii) if the person does not have any employment income from employment
                 during the relevant year, an amount of £2,848 (or such other amount as is
                 determined by the Administrator from time to time as being the amount of
                 the average annual salary income of all residents);
     (b)   in the case of any other resident, the greater of—
           (i) the total taxable employment income of the person determined for the
                 relevant year of assessment under Part A of Schedule 1; and
           (ii) £2,848 (or such other amount as is determined by the Administrator under
                 subparagraph (3)(a)(ii)); or
     (c)   where such person derives any income from any trade, business, profession or
           vocation arising in or derived from Tristan da Cunha, the total amount of his or
           her income during the relevant year of assessment as determined in accordance
           with Schedule 1, plus his or her taxable employment income (if any) under
           subparagraph (3)(a)(i) or (3)(b)(i), as the case may be.
                                             21


      (4)     In the case of any person being liable for medical contributions in respect of a
period in any year of assessment which is shorter than 12 months, the amount under
subparagraph (3)(a)(ii) or (3)(b)(ii) (if applicable) is to be apportioned accordingly.

     (5)      The medical contributions paid by a person under this paragraph cover the
person for—
     (a) any medical treatment on Tristan da Cunha; and
     (b) medical evacuation and treatment outside Tristan da Cunha, if the person is a
           permanent resident.

Exemption from medical contributions

       8.      The following persons are exempt from paying the medical contribution under
paragraph 7:
     (a) any child under the age of 16;
     (b) any child over the age of 16 years but under the age of 18 years and who is not in
           full time employment;
     (c) any person over the age of 65 years; and
     (d) any other person who is unemployed, provided such person is a permanent
           resident and has no income from any other source (other than any pension or
           social benefit payments).

                              PART IV
          PAYMENT AND ASSESSMENT OF TAX AND CONTRIBUTIONS

Payment of tax and medical contribution

        9.     (1)     The amount of income tax and medical contribution chargeable in
respect of a year of assessment under this Order must be paid to the Administrator by way of
provisional monthly instalments which must be determined in accordance with Schedule 2.

      (2)     The monthly instalments of tax and medical contributions payable by any
employee in respect of his or her income derived from employment must be deducted by his
or her employer from the remuneration payable by the employer to the employee during that
month.

      (3)       The instalment of tax and medical contributions due by a person in respect of
any month must be paid by him or her (or, in the case of any amount withheld under
subparagraph (2), by the employer of the person) to the Administrator within 7 days after the
end of the relevant month.

     (4)      A person must, together with a payment under subparagraph (3), submit to the
Administrator a statement in a form and containing the details required from time to time by
the Administrator.

Annual calculation

        10.   (1)      Every person (other than a person in respect of whom subparagraph (2)
applies) who is liable for any income tax or medical contributions in respect of any year of
assessment must at the end of that year—
                                              22


     (a)   calculate his or her final liability for such tax and contributions for such year; and
     (b)   within 30 days after the end of the year of assessment submit to the
           Administrator, in the form and containing the details the Administrator from time
           requires, a return of such final liability for tax and contributions.

      (2)      The total amount of monthly instalments of income tax and medical
contributions paid by a person during the year of assessment in respect of his or her
employment income is deemed to be the amount of his or her final liability for income tax
and medical contributions for such year, if—
      (a) the monthly instalments were determined in accordance with Schedule 2;
      (b) no further employment income is paid to the person after the year of assessment
            in respect of which item 1(2) of Part A of Schedule 1 applies for the relevant
            year; and
      (c) the person did not derive any other taxable income.

Administrator to make assessment

     11.       (1)     The Administrator must assess every person liable to pay income tax
or medical contributions as soon as may be after the expiration of the time allowed to the
person for the delivery of his or her return under paragraph 10.

     (2)      If a person has delivered a return, the Administrator may—
     (a)   accept the return and make an assessment accordingly; or
     (b)   refuse to accept the return and to the best of his or her judgement, determine the
           amount of the taxable income of the person and assess the person accordingly for
           income tax and medical contributions.

      (3)       If a person has not delivered a return and the Administrator is of the opinion
that the person is liable to pay tax or medical contributions, the Administrator may, according
to the best of his or her judgement, determine the amount of the taxable income of the person
and assess him or her accordingly for income tax and medical contributions.

      (4)      The Administrator must serve on each person who is assessed to pay tax or
medical contributions a notice of assessment stating the amount of his or her taxable income
and the final amount of income tax and medical contributions payable by the person, and
must in that notice inform the person of his or her rights under paragraph 14.

Payment of outstanding amount and refund

      12.      (1)    If the amount of income tax or medical contributions in respect a
person which has been assessed under paragraph 11 for the year of assessment exceeds or is
less than the amount of income tax or medical contributions paid by such person for such
year under paragraph 9, the person —
      (a) in the case of an underpayment, must make arrangements for payment of the
            outstanding amount to the Administrator; or
      (b) in the case of an overpayment, is entitled to a refund of the amount overpaid.

       (2)      If notice of an objection or appeal has been given against an assessment,
collection of income tax and medical contributions under the assessment remains in abeyance
until the objection or appeal is determined:
                                              23


      Provided that the Administrator may enforce payment of that portion of the tax (if any)
      which is not in dispute.

Additional or revised assessments

      13.       (1)    If it appears to the Administrator that any person liable to pay tax or
medical contributions has not been assessed or has been assessed at an amount which is more
or less than that which ought to have been charged, the Administrator may (within the year of
assessment in which such liability occurs, or within 6 years after the expiration of that year)
assess the person at such amount or such additional or reduced amount as, according to the
Administrator’s judgement, ought to have been charged.

     (2)     The provisions of paragraph 12 apply in respect of any underpayment or
overpayment resulting from an assessment or revised assessment issued under subparagraph
(1).

                                   PART V
                       OBJECTION AND APPEAL PROVISIONS

Objection against assessment

      14.     (1)    If any person disputes an assessment for income tax or medical
contributions made upon the person under this Order, he or she may apply to the
Administrator, by notice of objection in writing, to review the assessment made upon the
person.

      (2)      Every notice of objection must state precisely the grounds of the objections to
the assessment and be made within 15 days from the date of the service of the notice of
assessment, or any longer period the Administrator in the circumstances allows.

     (3)       On receipt of a notice of objection, the Administrator may—
     (a)    require the person giving the notice of objection to provide any particulars the
            Administrator considers necessary with respect to the income of the person
            assessed and to produce all books or other documents in the person’s custody or
            under the person’s control relating to such income; and
     (b)    summon any person who has or whom the Administrator believes to have
            knowledge of any such matter to attend before the Administrator and may
            examine such person on oath or otherwise.

      (4)      If a person who has objected to an assessment made upon him or her agrees
with the Administrator as to the amount at which the person is liable to be assessed, the
assessment must be amended accordingly, and notice of the income tax or medical
contributions payable must be served upon the person.

Appeals against assessments

      15.      (1)     A person who is aggrieved by an assessment made upon him or her
and who has failed to agree with the Administrator in the manner provided in paragraph
14(4), may appeal against the assessment to the Governor for a ruling on the matter, upon
giving notice in writing to the Administrator within 15 days from the date of the refusal of the
                                               24


Administrator to amend the assessment as desired, or any longer period the Governor in the
circumstances allows.

      (2)      If the Governor is satisfied that the assessment is in error, he or she must order
that the assessment be amended in such manner (either by way of reduction or increase) as is
necessary to bring the assessment into conformity with the provisions of this Order.

                                PART VI
              INFORMATION, NOTICES AND BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS

Notices and returns

     16.       (1)    The Administrator may, by notice in writing, require any person to
supply to the Administrator, within a reasonable time specified in the notice, such particulars
concerning matters of which the Administrator needs to be aware for the purposes of the due
administration of this Order and may require the person to produce for examination any
books, documents, accounts or other records the Administrator considers necessary.

      (2)    Without limiting subparagraph (1), the matters about which the Administrator
may require information to be supplied to the Administrator under that subparagraph
include—
      (a) the income of the person to whom the notice is addressed, or of any other person
          in respect of whose income such person is or may be assessable under any
          provision of this Order;
      (b) any fact or circumstance affecting the entitlement of any person to any of the
          deductions in Schedule 1; and
      (c) any sums paid or to be paid by the person to whom the notice is addressed, being
          sums which are or may be liable to tax in the hands of the recipient of them,
          together with the name and address of each recipient of any such sum.

Books of account

     17.      If a person liable to pay income tax fails or refuses to keep books or accounts
which, in the opinion of the Administrator are adequate for the purposes of the tax, the
Administrator may by notice in writing require the person to keep such records, books and
accounts.

Signature and service of notices

      18.     (1)     Every notice to be given by the Administrator under this Order must be
signed by the Administrator or by some person from time to time appointed by the
Administrator for that purpose, and every such notice is valid if the signature of the
Administrator or of such person is duly printed or written on it.

      (2)      Notices under this Order may be served upon a person either personally or by
being delivered to the person’s business or private address.

                                       PART VII
                                 TRUSTEES AND AGENTS
                                             25



Trustees of incapacitated persons

     19.       (1)    Every trustee, guardian other person having the direction, control, or
management of any property or concern on behalf of any incapacitated person is assessable to
income tax and medical contributions in the name of the incapacitated person in like manner
and to the like amount as the person would be assessable if he or she were not an
incapacitated person.

      (2)      The person who is assessable in respect of an incapacitated person is
answerable for all matters required to be done by virtue of this Order for the assessment of
the income of any person for whom he or she acts, and for paying income tax or medical
contributions assessable on that income.

     (3)      For the purpose of this paragraph “incapacitated person” means any person
who lacks legal capacity to manage his or her own affairs.

Manager of bodies of persons

      20.      The manager or other principal officer of every body of persons is answerable
for doing all such acts, matters and things as are required to be done by virtue of this Order
for the assessment of that body and payment of the tax.

Indemnification of representative

     21.       Every person answerable under this Order for the payment of income tax or
medical contributions on behalf of another person—
     (a) may retain out of any money coming to his or her hands on behalf of such other
           person sufficient money to pay the tax or contributions; and
     (b) is to be indemnified against any person whatsoever for all payments made by the
           person answerable pursuant to or by virtue of this Order.

Deceased persons

      22.      (1)    The liability of any person to pay income tax is not prejudiced or
affected by the person’s death.

      (2)      The personal representative of every deceased person is liable to and charged
with the payment (out of the assets of the estate) of any income tax which the deceased
person would have been liable to pay if he or she had not died, and is answerable for doing
such acts, matters and things as that person if that person were alive would be liable to do
under this Order.
                                               26


                                    PART VIII
                              OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

Failure to furnish a return or information

       23.     A person who fails or neglects to submit a return or to furnish information as
required under this Order commits an offence.

       (2)   A person who wilfully fails to comply with a notice to keep books and
accounts under paragraph 17, within 3 months of the service of the notice commits an
offence.

       (3)    A person convicted of an offence under this paragraph is liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding £250 plus £1 for each day during which such non-
compliance continues.

Penalty for non-payment of income tax or medical contribution

      24.      (1)     If any income tax or medical contribution is not paid within the period
prescribed in paragraph 9(3), or any period allowed under an arrangement under paragraph
12(1)(a), a penalty equal to one-fifth of the amount of the tax or contribution is payable and is
deemed to be a tax for purposes of section 16(3) of this Ordinance.

     (2)      The Administrator may remit the whole or any part of a penalty imposed
under subparagraph (1) if satisfied that the failure to comply with the provisions of this Order
was due to causes beyond the taxpayer’s control, or to any other good or sufficient reason.

False statements and returns

      25.     A person who—
      (a)  for the purpose of obtaining any deduction or repayment in respect of income tax
           or medical contributions for that person orfor any other person, in any return,
           account or information furnished with reference to the tax or contribution
           knowingly makes any false statement or false representations; or
     (b) aids, abets, assists, counsels, incites or induces another person—
          (i) to make or deliver any false return or statement under this Order; or
          (ii) to make or prepare any false accounts or particulars concerning any income
                on which income tax or medical contribution is payable under this Order,
commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £500.

Administrator may remit tax or contribution

        26.    The Administrator may remit, wholly or in part, the income tax or medical
contributions payable by any person under this Order, if satisfied that it is just and equitable
to do so.
                            _____________________________

                                        SCHEDULE 1
                                      (PARAGRAPH 4)
                                              27



                                        PART A
                               INCOME FROM EMPLOYMENT

Income from employment or office

      1.      (1)    The income taxable under this Part comprises a person’s gains or
profits from any employment or holding of an office in Tristan da Cunha, including any
monetary allowances granted in respect of such employment or holding of office.

      (2)       Any taxable income arising under sub-item (1) which is paid after the 1st day
of January in any year in respect of the immediately preceding year of assessment is deemed
to be taxable income accruing in that preceding year of assessment.

Benefits in kind

      2.       (1)    Where in any year of assessment a person is employed or holds any
office and by reason of such employment or office—
      (a) there is allowed to the person or paid to the person any sum as a benefit which,
            apart from this Item, is not treated as the person’s taxable income; or
      (b) there is provided for the person or for others being members of his or her family
            or household, any benefit to which a monetary value can be applied,
such benefits must be evaluated in cash terms and the person is deemed to be in receipt of
taxable income of an amount equal to the value of the benefits so received.

   (2) For the purposes of sub-item (1) ‘benefit’ is limited to any benefit which relates to the
provision of accommodation and meals.

                                       PART B
                          PROFITS OF A TRADE OR BUSINESS

Profits of trade or business

      3.       The income taxable under this Part comprises a person’s gains or profits from
any trade, business, profession or vocation which may have been carried on or exercised by
the person.

Losses of trade or business

      4.       If the amount of a loss incurred in any year of assessment in any trade,
business, profession or vocation carried on by any person either solely or in partnership is
such that it cannot be wholly set off against the person’s income from other sources for the
same year, the amount of such loss must, to the extent to which it is not allowed against the
person’s income from other sources for that year, be carried forward and set off against what
would otherwise have been the person’s taxable income for the next 5 years in succession.

Allowable deductions

     5.        (1)    For the purpose of ascertaining the taxable income of any person
engaged in a trade, business, profession or vocation there is to be allowed to be deducted all
                                             28


outgoings and expenses wholly and exclusively incurred by the person in the production of
the income, including—
      (a) sums payable by the person by way of interest upon any money borrowed by the
           person, where the Administrator is satisfied that the interest was payable on
           capital employed in acquiring the income;
      (b) rent paid by such person as tenant of land or buildings occupied by the person for
           the purpose of acquiring the income;
      (c) any sum expended by the person for repair of premises, plant and machinery
           employed in acquiring the income, or for the renewal, repair or alteration of any
           implement, utensil or article so employed;
      (d) any other deductions prescribed by any regulation made under this Order.

      (2)      In ascertaining the taxable income of any person engaged in a trade, business,
profession or vocation, there is to be allowed as a deduction a reasonable amount for the
exhaustion, wear and tear of property owned by the person, including plant and machinery,
arising out of the use or employment of that property in the trade, business, profession or
vocation during the year of assessment.

                                     PART C
                           NON-PERMISSIBLE DEDUCTIONS

Non-permissible deductions

     6.        For the purpose of ascertaining the taxable income of any person, no
deduction is to be allowed in respect of—
     (a) domestic or private expenses;
     (b) any disbursements or expenses not being money wholly and exclusively laid out
            or expended for the purpose of acquiring the income;
     (c) any capital withdrawn or any sum employed or intended to be employed as
            capital;
     (d) any capital employed in improvements;
     (e) any sum expended which has been recovered under insurance or contract of
            indemnity;
     (f) rent of or cost of repairs to any premises or part of premises not paid or incurred
            for the purpose of producing the income.

                                       SCHEDULE 2
                                     (PARAGRAPH 9)

                          TAX AND CONTRIBUTION TABLE

1.     Part A sets out the monthly amounts of tax and medical contributions to be deducted
       by an employer from the salary paid to an employee during any month. Part A does
       not apply in respect of the tax and medical contribution to be deducted for June and
       December, respectively, if Part B or Part C is applicable in respect of such month.
       Columns 3 and 4 of Part A does not apply to any person who is not a permanent
       resident if the medical contribution of the person is to be determined with reference to
       the amount referred to in paragraph 7(3)(b)(ii).
                                            29


2.    Part B applies for the calculation of the monthly amount of tax and medical
      contribution for June, if the amount of salary paid by the employer to the employee in
      any month during the period from January to June is higher or lower than the amount
      of salary paid to such employee in the other months during that period.

3.    Part C applies for the calculation of the monthly amount of tax and medical
      contribution for December, if the amount of salary paid by the employer to the
      employee in any month during the year is higher or lower than the amount of salary
      paid to such employee in the other months during that year.

4.    Part D sets out the monthly amounts of medical contribution in respect of any medical
      contribution payable by a person under paragraph 7(3)(a)(ii) or 7(3)(b)(ii).

5.    Part E applies for the calculation of the monthly amount of tax and medical
      contributions in respect of profits of a trade, business, profession or vocation.

                                     PART A
                          Tax and medical contribution table


     Monthly          Tax            Medical          Total payable
     income           (£’s)        contribution           (£’s)
       (£’s)                           (£’s)
             1                0               0.04               0.04
             2                0               0.08               0.08
             3                0               0.12               0.12
             4                0               0.16               0.16
             5                0               0.20               0.20
             6                0               0.24               0.24
             7                0               0.28               0.28
             8                0               0.32               0.32
             9                0               0.36               0.36
             10               0               0.40               0.40
             11               0               0.44               0.44
             12               0               0.48               0.48
             13               0               0.52               0.52
             14               0               0.56               0.56
             15               0               0.60               0.60
             16               0               0.64               0.64
             17               0               0.68               0.68
             18               0               0.72               0.72
             19               0               0.76               0.76
             20               0               0.80               0.80
             21               0               0.84               0.84
             22               0               0.88               0.88
             23               0               0.92               0.92
             24               0               0.96               0.96
             25               0               1.00               1.00
             26               0               1.04               1.04
                                30


Monthly      Tax           Medical         Total payable
income       (£’s)       contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        27           0              1.08            1.08
        28           0              1.12            1.12
        29           0              1.16            1.16
        30           0              1.20            1.20
        31           0              1.24            1.24
        32           0              1.28            1.28
        33           0              1.32            1.32
        34           0              1.36            1.36
        35           0              1.40            1.40
        36           0              1.44            1.44
        37           0              1.48            1.48
        38           0              1.52            1.52
        39           0              1.56            1.56
        40           0              1.60            1.60
        41           0              1.64            1.64
        42           0              1.68            1.68
        43           0              1.72            1.72
        44           0              1.76            1.76
        45           0              1.80            1.80
        46           0              1.84            1.84
        47           0              1.88            1.88
        48           0              1.92            1.92
        49           0              1.96            1.96
        50           0              2.00            2.00
        51           0              2.04            2.04
        52           0              2.08            2.08
        53           0              2.12            2.12
        54           0              2.16            2.16
        55           0              2.20            2.20
        56           0              2.24            2.24
        57           0              2.28            2.28
        58           0              2.32            2.32
        59           0              2.36            2.36
        60           0              2.40            2.40
        61           0              2.44            2.44
        62           0              2.48            2.48
        63           0              2.52            2.52
        64           0              2.56            2.56
        65           0              2.60            2.60
        66           0              2.64            2.64
        67           0              2.68            2.68
        68           0              2.72            2.72
        69           0              2.76            2.76
        70           0              2.80            2.80
        71           0              2.84            2.84
                                 31


Monthly       Tax           Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)       contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                       (£’s)
        72            0              2.88            2.88
        73            0              2.92            2.92
        74            0              2.96            2.96
        75            0              3.00            3.00
        76            0              3.04            3.04
        77            0              3.08            3.08
        78            0              3.12            3.12
        79            0              3.16            3.16
        80            0              3.20            3.20
        81            0              3.24            3.24
        82            0              3.28            3.28
        83            0              3.32            3.32
        84            0              3.36            3.36
        85            0              3.40            3.40
        86            0              3.44            3.44
        87            0              3.48            3.48
        88            0              3.52            3.52
        89            0              3.56            3.56
        90            0              3.60            3.60
        91            0              3.64            3.64
        92            0              3.68            3.68
        93            0              3.72            3.72
        94            0              3.76            3.76
        95            0              3.80            3.80
        96            0              3.84            3.84
        97            0              3.88            3.88
        98            0              3.92            3.92
        99            0              3.96            3.96
        100           0              4.00            4.00
        101           0              4.04            4.04
        102           0              4.08            4.08
        103           0              4.12            4.12
        104           0              4.16            4.16
        105           0              4.20            4.20
        106           0              4.24            4.24
        107           0              4.28            4.28
        108           0              4.32            4.32
        109           0              4.36            4.36
        110           0              4.40            4.40
        111           0              4.44            4.44
        112           0              4.48            4.48
        113           0              4.52            4.52
        114           0              4.56            4.56
        115           0              4.60            4.60
        116           0              4.64            4.64
                                32


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        117          0              4.68            4.68
        118          0              4.72            4.72
        119          0              4.76            4.76
        120          0              4.80            4.80
        121          0              4.84            4.84
        122          0              4.88            4.88
        123          0              4.92            4.92
        124          0              4.96            4.96
        125          0              5.00            5.00
        126          0              5.04            5.04
        127          0              5.08            5.08
        128          0              5.12            5.12
        129          0              5.16            5.16
        130          0              5.20            5.20
        131       0.08              5.24            5.32
        132       0.17              5.28            5.45
        133       0.27              5.32            5.59
        134       0.36              5.36            5.72
        135       0.46              5.40            5.86
        136       0.56              5.44            6.00
        137       0.65              5.48            6.13
        138       0.75              5.52            6.27
        139       0.84              5.56            6.40
        140       0.94              5.60            6.54
        141       1.04              5.64            6.68
        142       1.13              5.68            6.81
        143       1.23              5.72            6.95
        144       1.32              5.76            7.08
        145       1.42              5.80            7.22
        146       1.52              5.84            7.36
        147       1.61              5.88            7.49
        148       1.71              5.92            7.63
        149       1.80              5.96            7.76
        150       1.90              6.00            7.90
        151       2.00              6.04            8.04
        152       2.09              6.08            8.17
        153       2.19              6.12            8.31
        154       2.28              6.16            8.44
        155       2.38              6.20            8.58
        156       2.48              6.24            8.72
        157       2.57              6.28            8.85
        158       2.67              6.32            8.99
        159       2.76              6.36            9.12
        160       2.86              6.40            9.26
        161       2.96              6.44            9.40
                                33


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        162       3.05              6.48            9.53
        163       3.15              6.52            9.67
        164       3.24              6.56            9.80
        165       3.34              6.60            9.94
        166       3.44              6.64           10.08
        167       3.53              6.68           10.21
        168       3.63              6.72           10.35
        169       3.72              6.76           10.48
        170       3.82              6.80           10.62
        171       3.92              6.84           10.76
        172       4.01              6.88           10.89
        173       4.11              6.92           11.03
        174       4.20              6.96           11.16
        175       4.30              7.00           11.30
        176       4.40              7.04           11.44
        177       4.49              7.08           11.57
        178       4.59              7.12           11.71
        179       4.68              7.16           11.84
        180       4.78              7.20           11.98
        181       4.88              7.24           12.12
        182       4.97              7.28           12.25
        183       5.07              7.32           12.39
        184       5.16              7.36           12.52
        185       5.26              7.40           12.66
        186       5.36              7.44           12.80
        187       5.45              7.48           12.93
        188       5.55              7.52           13.07
        189       5.64              7.56           13.20
        190       5.74              7.60           13.34
        191       5.84              7.64           13.48
        192       5.93              7.68           13.61
        193       6.03              7.72           13.75
        194       6.12              7.76           13.88
        195       6.22              7.80           14.02
        196       6.32              7.84           14.16
        197       6.41              7.88           14.29
        198       6.51              7.92           14.43
        199       6.60              7.96           14.56
        200       6.70              8.00           14.70
        201       6.80              8.04           14.84
        202       6.89              8.08           14.97
        203       6.99              8.12           15.11
        204       7.08              8.16           15.24
        205       7.18              8.20           15.38
        206       7.28              8.24           15.52
                                34


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        207       7.37              8.28           15.65
        208       7.47              8.32           15.79
        209       7.56              8.36           15.92
        210       7.66              8.40           16.06
        211       7.76              8.44           16.20
        212       7.85              8.48           16.33
        213       7.95              8.52           16.47
        214       8.04              8.56           16.60
        215       8.14              8.60           16.74
        216       8.24              8.64           16.88
        217       8.33              8.68           17.01
        218       8.43              8.72           17.15
        219       8.52              8.76           17.28
        220       8.62              8.80           17.42
        221       8.72              8.84           17.56
        222       8.81              8.88           17.69
        223       8.91              8.92           17.83
        224       9.00              8.96           17.96
        225       9.10              9.00           18.10
        226       9.20              9.04           18.24
        227       9.29              9.08           18.37
        228       9.39              9.12           18.51
        229       9.48              9.16           18.64
        230       9.58              9.20           18.78
        231       9.68              9.24           18.92
        232       9.77              9.28           19.05
        233       9.87              9.32           19.19
        234       9.96              9.36           19.32
        235      10.06              9.40           19.46
        236      10.16              9.44           19.60
        237      10.25              9.48           19.73
        238      10.35              9.52           19.87
        239      10.44              9.56           20.00
        240      10.54              9.60           20.14
        241      10.64              9.64           20.28
        242      10.73              9.68           20.41
        243      10.83              9.72           20.55
        244      10.92              9.76           20.68
        245      11.02              9.80           20.82
        246      11.12              9.84           20.96
        247      11.21              9.88           21.09
        248      11.31              9.92           21.23
        249      11.40              9.96           21.36
        250      11.50             10.00           21.50
        251      11.32             10.04           21.36
                                35


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        252      11.45             10.08           21.53
        253      11.57             10.12           21.69
        254      11.70             10.16           21.86
        255      11.82             10.20           22.02
        256      11.95             10.24           22.19
        257      12.07             10.28           22.35
        258      12.20             10.32           22.52
        259      12.32             10.36           22.68
        260      12.45             10.40           22.85
        261      12.57             10.44           23.01
        262      12.70             10.48           23.18
        263      12.82             10.52           23.34
        264      12.95             10.56           23.51
        265      13.07             10.60           23.67
        266      13.20             10.64           23.84
        267      13.32             10.68           24.00
        268      13.45             10.72           24.17
        269      13.57             10.76           24.33
        270      13.70             10.80           24.50
        271      13.82             10.84           24.66
        272      13.95             10.88           24.83
        273      14.07             10.92           24.99
        274      14.20             10.96           25.16
        275      14.32             11.00           25.32
        276      14.44             11.04           25.48
        277      14.57             11.08           25.65
        278      14.69             11.12           25.81
        279      14.82             11.16           25.98
        280      14.94             11.20           26.14
        281      15.07             11.24           26.31
        282      15.19             11.28           26.47
        283      15.32             11.32           26.64
        284      15.44             11.36           26.80
        285      15.57             11.40           26.97
        286      15.69             11.44           27.13
        287      15.82             11.48           27.30
        288      15.94             11.52           27.46
        289      16.07             11.56           27.63
        290      16.19             11.60           27.79
        291      16.32             11.64           27.96
        292      16.44             11.68           28.12
        293      16.57             11.72           28.29
        294      16.69             11.76           28.45
        295      16.82             11.80           28.62
        296      16.94             11.84           28.78
                                36


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        297      17.07             11.88           28.95
        298      17.19             11.92           29.11
        299      17.32             11.96           29.28
        300      17.44             12.00           29.44
        301      17.56             12.04           29.60
        302      17.69             12.08           29.77
        303      17.81             12.12           29.93
        304      17.94             12.16           30.10
        305      18.06             12.20           30.26
        306      18.19             12.24           30.43
        307      18.31             12.28           30.59
        308      18.44             12.32           30.76
        309      18.56             12.36           30.92
        310      18.69             12.40           31.09
        311      18.81             12.44           31.25
        312      18.94             12.48           31.42
        313      19.06             12.52           31.58
        314      19.19             12.56           31.75
        315      19.31             12.60           31.91
        316      19.44             12.64           32.08
        317      19.56             12.68           32.24
        318      19.69             12.72           32.41
        319      19.81             12.76           32.57
        320      19.94             12.80           32.74
        321      20.06             12.84           32.90
        322      20.19             12.88           33.07
        323      20.31             12.92           33.23
        324      20.44             12.96           33.40
        325      20.56             13.00           33.56
        326      20.68             13.04           33.72
        327      20.81             13.08           33.89
        328      20.93             13.12           34.05
        329      21.06             13.16           34.22
        330      21.18             13.20           34.38
        331      21.31             13.24           34.55
        332      21.43             13.28           34.71
        333      21.56             13.32           34.88
        334      21.68             13.36           35.04
        335      21.81             13.40           35.21
        336      21.93             13.44           35.37
        337      22.06             13.48           35.54
        338      22.18             13.52           35.70
        339      22.31             13.56           35.87
        340      22.43             13.60           36.03
        341      22.56             13.64           36.20
                                37


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        342      22.68             13.68           36.36
        343      22.81             13.72           36.53
        344      22.93             13.76           36.69
        345      23.06             13.80           36.86
        346      23.18             13.84           37.02
        347      23.31             13.88           37.19
        348      23.43             13.92           37.35
        349      23.56             13.96           37.52
        350      23.68             14.00           37.68
        351      23.80             14.04           37.84
        352      23.93             14.08           38.01
        353      24.05             14.12           38.17
        354      24.18             14.16           38.34
        355      24.30             14.20           38.50
        356      24.43             14.24           38.67
        357      24.55             14.28           38.83
        358      24.68             14.32           39.00
        359      24.80             14.36           39.16
        360      24.93             14.40           39.33
        361      25.05             14.44           39.49
        362      25.18             14.48           39.66
        363      25.30             14.52           39.82
        364      25.43             14.56           39.99
        365      25.55             14.60           40.15
        366      25.68             14.64           40.32
        367      25.80             14.68           40.48
        368      25.93             14.72           40.65
        369      26.05             14.76           40.81
        370      26.18             14.80           40.98
        371      26.30             14.84           41.14
        372      26.43             14.88           41.31
        373      26.55             14.92           41.47
        374      26.68             14.96           41.64
        375      26.80             15.00           41.80
        376      26.92             15.04           41.96
        377      27.05             15.08           42.13
        378      27.17             15.12           42.29
        379      27.30             15.16           42.46
        380      27.42             15.20           42.62
        381      27.55             15.24           42.79
        382      27.67             15.28           42.95
        383      27.80             15.32           43.12
        384      27.92             15.36           43.28
        385      28.05             15.40           43.45
        386      28.17             15.44           43.61
                                38


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        387      28.30             15.48           43.78
        388      28.42             15.52           43.94
        389      28.55             15.56           44.11
        390      28.67             15.60           44.27
        391      28.80             15.64           44.44
        392      28.92             15.68           44.60
        393      29.05             15.72           44.77
        394      29.17             15.76           44.93
        395      29.30             15.80           45.10
        396      29.42             15.84           45.26
        397      29.55             15.88           45.43
        398      29.67             15.92           45.59
        399      29.80             15.96           45.76
        400      29.92             16.00           45.92
        401      30.04             16.04           46.08
        402      30.17             16.08           46.25
        403      30.29             16.12           46.41
        404      30.42             16.16           46.58
        405      30.54             16.20           46.74
        406      30.67             16.24           46.91
        407      30.79             16.28           47.07
        408      30.92             16.32           47.24
        409      31.04             16.36           47.40
        410      31.17             16.40           47.57
        411      31.29             16.44           47.73
        412      31.42             16.48           47.90
        413      31.54             16.52           48.06
        414      31.67             16.56           48.23
        415      31.79             16.60           48.39
        416      31.92             16.64           48.56
        417      32.04             16.68           48.72
        418      32.17             16.72           48.89
        419      32.29             16.76           49.05
        420      32.42             16.80           49.22
        421      32.54             16.84           49.38
        422      32.67             16.88           49.55
        423      32.79             16.92           49.71
        424      32.92             16.96           49.88
        425      33.04             17.00           50.04
        426      33.16             17.04           50.20
        427      33.29             17.08           50.37
        428      33.41             17.12           50.53
        429      33.54             17.16           50.70
        430      33.66             17.20           50.86
        431      33.79             17.24           51.03
                                39


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        432      33.91             17.28           51.19
        433      34.04             17.32           51.36
        434      34.16             17.36           51.52
        435      34.29             17.40           51.69
        436      34.41             17.44           51.85
        437      34.54             17.48           52.02
        438      34.66             17.52           52.18
        439      34.79             17.56           52.35
        440      34.91             17.60           52.51
        441      35.04             17.64           52.68
        442      35.16             17.68           52.84
        443      35.29             17.72           53.01
        444      35.41             17.76           53.17
        445      35.54             17.80           53.34
        446      35.66             17.84           53.50
        447      35.79             17.88           53.67
        448      35.91             17.92           53.83
        449      36.04             17.96           54.00
        450      36.16             18.00           54.16
        451      36.28             18.04           54.32
        452      36.41             18.08           54.49
        453      36.53             18.12           54.65
        454      36.66             18.16           54.82
        455      36.78             18.20           54.98
        456      36.91             18.24           55.15
        457      37.03             18.28           55.31
        458      37.16             18.32           55.48
        459      37.28             18.36           55.64
        460      37.41             18.40           55.81
        461      37.53             18.44           55.97
        462      37.66             18.48           56.14
        463      37.78             18.52           56.30
        464      37.91             18.56           56.47
        465      38.03             18.60           56.63
        466      38.16             18.64           56.80
        467      38.28             18.68           56.96
        468      38.41             18.72           57.13
        469      38.53             18.76           57.29
        470      38.66             18.80           57.46
        471      38.78             18.84           57.62
        472      38.91             18.88           57.79
        473      39.03             18.92           57.95
        474      39.16             18.96           58.12
        475      39.28             19.00           58.28
        476      39.40             19.04           58.44
                                40


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        477      39.53             19.08           58.61
        478      39.65             19.12           58.77
        479      39.78             19.16           58.94
        480      39.90             19.20           59.10
        481      40.03             19.24           59.27
        482      40.15             19.28           59.43
        483      40.28             19.32           59.60
        484      40.40             19.36           59.76
        485      40.53             19.40           59.93
        486      40.65             19.44           60.09
        487      40.78             19.48           60.26
        488      40.90             19.52           60.42
        489      41.03             19.56           60.59
        490      41.15             19.60           60.75
        491      41.28             19.64           60.92
        492      41.40             19.68           61.08
        493      41.53             19.72           61.25
        494      41.65             19.76           61.41
        495      41.78             19.80           61.58
        496      41.90             19.84           61.74
        497      42.03             19.88           61.91
        498      42.15             19.92           62.07
        499      42.28             19.96           62.24
        500      42.40             20.00           62.40
        501      42.52             20.04           62.56
        502      42.65             20.08           62.73
        503      42.77             20.12           62.89
        504      42.90             20.16           63.06
        505      43.02             20.20           63.22
        506      43.15             20.24           63.39
        507      43.27             20.28           63.55
        508      43.40             20.32           63.72
        509      43.52             20.36           63.88
        510      43.65             20.40           64.05
        511      43.77             20.44           64.21
        512      43.90             20.48           64.38
        513      44.02             20.52           64.54
        514      44.15             20.56           64.71
        515      44.27             20.60           64.87
        516      44.40             20.64           65.04
        517      44.52             20.68           65.20
        518      44.65             20.72           65.37
        519      44.77             20.76           65.53
        520      44.90             20.80           65.70
        521      45.02             20.84           65.86
                                41


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        522      45.15             20.88           66.03
        523      45.27             20.92           66.19
        524      45.40             20.96           66.36
        525      45.52             21.00           66.52
        526      45.64             21.04           66.68
        527      45.64             21.08           66.72
        528      45.77             21.12           66.89
        529      45.89             21.16           67.05
        530      46.02             21.20           67.22
        531      46.14             21.24           67.38
        532      46.39             21.28           67.67
        533      46.52             21.32           67.84
        534      46.64             21.36           68.00
        535      46.77             21.40           68.17
        536      46.89             21.44           68.33
        537      47.02             21.48           68.50
        538      47.14             21.52           68.66
        539      47.27             21.56           68.83
        540      47.39             21.60           68.99
        541      47.52             21.64           69.16
        542      47.64             21.68           69.32
        543      47.77             21.72           69.49
        544      47.89             21.76           69.65
        545      48.02             21.80           69.82
        546      48.14             21.84           69.98
        547      48.27             21.88           70.15
        548      48.39             21.92           70.31
        549      48.52             21.96           70.48
        550      48.64             22.00           70.64
        551      48.76             22.04           70.80
        552      48.89             22.08           70.97
        553      49.01             22.12           71.13
        554      49.14             22.16           71.30
        555      49.26             22.20           71.46
        556      49.39             22.24           71.63
        557      49.51             22.28           71.79
        558      49.64             22.32           71.96
        559      49.76             22.36           72.12
        560      49.89             22.40           72.29
        561      50.01             22.44           72.45
        562      50.14             22.48           72.62
        563      50.26             22.52           72.78
        564      50.39             22.56           72.95
        565      50.51             22.60           73.11
        566      50.64             22.64           73.28
                                42


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        567      50.76             22.68           73.44
        568      50.89             22.72           73.61
        569      51.01             22.76           73.77
        570      51.14             22.80           73.94
        571      51.26             22.84           74.10
        572      51.39             22.88           74.27
        573      51.51             22.92           74.43
        574      51.64             22.96           74.60
        575      51.76             23.00           74.76
        576      51.88             23.04           74.92
        577      52.01             23.08           75.09
        578      52.13             23.12           75.25
        579      52.26             23.16           75.42
        580      52.38             23.20           75.58
        581      52.51             23.24           75.75
        582      52.63             23.28           75.91
        583      52.76             23.32           76.08
        584      52.88             23.36           76.24
        585      53.01             23.40           76.41
        586      53.13             23.44           76.57
        587      53.26             23.48           76.74
        588      53.38             23.52           76.90
        589      53.51             23.56           77.07
        590      53.63             23.60           77.23
        591      53.76             23.64           77.40
        592      53.88             23.68           77.56
        593      54.01             23.72           77.73
        594      54.13             23.76           77.89
        595      54.26             23.80           78.06
        596      54.38             23.84           78.22
        597      54.51             23.88           78.39
        598      54.63             23.92           78.55
        599      54.76             23.96           78.72
        600      54.88             24.00           78.88
        601      55.00             24.04           79.04
        602      55.13             24.08           79.21
        603      55.25             24.12           79.37
        604      55.38             24.16           79.54
        605      55.50             24.20           79.70
        606      55.63             24.24           79.87
        607      55.75             24.28           80.03
        608      55.88             24.32           80.20
        609      56.00             24.36           80.36
        610      56.13             24.40           80.53
        611      56.25             24.44           80.69
                                43


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        612      56.38             24.48           80.86
        613      56.50             24.52           81.02
        614      56.63             24.56           81.19
        615      56.75             24.60           81.35
        616      56.88             24.64           81.52
        617      57.00             24.68           81.68
        618      57.13             24.72           81.85
        619      57.25             24.76           82.01
        620      57.38             24.80           82.18
        621      57.50             24.84           82.34
        622      57.63             24.88           82.51
        623      57.75             24.92           82.67
        624      57.88             24.96           82.84
        625      58.00             25.00           83.00
        626      58.12             25.04           83.16
        627      58.25             25.08           83.33
        628      58.37             25.12           83.49
        629      58.50             25.16           83.66
        630      58.62             25.20           83.82
        631      58.75             25.24           83.99
        632      58.87             25.28           84.15
        633      59.00             25.32           84.32
        634      59.12             25.36           84.48
        635      59.25             25.40           84.65
        636      59.37             25.44           84.81
        637      59.50             25.48           84.98
        638      59.62             25.52           85.14
        639      59.75             25.56           85.31
        640      59.87             25.60           85.47
        641      60.00             25.64           85.64
        642      60.12             25.68           85.80
        643      60.25             25.72           85.97
        644      60.37             25.76           86.13
        645      60.50             25.80           86.30
        646      60.62             25.84           86.46
        647      60.75             25.88           86.63
        648      60.87             25.92           86.79
        649      61.00             25.96           86.96
        650      61.12             26.00           87.12
        651      61.24             26.04           87.28
        652      61.37             26.08           87.45
        653      61.49             26.12           87.61
        654      61.62             26.16           87.78
        655      61.74             26.20           87.94
        656      61.87             26.24           88.11
                                44


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        657      61.99             26.28           88.27
        658      62.12             26.32           88.44
        659      62.24             26.36           88.60
        660      62.37             26.40           88.77
        661      62.49             26.44           88.93
        662      62.62             26.48           89.10
        663      62.74             26.52           89.26
        664      62.87             26.56           89.43
        665      62.99             26.60           89.59
        666      63.12             26.64           89.76
        667      63.24             26.68           89.92
        668      63.37             26.72           90.09
        669      63.49             26.76           90.25
        670      63.62             26.80           90.42
        671      63.74             26.84           90.58
        672      63.87             26.88           90.75
        673      63.99             26.92           90.91
        674      64.12             26.96           91.08
        675      64.24             27.00           91.24
        676      64.36             27.04           91.40
        677      64.49             27.08           91.57
        678      64.61             27.12           91.73
        679      64.74             27.16           91.90
        680      64.86             27.20           92.06
        681      64.99             27.24           92.23
        682      65.11             27.28           92.39
        683      65.24             27.32           92.56
        684      65.36             27.36           92.72
        685      65.49             27.40           92.89
        686      65.61             27.44           93.05
        687      65.74             27.48           93.22
        688      65.86             27.52           93.38
        689      65.99             27.56           93.55
        690      66.11             27.60           93.71
        691      66.24             27.64           93.88
        692      66.36             27.68           94.04
        693      66.49             27.72           94.21
        694      66.61             27.76           94.37
        695      66.74             27.80           94.54
        696      66.86             27.84           94.70
        697      66.99             27.88           94.87
        698      67.11             27.92           95.03
        699      67.24             27.96           95.20
        700      67.36             28.00           95.36
        701      67.48             28.04           95.52
                                45


Monthly       Tax          Medical         Total payable
income        (£’s)      contribution          (£’s)
  (£’s)                      (£’s)
        702      67.61             28.08           95.69
        703      67.73             28.12           95.85
        704      67.86             28.16           96.02
        705      67.98             28.20           96.18
        706      68.11             28.24           96.35
        707      68.23             28.28           96.51
        708      68.36             28.32           96.68
        709      68.48             28.36           96.84
        710      68.61             28.40           97.01
        711      68.73             28.44           97.17
        712      68.86             28.48           97.34
        713      68.98             28.52           97.50
        714      69.11             28.56           97.67
        715      69.23             28.60           97.83
        716      69.36             28.64           98.00
        717      69.48             28.68           98.16
        718      69.61             28.72           98.33
        719      69.73             28.76           98.49
        720      69.86             28.80           98.66
        721      69.98             28.84           98.82
        722      70.11             28.88           98.99
        723      70.23             28.92           99.15
        724      70.36             28.96           99.32
        725      70.48             29.00           99.48
        726      70.60             29.04           99.64
        727      70.73             29.08           99.81
        728      70.85             29.12           99.97
        729      70.98             29.16          100.14
        730      71.10             29.20          100.30
        731      71.23             29.24          100.47
        732      71.35             29.28          100.63
        733      71.48             29.32          100.80
        734      71.60             29.36          100.96
        735      71.73             29.40          101.13
        736      71.85             29.44          101.29
        737      71.98             29.48          101.46
        738      72.10             29.52          101.62
        739      72.23             29.56          101.79
        740      72.35             29.60          101.95
        741      72.48             29.64          102.12
        742      72.60             29.68          102.28
        743      72.73             29.72          102.45
        744      72.85             29.76          102.61
        745      72.98             29.80          102.78
        746      73.10             29.84          102.94
                                             46


      Monthly          Tax             Medical         Total payable
      income           (£’s)         contribution          (£’s)
        (£’s)                            (£’s)
              747         73.23                29.88            103.11
              748         73.35                29.92            103.27
              749         73.48                29.96            103.44
              750         73.60                30.00            103.60


                                         PART B
                               Deduction calculation for June

(If income payments for January to June are all equal amounts, use the Table in Part A to
calculate tax and medical contribution for June)

Total income (January to end June):                                     £__________ (A)
Total tax deducted (January to end May):                          £__________ (B)
Total medical contributions deducted (January to end May):        £__________ (C)

To calculate June deduction:

Step 1: Calculate annual equivalent of income:      Ax2=              £___________(D)
Step 2: Calculate annual medical contribution:      D x 4/100 = £___________(E)
Step 3: Calculate annual taxable income:            D–E=              £___________(F)
Step 4: Calculate annual tax using one of the following:        £___________(G)

       Formula 1:
       If F does not exceed £1500:
       (G) = 0

       Formula 2:
       If F exceeds £1500 but does not exceed £3000:
       (G) = (F – 1500) x 10/100

       Formula 3:
       If F exceeds £3000:
       (G) = [(F – 3000) x 13/100] + 150

Step 5: Calculate tax due to end June:                     G ÷2 = £___________(H)
Step 6: Calculate medical contribution to end June: E ÷2 = £ ___________(I)


Tax payable for June:                                      H–B=
      £__________
Medical contribution payable for June:      I–C=           £__________


                                        PART C
                           Deduction calculation for December
                                              47


(If income payments for January to December are all equal amounts, use the table in Part A
to calculate tax and medical contribution for December)

Total income (January to end December):                         £______ (A)
Total tax deducted (January to end November):                   £______ (B)
Total medical contributions deducted (January to end November): £______ (C)

To calculate December deduction:

Step 1: Calculate annual medical contribution:      A x 4/100 = £___________(D)
Step 2: Calculate annual taxable income:            A–D=              £___________(E)
Step 3: Calculate annual tax using one of the following:        £___________(F)

       Formula 1:
       If E does not exceed £1500:
       (F) = 0

       Formula 2:
       If E exceeds £1500 but does not exceed £3000:
       (F) = (E – 1500) x 10/100

       Formula 3:
       If E exceeds £3000:
       (F) = [(E – 3000) x 13/100] + 150

Tax payable for December:                                           F–B=
      £_________
Medical contribution payable for December:                  D–C=             £_________

                                           PART D

      Calculation of medical contribution under paragraph 7(3)(a)(ii) or 7(3)(b)(ii)


Annual medical contribution:                 £2,848 x 4/100 =                £ 113.92

Monthly medical contribution:                                       £ 9.50


                                           PART E

  Calculation of monthly tax and medical contribution payments in respect of profits
                     from business, trade, profession or vocation

The amount of the monthly tax and medical contribution payable by a person during any year
of assessment in respect of profits from business, trade, profession or vocation shall be
determined in accordance with the following formula:

Total annual profits from business, trade, profession or vocation
                                             48


for previous year of assessment (as adjusted*):
        £________(A)
Calculate annual tax: A x 10/100 =                                         £________(B)
Calculate after tax income: A – B =                                        £________(C)
Calculate annual medical contribution: C x 4/100 =                         £ ________(D)


(*The Administrator may for this purpose adjust the annual profits of the preceding year
under (A) by such a percentage as may be agreed between the taxpayer and the Administrator
to reflect a reasonable estimate of the projected profits for the current year of assessment.)


Tax payable per month:                               B ÷ 12 =              £_________
Medical contribution per month:                      D ÷ 12 =              £_________

                                  ____________________

           ISLAND COUNCIL (TRISTAN DA CUNHA) ORDINANCE, 1985

                            TRISTAN DA CUNHA BY-LAWS
                                    (Section 15)

                                   TABLE OF BY-LAWS

Calf Pen By-Laws

Children’s Playground By-Laws

Disposal of Animal Carcasses By-Laws

Dogs Control By-Laws

Donkeys Limitation By-Laws

Education By-Laws

Fire Prevention By-Laws

Fishing Boats Safety By-Laws

Library By-Laws

Litter By-Laws

Livestock Limitation By-Laws

Livestock, Forestry and Poultry By-Laws

Motor Cycle Prohibition By-Laws
                                              49


Prince Philip Hall Management By-Laws

Public Health By-Laws

Public Holidays By-Laws

School children Medical and Dental By-Laws

Slaughterhouse By-Laws

Wood Control By-Laws

Youth Club By-Laws

                                    _________________

                                   CALF PEN BY-LAWS
      1.       Calf pens must be sited only either in the East Pasture east of the Volcano
Road, or in the pasture west of the Hottentot Gulch gate.
      2.       Calf pens must be constructed to a size not less than 6 feet by 10 feet and must
have a cement or cement wash floor and the inside walls to a height of 3 feet must be
constructed either of cement or of soft stone.
      3.       No more than 5 stock owners may share in the use of any one calf pen.
       4.      A person who fails to comply with these By-Laws commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine not exceeding £5 or in the case of a continuing offence a fine not exceeding
£2 for each day during which the offence continues.
                                       ___________

                       CHILDREN’S PLAYGROUND BY-LAWS
       1.       The area known as the Gulbenkian Children’s Playground hereinafter called
the Playground is set aside exclusively as a playground for children.
       2.       No person over the age of 15 years is permitted to make use of any of the play
equipment in the Playground.
       3.       No person over 10 years of age may use the small roundabout or the small
swings.
       4.       The Playground may not be used before 6am or after 8pm. during the months
of November to April inclusive nor before 7am or after 7pm in the months of May to October
inclusive.
       5.       Any person who damages any equipment in the Playground is liable to pay the
cost of repairing or replacing the same as may be directed by the court.
       6.       A person who fails to comply with the provisions of these By-Laws or
damages any equipment commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine not exceeding £5.
                                         ___________

                   DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL CARCASSES BY-LAWS
       1.     The owner of any animal which dies in the area between Shateler’s Hut on the
west, through and including all the Patches and the Village to Big Beach on the east and
                                             50


below 200 feet above sea level, must bury or cause to be buried the carcass of that animal
within 24 hours of its discovery in such a way that it cannot attract or become a breeding
place for flies.
       2.        The Administrator may in special circumstances and on application of the
owner extend the time limit or otherwise vary the application of the previous By-Law, having
due regard for the protection of the health of the community.
       3.        Neglect to comply with the requirements of By-Law 1 or any variation of
those requirements permitted under By-Law 2 is an offence and renders the owner of any
dead domestic animal liable to a fine not exceeding £1 on the first or £2 on any subsequent
conviction.
                                          ___________

                             DOGS (CONTROL) BY-LAWS

(Made in 1983 and replaced by the Dogs (Control) By-Laws of 1 May 1995 and 7 November
                                         2003)

                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.     Definitions
2.     Offences by dog owners
3.     Conditions of ownership

1.     Definitions

       (1)    In these By-Laws:

“livestock” means cattle, sheep, pigs or poultry;
“owner”, in respect of a dog, includes the person for the time being in charge of or other
        wise in control of the dog;
“worry” means to bite, pull about with teeth or chase.

       (2)    The occupier of premises where a dog is kept or permitted to live or
remains is taken to be the owner of the dog for the purposes of these By-Laws unless the
contrary is
proved.

2.     Offences by dog owners

        (1)    The owner of a dog must ensure that the dog does not kill or worry
livestock.
Penalty: A fine not exceeding £250.

       (2)     The owner of a dog must keep the dog under control.
Penalty: A fine not exceeding £250.

      (3)    If a dog bites someone and they need to go to the Doctor, the person bitten
can complain to the Police and either the dog is put down or the owner is fined £250.

       (4)    The owner of a dog must not allow the dog to be at large between 9.00pm
on one day at 6.00am on the following day.
                                              51


Penalty: A fine not exceeding £100.

       (5)   A person must not import a dog into Tristan da Cunha, whether
permanently or for any temporary period, without the approval of the Agricultural
Officer.
Penalty: A fine not exceeding £100.

       (6)     The Agricultural Officer must not give approval for the purpose of
subclause (5) unless there is produced to him or her:
   (a) a veterinary certificate showing the dog to be in good health; and

     (b) in the case of a bitch dog - a certificate showing that the bitch is incapable of
         producing progeny.

       (7)    If a Magistrate finds the owner of a dog guilty of an offence under these
By-Laws the magistrate may, if he or she considers it in the public interest to do so,
order the owner to destroy the dog within a period the Magistrate specifies.

        (8)      The owner of a dog must comply with an order made under paragraph
(7).
Penalty: A fine not exceeding £25 for each day or part of a day during which the order is
not complied with

3.      Conditions of ownership

        (1)    Before the purchase of any dog a licence must be obtained from the
Administrator in consultation with the Agricultural Officer. A Register of Dogs will be kept
at the Administration Office and the licensee must sign the Register.

        (2)     Only one dog (working dog or pet) per household (which is defined as a
single, separate dwelling unit with its own separate entrance) will be licensed.

        (3)    Those households, which currently have more than one dog, will be permitted
to keep the extra dog or dogs, but will not be permitted to replace those extra animals when
the said animals die.

       (4)      A licensed dog must be kept on the property of the person to whom it is
licensed.

      (5)      Once a dog has reached the age of 8 years, or is no longer able to work
through ill health, the owner may apply to be granted a licence to own another dog.

        (6)    If a bitch becomes pregnant, the litter must be destroyed, unless the owner
can show that there are sufficient Islanders, eligible to be granted a licence, who wish to own
a dog from that litter.

       (7)   No dog may be imported or purchased on the Island without prior authority
from the Administrator.
                                              52


       (8)    No expatriate is allowed to keep a dog. However, if an expatriate wishes to
bring with them a dog, they must undertake to export the animal when he/she leaves or
have the dog put down.

       (9)    A healthy dog may not be destroyed unless destruction has been ordered by
the Administrator or sufficient cause is shown to the Administrator why that dog should be
destroyed.

       (10) A person who fails to comply with this by-law commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £250.
                                    ___________

                           DONKEYS LIMITATION BY-LAW

  1.      In this by-law 
          “jack”        means male donkey;
          “jinny”      means female donkey;
          “family”     means a person or persons separately owning,
                       and maintaining potato patches;
          “unit”       a group of three families;
          “owner”      means every person who is for the time being in
                       chief charge or control of the donkey.

   2.      The families on the Island of Tristan da Cunha are to be divided into units of 3
families to each group. Each unit will be allowed to keep and own 2 jacks and one jinny. Any
person or persons found in possession of more than this amount commits an offence.
   Penalty: A fine of £1.
   3.      (1) Every unit must
           (a) register any change in the composition of the units within one month of any
               such change with the Administrator or other such person as is appointed; and
           (b) seek the permission of the Administrator to rear the foal as a replacement for
               an existing donkey if the unit wishes to retain the foal and in the event that
               permission is granted to rear the foal, it may be kept for 2 years without being
               counted.
          (2) Failure to notify any changes will render the persons concerned liable to a fine
of 25p each.
   4.     Any family wishing to opt out of the requirements of by-law 2 may do so but will
only be allowed to keep one donkey and the penalties of by-law 2 will apply and the
provisions of by-law 3 must be adhered to.
   5.     In the event of any dispute concerning the composition of units as defined or the
use of animals within the group, the decision of the Administrator will be final.
                                        ___________

                                 EDUCATION BY-LAWS

   (Amended by the Education (Amendment) By-Laws, 2008 which came into force on 14
                                   January 2008
  1.     This by-law may be cited as the Education By-Laws.
                                              53


   2.      In this by-law—
“Committee” means the Education Committee established in accordance with section 18 of
       the Ordinance;
“Education Officer” means the officer appointed under paragraph 5 of this by-law;
“School” means St. Mary’s School, Edinburgh, or such other schools as may hereafter be
       established;
“Teacher” includes an assistant teacher.
   3.      Subject to any rules made under by-law 6(1), it is the duty of the parent of every
child who has reached the age of 5 years and has not reached the age of 16 years to cause
such child to attend school during the whole of the time prescribed for attendance of such
child unless there is reasonable excuse for non-attendance; and a parent who fails to perform
such duty commits an offence:
       Provided that no child shall be required to attend school on Sunday or on any Public
Holiday.
   4.      The following are be deemed reasonable excuses for the non-attendance of a child
at school—
       (a) That the child is prevented from attending school by sickness and that such
        absences of a week or longer is duly certified by a Medical Officer;
       (b) That the child is in the opinion of the Education Officer under efficient instruction
       in some other manner;
       (c) That the child is absent because by agreement with the Education Officer the
       parents have arranged for their child-
         (i) to take part in one longboat trip to Nightingale per year during school term
              providing such child has made no other trip to Nightingale that calendar year;
         (ii) to make a trip overseas for recreational or medical purposes;
         (iii) to take part in a day trip away from the Settlement area.
   5.       There is to be an Education Officer who must be appointed in accordance with
paragraph 1 of the Schedule to these By-Laws and who is responsible to the Administrator
for the running of the school in accordance with paragraph 2 of that Schedule.
   6.       (1)          The Committee may, with the approval of the Administrator in
Council, make rules for—
            (a) the appointment, dismissal, terms of service and remuneration of teachers and
                 creche workers;
          (b) the good government, discipline and routine work of the school and for
              preparing hours of attendance;
          (c) prescribing the duration of terms and for declaring school holidays;
          (d) the provision of new schools or additional buildings and for the improvement
              or enlargement of existing buildings;
          (e) the provision of an annual routine medical inspection and adequate dental
              inspection when a dental officer is available and adequate treatment following
              such inspections;
          (f) the provision of playing fields and equipment and for regulating the terms and
              conditions upon which they may be used;
          (g) the provision of staffing, management and routine work of a public library;

           (h) the provision of staffing, management and routine work of the c reche;
                                              54


           (i) the provision of suitable types of adult education;
           (j) the making of grants towards the expenses of voluntary organisations such as
               the uniformed organisations in providing or in aiding the provision of facilities
               for physical training and recreation and for prescribing the condition of
               eligibility for such grants;
           (k) determining whether and upon what terms scholars may be admitted to school
               before the age of 5 years or allowed to leave after the age of 14 years before
               attaining the age of 16 years;
           (l) the provision and operation of a Youth Club;
           (m) generally for carrying into effect the purposes and provisions of these By-
               Laws.
       (2)      Rules made under sub-rule (1) may provide that breaches of, or failure to
comply with, any provision thereof are punishable on conviction by a fine not exceeding £25.
   7.      Religious instruction may be provided in accordance with the provisions of
paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Schedule.
   8.      A person who wilfully damages school property commits an offence.
   9.      Any person guilty of an offence under these By-Laws is liable on conviction to a
fine not exceeding £25 or in the event of a continuing offence £2 for each day during which
the offence continues and in the event of damage to property to pay the costs of repair or
replacement as may be directed by the Court.

                                        SCHEDULE
                                         (by-law 6)

      1.      The Education Officer must be selected by the Governor in consultation with
the Administrator, Island Council, and Committee. His or her salary must be paid by the
Administration of Tristan da Cunha. He or she is to be the Head Teacher of the school.
       2. The Education Officer is responsible to the Administrator for the efficient internal
management of the school, teaching in, and examination of the school, the drafting of
syllabuses and the training of teachers and in respect of other duties assigned to him or her by
the Administrator.
       3. The Chaplain licensed by the Archbishop of Cape Town for Tristan da Cunha must
be invited to teach religious instruction in school and to lead school in worship. At the
discretion of the Chaplain school worship and religious instruction may take place elsewhere
than in school.
       4. Any person may withdraw his or her child from worship and religious education on
giving notice to the Education Officer. Any person may also request that his or her child be
given facilities for receiving religious instruction otherwise than in accordance with Anglican
principles and the Education Officer is responsible for arranging that such instruction is given
by a competent person if this is practicable.
                                           ___________

                             FIRE PREVENTION BY-LAWS

       1.       There is to be established a Tristan da Cunha Volunteer Fire Service which is
to consist of the number of men that the Administrator from time to time directs and the Fire
Service is to be under the command of a person the Administrator in writing appoints.
       2.       It is the duty of all male persons over the age of 15 years to give such aid and
assistance in the fighting of any fires as the Administrator or the person in command of the
                                             55


Volunteer Fire Service directs. Any person who fails to render such aid or assistance when
called upon to do so commits an offence.
        3.       It is the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works of the Tristan da Cunha
Administration or any other person the Administrator in writing directs, to maintain in good
working order the fire fighting apparatus and appliances and the fire alarm system.
        4.       It is an offence for a person without reasonable cause to interfere with or
damage any fire fighting apparatus or appliances or the fire alarm system.
        5.       A person who commits an offence against these by-laws is on conviction
liable to a fine not exceeding £5.
                                          ___________

                FISHING BOATS SAFETY REGULATIONS BY-LAWS
       1.     In these By-Laws
     “Tristan local Waters”     Within 3 miles of the Coast of the
                                Island of Tristan da Cunha;
     “Company”                  Tristan Investments Co., (Pty.) Ltd. or
                                any successor company thereto;
     “Company Fishing           This refers to M.V. Tristania or M.V.
     Vessels”                   Frances Repetto or any sea going ship
                                subsequently used by the Company for
                                carrying out similar functions;
     “Shorebased”               Relates to all those craft belonging to
                                or used by the Company which
                                operate from the Island of Tristan da
                                Cunha;
     “Motor Boat                The Senior man in each motor boat, so
     Coxswain”                  appointed by the Company;
     “Senior                    A person so appointed by the Tristan
     Representative”            da Cunha Development Company;

       2.      These By-Laws apply to shorebased fishing dinghies, checking dinghies, and
motor powered boats owned by the Company, or used by the Company.
       3.      Each fishing dinghy, and checking dinghy owned by the Company or used by
the Company, on putting to sea, must be in possession of a torch, a whistle, and a lifebelt or
lifejacket for each person. Each item of this equipment must be in good working order.
Failure to comply with this regulation renders the Company, on conviction, liable to a fine
not exceeding £5.
       4.      Each motor powered boat owned or used by the Company, on putting to sea,
must be in possession of a main bow light of such intensity as to satisfy the Administrator or
any person appointed by him or her under regulation 10 of this by-law, a torch, a whistle, a
watch, a walkie talkie radio, a Very pistol and a lifebelt or lifejacket for each of the motor
powered boat’s crew. Each item of equipment must be in good working order. Failure to
comply with this regulation renders the Company on conviction liable to a fine not exceeding
£5.
       5.      Every person whilst at sea in any fishing boat whether dinghy or motor
powered boat must wear the lifejacket or lifebelt provided at all times. Any person who fails
to do so commits an offence.
    Penalty: A fine of £5.
                                               56


        6.       Each torch and whistle as described in regulation 3 and 4 must only be used to
attract attention when in difficulty.
        7.       In the event of a Company fishing vessel being outside Tristan local waters,
the motor boat coxswain must ensure that all nets are raised, and each dinghy is ready for
towing not later than one hour before sunset north of a line drawn across the Island of Tristan
da Cunha from Anchorstock Point to Sandy Point, and 2 hours before sunset south of this
line. The latest time for raising nets on each day is to be determined by the Senior
Representative or his or her deputy, and the leading hands informed accordingly. Failure to
comply with this regulation renders the Company and the motor boat coxswain liable to a
fine on conviction not exceeding £10.
        8.       If any dinghy is not ready for towing one hour after the signal for raising nets
has been given, each person in the Dinghy is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding £1.
        9.       The Senior Representative must arrange for a signal for raising nets which is
clearly recognisable and easily understood, and is responsible for seeing that all persons
employed by the Company are aware of the signal.
        10.      All craft operated by the company other than those operated by a Company
fishing vessel in Tristan local Waters or other motor powered craft which the Administrator
specially or generally exempts must return to the harbour before sunset. The occupants of any
craft which fails to do so commit an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5.
   In the event that any craft other than those operated by a Company Fishing vessel or a craft
exempted by the Administrator under this by-law fails to return to the harbour by 10 minutes
after sunset the Senior Representative or his or her deputy must personally inform the
Administrator as soon as possible.
       11.     (1)     Whenever fishing dinghies are at sea pursuant to a request of the duly
appointed representative of Tristan in Investments (Pty) Ltd., the representative must cause a
power boat of the company to remain on patrol off shore until the last dinghy and its crew are
safely ashore.
       (2)     A person who fails to comply with the provisions of this bye law commits an
offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5.
       12.     The Administrator, or any person appointed by the Administrator, may inspect
craft owned by the Company to ensure that the regulations prescribed are being adhered to.
       13.     The Administrator must in writing appoint one or more persons not in the
permanent employment of the Company to inspect all shore based company craft once a year
and must if satisfied upon receipt of the inspecting officer’s report issue a Certificate of
Seaworthiness in respect of each craft. No craft may put to sea unless a Certificate of
Seaworthiness has been issued in respect of it. If any craft puts to sea without a Certificate of
Seaworthiness, the Company and the persons putting to sea in such craft each commits an
offence.
   Penalty: A fine of £5.
       14.     The Administrator after consultation with but not necessarily in accordance
with the advice of such Committee of the Island Council as he or she designates for the
purpose may make regulations supplementary to and not inconsistent with the provisions of
this by-law for the more effective safeguarding of the safety of fishing boats at sea if in his or
her opinion such regulations are necessary. The regulations may if the Administrator so
decides incorporate any standing orders issued by the Company for the safety of its craft and
may provide that any breach of them or failure to comply with them is punishable upon
conviction by a fine not exceeding £5.
                                         ___________
                                              57


                  ISLAND BOATS SAFETY REGULATION BY-LAWS

                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.      Citation
2.      Board of Inspectors
3.      Licensing of boats
4.      Licences
5.      Fees
6.      Coxswains
7.      Commencement of journey
8.      Rations
9.      Responsibility for personnel
10.     Senior coxswain
11.     Voyage discipline
12.     Safety stores
13.     Lifejackets
14.     Communications

Citation
       1.      These By-Laws may be cited as the Island Boats Safety Regulation by-laws.

Board of Inspectors
       2.     A Board of Inspectors shall be appointed from time to time with the
Administrator as Chair and not more than six nor less than four members, appointed by the
Administrator from amongst those at the time being resident in Tristan da Cunha. Not more
than two members shall be temporary residents.

Licensing of boats
       3.       Before and Island boat can be used it must be licensed by the Administrator.
Licences will be granted after the boat and its equipment have been inspected by at least 2
members of the Board of Inspectors, one of whom must be an Islander. Licences will only be
granted if the boat and its equipment is considered to be in a seaworthy condition and all oars
will be marked after inspection and only such oars can be used in the boat. Licences are to be
of two sorts 
           (a) for local usethat is for use in the waters immediately around Tristan da
               Cunha;
           (b) for general usethat is for use for trips to Nightingale and Inaccessible.

Licences
      4.     Licences are renewable during January of each year, and are valid until the
31st December of the year of issue only.

Fees
       5.      (1)    The following fees are payable prior to the issue of a licence
       (a) for a long boat 50p per annum or part thereof;
       (b) for a dinghy 40p per annum or part thereof.
      (2)      Any person who uses a boat, or permits a boat to be used which has not a
current licence commits an offence.
                                              58


Penalty: A fine of £5.
The coxswain of any boat so used shall render himself liable to have his or her name removed
from the register of coxswains.

Coxswains
       6.       There is to be a Register of Coxswains maintained by the Administrator or an
officer appointed by the Administrator for the purpose. Only these men and women who are
at the time of coming into force of this amending by-law listed in such Register or who
thereafter receive a Coxswains Certificate from the Administrator may be permitted to take
Island boats to Nightingale or Inaccessible:
       Provided that no such certificate may be issued by the Administrator unless 2 senior
coxswains have certified to the Admnistrator that the person in respect of whom a certificate
is to be issued is in their judgment competent in all respects to take an Island boat to
Nightingale or Inaccessible. Any person whose name is not on the Register of Coxswains
who takes an Island boat to Nightingale or Inaccessible commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5.

Commencement of journey
       7.       Before any boat sets out for Nightingale or Inaccessible the coxswain for the
trip must report to the Administrator informing the Administrator who will travel in the boat
with the coxswain. No boat is to be granted permission to leave Tristan da Cunha unless it
has at least 4 competent crew members besides the coxswain.

Rations
       8.      (1)     Each boat must be provided with 3 days reserve of fresh water and
food for all those in the boat and the coxswain will be held responsible to ensure that these
reserves of food and water are carried at all times.
       (2)     Any coxswain who fails to obtain sufficient reserves of water and food in his
or her boat commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £ and removal of the person’s name from the register of coxswains.

Responsibility for personnel
       9.       The coxswain is responsible for all the people in his or her boat, and must give
clear instructions when necessary. He or she must ensure that the boat is never overloaded.
A person who fails to carry out any reasonable instructions given by the coxswain commits
an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £1.

Senior coxswain
       10.     (1)     Before any boats leave for Nightingale or Inaccessible, the
Administrator must appoint one of the coxswains to be regarded as senior coxswain for the
trip. The person so appointed senior coxswain is responsible for issuing such instructions to
the other coxswains as he or she considers fit.
       (2)     If 2 or more boats want to leave Nightingale or Inaccessible for a day when
the senior coxswain does not intend leaving he or she may, if he or she considers the weather
reasonable, give permission to the boats to leave, after he or she has nominated one of the
coxswains to be regarded as senior coxswain:
       But the Senior Coxswain must not give permission for any boats to leave Nightingale
or Inaccessible or any day after 1.30pm local time.
                                              59


Voyage discipline
        11.     The senior coxswain must ensure that all the boats keep together during the
trip to and from Nightingale or Inaccessible, and must see that any damaged boat or boat with
a weak crew is kept in front of the rest of the fleet.
        (2)     The senior coxswain must decide when it is a good day to return from
Nightingale or Inaccessible, and no boat may leave without his or her permission.
        (3)     A person, including another coxswain, who fails to carry out any reasonable
instruction given by the senior coxswain commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £2 and removal of the person’s name (if a coxswain) from the register of
coxswains.

Safety stores
       12.      (1)     Before any boat leaves Tristan da Cunha for Nightingale or
Inaccessible, or at any other time as the Administrator directs, the coxswain must arrange for
safety stores to be collected from the Administrator and taken in the coxswain’s boat for use
in an emergency. Such stores must be returned as soon as the boats return to Tristan da
Cunha, and the coxswain will be held responsible for the stores until they are returned to the
Administrator.
       (2)       A person who contravenes paragraph (1) or who, being responsible for safety
stores fails to take reasonable care of them, commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5 and removal of the person’s name (if a coxswain) from the register of
coxswains either permanently or for a period the court directs.

Lifejackets
       13.      Every person while at sea in any boat must wear a lifejacket of a type the
Administrator approves. The Coxswain of every boat must ensure that this regulation is
complied with. A person who fails to wear a lifejacket or any coxswain who fails to ensure
that such lifejackets are worn commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5.

Communications
      14.     The Senior Coxswain is for the collection and safe custody of the radio set and
must nominate a person to operate it and to maintain daily schedules with Tristan Radio. If
the Senior Coxswain fails to do so he or she commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5.
                                       ___________

                                   LIBRARY BY-LAWS

       1.       There is to be a Public Library maintained by the government of Tristan da
Cunha which is to be housed in such building as the Administrator directs.
       2.       The Public Library is to be under the day to day control of a librarian who
must be appointed by and is responsible to the Administrator.
       3.       The librarian may appoint such assistant staff as he or she considers necessary
subject to their appointment receiving the approval of the Administrator. Such assistant staff
may be paid such honorarium (if any) as the Administrator directs.
       4.       The Public Library is to be divided into an Adult and a Children’s Section. No
person under 14 years of age may use the Adult section except with the permission in writing
of the Administrator. No child under 5 years of age may use the Public Library.
                                               60


       5.      Books may be borrowed from the Public Library by any person residing on
Tristan whether temporarily or permanently; but before any book is borrowed by any person
a Library Users ticket in a form approved by the Administrator must be issued to the person
by the Librarian.
       6.      The number of books which may be borrowed by any one person at any one
time is to be fixed by the Librarian with the approval of the Administrator and is until so
fixed unlimited.
       7.      Books borrowed from the Public Library must be returned on or before the
expiry of 15 days inclusive of the day of issue and return. Any person who fails so to return
any book is liable to pay a fine of 1p for any week or part of a week in excess of the
authorised period of 15 days during which the book is retained by the borrower.2
       8.      The Public Library must be opened daily except Sunday for a period of not
less than one hour and the Librarian, with the approval of the Administrator, may fix and vary
the hours within which the Library is open. One week’s notice of any variation of hours must
be given by public notice.
       9.      A person who fails to comply with these By-Laws or damages or loses any
book from the Public Library commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5; and in the event of loss or damage to a book to pay the cost of repair
or replacement as the court directs.
                                         ___________

                                     LITTER BY-LAWS
(Made on 23 November 2001, and amended by the Litter (Amendment) By-Laws, 2008 which
came into force on 1 March 2008)
       1.       These By-Laws may be known as the Litter By-Laws, and apply equally to the
Islands of Tristan da Cunha, Nightingale, Inaccessible and Gough.
       2.       A person must not throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown or
deposited any dust, dirt, ashes, refuse, offal, rubbish, bottles, any material dangerous to
animals or other matter or thing anywhere other than in a refuse bin or receptacle or in an
area set aside by the Administrator for the disposal of such dirt, dust, ashes, offal, rubbish,
bottles, material dangerous to animals or such any other matter or thing.

       3.       A person who contravenes by- Law 2 commits an offence.
Penalty: (a) for a first offence, a fine of £25; or
          (b) for any subsequent offence, a fine of £100,
and, in either case, a further fine of £3 for every day during which the offence is continued
after conviction.
                                           ___________

                          LIVESTOCK LIMITATION BY-LAWS

        1.    In these By-Laws—
“livestock” means cattle and sheep;
“owner” means the person in whose name livestock are registered;
       2.     No owner of livestock may retain in his or her possession livestock in excess
of the number approved by Island Council.
       3.     A person who contravenes by-law 2 commits an offence.

2
    Under the Decimal Currency Ordinance, 1971, three old pennies become 1p
                                               61


Penalty: A fine of £2 and a further fine of £1 for each day the offence continues after
conviction.
                                    ___________

              LIVESTOCK, FORESTRY, AND AGRICULTURE BY-LAWS

                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS

   -   Definitions
   -   Agricultural Committee
   -   Duties of Agriculture Committee
   -   Control of Pastures
   -   Agriculture
   -   Forestry
   -   Schedule: Livestock Return

Definitions
       1.      In these By-Laws, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
expressions have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, that is to say—
“Administrator” in relation to any function under these By-Laws includes a person
      appointed in writing by the Administrator for the purpose of performing that function;
“crop” includes all trees grown either for timber, fuel, food production or any other purpose.
“disease” includes damage by insects and other pests.
“grazing area” means one of the following areas: Settlement, Anchorstock, Caves,
       Stonybeach, Sandy Point, Hill, Inacessible, Nightingale, Gough.
“livestock” includes all cattle, sheep, dogs, donkeys, pigs, geese, poultry and any other
       animal declared by the Administrator to be included in this definition for the purpose
       of these By-Laws.
“owner” means every person for the time being in chief charge or control, or in the case of
       joint ownership, the senior partner, over livestock or agricultural land which term
       includes “The Patches”.
“pasture” means the areas specifically fenced off for controlled grazing known as Beacon
       Field, Cemetery Field, Stableford Field, and Hottentot Field, and any other areas that
       are from time to time fenced.
“valuable timber” means all timber other than Island Wood (Phylica Nitida) unless
      personally owned.

Agricultural Committee
       2.      There is to be an Agricultural Committee consisting of the Administrator as
the Chair, and 4 members of the Island Council, who must themselves be owners of livestock,
elected annually at the first meeting of the Island Council each year.

Duties of Agriculture Committee
       3.      The duties of the Agricultural Committee are be to assist the Administrator in
the following matters—
          (a) control of the pastures and grazings;
            (b) control of the number of types of livestock permitted for each owner;
            (c) selection of male animals for breeding purposes;
                                             62


           (d) allocation of land;
           (e) enforcement of the provisions of these By-Laws.
       4.       Every owner of livestock must during the first fortnight of January in each
year complete a return thereof on the form prescribed in the Schedule to these By-Laws, and
must deliver the same to the Administrator not later than the 20th day of January each year.
An owner who fails to do so commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
       5.       Copies of the prescribed form are to be available from the Administrator.
       6.       Every owner must register with the Administrator the owner’s Brand or Mark.
The Administrator must keep a Register known as “The Brand Book” for the purpose of
registering brands and marks.
       7.       Any owner wishing to acquire, or change his or her brand or mark after the
coming into force of this by-law can do so only by making prior application to the
Administrator for approval of the proposed brand or mark. Having given his or her approval
the Administrator must forthwith register the brand or mark in the Brand Book.
       8.       (1)     Every owner, before moving any livestock from one grazing to
another, must obtain permission from the Administrator for such move, and the Administrator
must inspect such livestock and make such stipulations as he or she considers fit for dipping
or spraying the livestock prior to its movement. An owner who fails to obtain such
permission or to comply with such stipulations commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
       (2)      The Administrator must keep a register known as the “Stock Movement
Register” in the form prescribed in the first schedule to this by-law, in which the
Administrator must register all authorised movements of stock.
       9.       Every owner must, within 24 hours of obtaining the information himself or
herself, report to the Administrator the birth, sickness or death of any animal, and must take
such action as directed by the Administrator. An owner who fails to make such report or to
take such action as the Administrator directs commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
       10.      Every owner must, where practical within the month of January and at such
other times as the Administrator directs, arrange for all his or her sheep to be dipped to the
satisfaction of the Administrator.
       11.      (1)     Every owner must, when slaughtering livestock for human
consumption, arrange for the carcase to be inspected by the Medical Officer prior to its being
cut up. An owenr who fails to do this commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
        (2)      All cutting up of meat must where practical be done in the slaughter house
provided for that purpose.
        12.      Every owner must arrange for the castration of all male calves, donkeys,
lambs, and pigs before they are 6 month old, unless the owner obtains a permit from the
Administrator to use the animal for breeding purposes. An owner who fails to arrange such
castration commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
        13.      Every owner of geese must on or before the 31st day of March each year, kill
all his or her geese with the exception of one goose and one gander.
                                             63


Control of Pastures
       14.      Owners may not allow their livestock onto any of the pastures without the
permission of the Administrator. An owner who allows such livestock without permission
commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
       15.      Owners are responsible for moving their livestock from the pastures when
instructed so to remove them by the Administrator. An owner who fails to do so commits an
offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.


      16.     No person may remove dung from any pasture.
       17.      No person may remove turf or soil from any pasture without the permission of
the Administrator or an officer appointed in writing by him. A person who removes such turf
or soil without permission commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.

Agriculture
       18.      Every owner must, when requested by the Administrator, submit a return
showing the number, location and use to which he or she has put any agricultural plots in his
or her possession.
       19.      Nobody may enclose any land, or build a wall, house or other structure on any
land not already fenced at the coming into force of this by-law without the permission of the
Administrator. The Administrator must seek the advice of the Agricultural Committee before
granting permission to enclose land. A person who encloses any such land or builds any such
wall, house or other structure without the permission of the Administrator commits an
offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
       20.      Every owner must maintain in good order the walls, and gates round his or her
property or land, and must help with the maintenance of the public gates when called upon by
the Agricultural Committee to do so. An owner who fails to do so commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
       21.      Every owner must report to the Administrator within 24 hours of finding it,
any form of disease or insect pests the owner finds in his or her plots, and must take such
action to rid the plots of the disease as the Administrator orders. An owner who fails to take
such action commits an offence.
       Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
   22.     Every owner must, if so instructed by the Administrator spray all or any portion of
his or her land with selective weed-killer if the Administrator considers it is in the general
interests of good husbandry that that land should be so sprayed. An owner who fails to carry
out such instructions commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.

Forestry
       23.    Every owner must, when requested by the Administrator, render a return of all
fruit and other valuable trees in his or her possession, giving the location, number and
approximate age of the trees. An owner who fails to do so commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
                                              64


       24.      No person may clear any area for the purpose of planting trees without first
obtaining permission from the Administrator. A person who so clears without such
permission commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
       25.      No person may fell any timber either valuable or Island wood (Phylica Nitida)
in the area bounded by “Big Gulch” and “East End” without first obtaining a permit from the
Agricultural Committee so to do. A person who fells any tree without first obtaining such
permit commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 27.
       26.      Any person wishing to obtain timber from valuable trees must apply to the
Agricultural Committee who will issue, if they think fit, a permit on payment of the
prescribed fee.
        27.      A person convicted of any offence against these By-Laws is on conviction
liable to a fine not exceeding £10 or the confiscation of the livestock or to both such fine and
confiscation.

                             SCHEDULE
                              (by-law 4)

                        LIVESTOCK RETURN

      To be completed by each owner and handed to the Administrator
or an officer appointed in writing by the Administrator before the 20th
January each year.

Owners Registered Mark
………………………………………………………………


Owners Name
………………………………………………………………………….




                                                                  NIGHTINGALE           SANDY POINT
                            SETTLEMENT



                                                    INACESSIBLE
                            ANCHOR
                            STOCK
                            CAVES

                                                                                GOVEN                 TOTAL
                            STONCY
                            BEACH
                            HILL

               COVES
CATTLE
               BULLOC
               KS
               EWES
SHEEP
               RAMS
               JENNYS
DONKEYS
               JACKS
                                             65


               PIGS
               DOGS
               GEESE
               POULTRY


                    STOCK MOVEMENT REGISTER

 To be kept by the Administrator or an officer appointed in writing by the
 Administrator.

 NO        NAME       NUMBER       FROM      TO    DATE      APPROVED
           OF         AND
           OWNER      CLASS OF
                      STOCK




                                        ___________


                      MOTOR CYCLE PROHIBITION BY-LAWS

      1.      These By-Laws may be cited as the Motor Cycle Prohibition By-Laws.
      2.      In these By-Laws except when the context requires otherwise—
“Motor Cycle” has the meaning ascribed to it in the Road Traffic (Tristan da Cunha)
Ordinance, 1996.
      3.      No person may import into Tristan da Cunha any motor cycle or motor scooter
having an engine capacity exceeding 200cc.
      4.      A person who contravenes by-law 3 commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £25 or, in the case of a continuing offence, the sum of £2 for every day
during which such offence is continued.
                                        ___________

                   PRINCE PHILIP HALL MANAGEMENT BY-LAWS

      1.      In these By-Laws 
“the Hall” means the Prince Philip Hall;
“the Management Committee” means the Prince Philip Hall Management Committee
      established under by-law 3.
      2.        The Administrator may make regulations providing for—
           (a) the proper use of the Hall,
                                             66


           (b) the maintenance and improvement of the Hall,
           (c) the management and control of any bar licensed to serve alcoholic drinks on
               the premises of the Hall,
           (d) the collection, accounting and use of funds accruing to the Hall through the
               running of a licensed bar, or from any other source.
       3.       A committee to be known as the “Prince Philip Hall Management Committee”
is constituted consisting of—
           (a) 2 ex officio members, namely, the Administrator who is to be President, and the
               person holding the office of Chief Islander;
           (b) 3 members appointed by the Island Council for a period of one year, at least
               one of whom should be a woman:
           (c) 3 members to be nominated by the Administrator to serve for a period of 2
               years; one of whom must be a senior Administration official who is to be
               Treasurer.
       4.       At its first meeting each year the Committee must elect a Chair from amongst
the elected and nominated members who must preside at meetings of the Committee; but that
the President may summon a meeting of the Committee and may preside at such a meeting if
he or she so desires.
       5.     The function of the Management Committee is to advise the Administrator on
regulations made under these By-Laws, and the manner in which funds accruing to the Hall
should be used in the maintenance and improvement of the Hall.
       6.     A person who—
          (a) wilfully damages any part of the fabric or any article of equipment in the Hall;
           (b) obstructs persons lawfully using the Hall;
           (c) uses the Hall contrary to the provisions of any regulation made under by-law 2;
           (d) uses the Hall during prohibited hours,
commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5; and in the event of damage to pay the costs of repair and replacement
as directed by the court.
                                          ___________

                 PUBLIC HEALTH AND PUBLIC WORKS BY-LAWS

      1.      In these By-Laws
“building premises” includes houses, hotels, schools, factories, garages, and other buildings
      in which persons are employed, and the curtilege of any building;
“Committee” means the Public Health & Public Works Committee established by by-law
      13;
“Medical Officer” means the Principal Medical Officer of the Tristan da Cunha
      Administration or any other medical practitioner that the Administrator in writing
      designates;
“occupier” means in the case of a building or part of a building the person in occupation or
      having the charge management or control of it, either on his or her own account or as
      the agent of another person, and in the case of a ship means the master or other person
      in charge of it;
                                              67


“owner” means the person for the time being receiving the rent of the premises in connection
      with which the word is used, or who would be in receipt of such rent according to the
      Law of England if any rent were paid;
“premises” includes lands, buildings, vehicles, structures of any kind, streams ditches or
      open spaces, covered or enclosed, whether built on or not and whether natural or
      artificial and any ship lying in the territorial waters of Tristan da Cunha;
“privy accommodation” includes water closets, earth closets, privies or any similar
      accommodation;
“Settlement” means the Settlement of Edinburgh and any other Settlement which may
      hereafter be established;
“slaughter house” means the place or building so designated by the Administrator in writing
      .
       2.       The Administrator may from time to time appoint such Public Health Officers,
operators or workers as the Administrator considers necessary for the due execution of these
By-Laws. Such persons hold office during the Administrator’s pleasure.
       3.       (1)   It is not lawful to erect any building or to rebuild any building without
sufficient privy accommodation. A person who erects any building without sufficient privy
accommodation commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
       (2)     If any building appears to the Medical Officer to be without sufficient privy
accommodation he or she must by written notice require the owner or occupier of the
building within a reasonable time specified in the notice, being not less than one month, to
provide sufficient privy accommodation.
       4.       (1)     On the complaint of any person to the Medical Officer that any drain,
privy accommodation, cesspool or septic tank on or belonging to any premises is a nuisance,
or if on the report of any Public Health Officer appointed under by-law 2 the Medical Officer
has reason to suspect that any such drain, privy accommodation, cesspool or septic tank is a
nuisance or injurious to health, any person authorised in writing by the Administrator may
enter such premises and cause the ground to be opened and examine any such drain, privy
accommodation, cesspool or septic tank.
       (2)      If on an examination under paragraph (1) the drain, privy accommodation,
cesspool or septic tank is found to be in a proper condition, the authorised person must cause
the ground to be closed and any damage done to be made good. If the drain, privy
accommodation, cesspool or septic tank appears to be in bad condition or to require alteration
or repair, the Medical Officer must forthwith cause written notice to be given to the owner or
occupier of the premises requiring the owner forthwith to do the necessary work.
        (3)    If the owner or occupier fails to comply with a notice given under paragraph
(2) –
               (a) the Administrator may in writing direct that the Superintendent of Public
                    Works or some other person to do the work at the expense of the
                    Tristan da Cunha Administration and such expense shall be recoverable
                    from the owner or occupier as the Court directs; and
              (b) the owner or occupier commits an offence;
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
              (b
       5.     (1)    Whenever the Medical Officer has reason to believe that the privy
accommodation in any factory or public building is insufficient or unsuitable by reason of the
number of persons employed in or resorting thereto he or she must forthwith give notice in
writing to the owner or occupier in a form and specifying a time the Administrator by
regulation provides, requiring the owner or occupier to provide or maintain such
                                               68


accommodation as is required or has been specified for such building in any Regulation made
by the Administrator.
       (2)     If an owner or occupier fails to comply with a notice under paragraph (1) at
the expiration of the prescribed period –
            (a) the Administrator may in writing direct that the Superintendent of Public
                      Works or some other person to do the work at the expense of the
                      Tristan da Cunha Administration and such expense is recoverable
                       from the owner or occupier as the court directs; and
               (b) the owner or occupier commits an offence;
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
       6.      The Tristan da Cunha Administration may provide such Public Privy
Accommodation as the Administrator by regulation prescribes and any person who misuses
any privy accommodation provided in connection with any factory, school or other public
building commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
       7.      (1)    The following are deemed to be nuisances—
          (a) any premises in such a state as to be a nuisance or injurious to health in the
              opinion of the Medical Officer or if a drain is so foul or in such state as to be a
              nuisance or injurious to health in the opinion of the Medical Officer.
          (b) any animal so kept as to be a nuisance or injurious to health in the opinion of
              the Medical Officer.
          (c) any accumulation or deposit which is a nuisance or injurious to health in the
              opinion of the Medical Officer.
            (d) any other matter so declared by the Administrator.
        (2)      The person by reason of whose act, default, or sufferance, a nuisance arose,
exists, or continues commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
        (3)      The court may order that any building wherein a nuisance proved to exist is
such as to render the building in the judgement of the court unfit for human habitation to
prohibit the using of the building for that purpose until in its judgement the building is
rendered fit for that purpose.
        8.       (1)     If an inmate of any building used for human habitation is suffering
from any disease deemed to be infectious by regulation made by the Administrator, the head
of the family to which the inmate belongs must forthwith give notice thereof to the Medical
Officer and must comply with any directions the Medical Officer gives thereafter for dealing
with such disease.
        (2)      A person required by paragraph (1) to give notice who fails to do so, or who
fails to comply with any direction given by the Medical Officer, commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
        (3)      If in the opinion of the Medical Officer there is an outbreak of any disease
deemed by regulation to be infectious, the Administrator may by regulation prescribe such
general measures as seem to him or her necessary
        (4)      If the Medical Officer is of the opinion that the cleansing and disinfecting of
any building or part thereof would tend to prevent or check infectious disease, the
Administrator must in writing direct the owner or occupier of the building to disinfect the
building in a manner the Medical Officer specifies. A person who fails to comply with such
direction commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
                                               69


       9.      (1)     If the Medical Officer has reason to suspect that the milk or water
supplied from any dairy or water supply is likely to propagate an infectious disease, the
Medical Officer must examine any premises, dairy, cowshed or water supply suspected and
may examine any animal, pipe, stream or resident of any premises. The Medical Officer must
forthwith report the results to the Administrator who must in writing direct the person who, in
the Administrator’s opinion, is most concerned to take such steps as the Administrator directs
to prevent or check the spread of such infectious disease.
       (2)     A person who refuses to comply with such directions or who refuses to allow
the Medical Officer to inspect the person’s premises or animals commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
       10.     (1)     No person, without permission in writing from the Medical Officer,
may retain a body unburied elsewhere than in a public mortuary or in a place not used at the
time as a dwelling house or workroom for more than a period prescribed by regulation made
by the Administrator.
       (2)     A person who contravenes paragraph (1) commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).


       11.      Every person who intends to erect, reconstruct, alter or extensively repair any
building used or to be used for human habitation must give notice of such intention to the
Administrator. Ay person who fails to do so commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in by-law 15(2).
       12.      The Medical Officer may inspect any animal, meat, poultry, game, flesh, fish,
bird, milk, flour, rice, butter or other food, fresh preserved or canned which he or she has
reason to believe is intended for sale for or to be used for human consumption. If any food as
aforesaid appears to the Medical Officer to be unwholesome or unfit for human consumption
he or she must forthwith report the fact to the Administrator, who must in writing direct the
Medical Officer, or any other person the Administrator thinks fit, to seize and to destroy such
food.
       13.      (1)     A Committee to be known as the Public Health and Public Works
committee is hereby constituted. It is to consist of—
           (a) the Administrator;
           (b) the Medical Officer;
           (c) 2 persons elected by the Island Council from amongst the elected members
               thereof.
           (d) 2 persons appointed by the Administrator.
       (2)      The members elected under paragraph 13(i)(c) are to be elected annually at the
first meeting of the Island Council following the elections to that body. The persons
nominated under paragraph 13(i)(d) are to be appointed annually to hold office for the same
period as the persons elected under paragraph 13(i)(c).
       (3)      The Administrator is Chair of the Committee but in the Administrator’s
absence from any meeting the Medical Officer is Chair of that meeting.
       (4)      The quorum for a meeting of the committee is 4, of whom at least one must be
an elected member of the Island Council.
       (5)      In the event of an equality of votes on any issue the person presiding has a
second or casting vote.
      (6)        The functions of the Public Health and Public Works Committee are to
            (a) exercise a general supervision over the Public Health and Sanitation matters of
                Tristan da Cunha;
                                             70


          (b) advise the Administrator on the making of regulations under this by-law.
      (7)      The minutes of the Public Health and Public Works Committee must be
submitted to the Island Council for their approval at the meeting of that body next after the
meeting of the Committee.
      14.      The Administrator may make Regulations
          (a) for regulating the establishment of, conditions of admission to, and the use,
              conduct, management and inspection of, slaughter houses;
          (b) providing for the inspection of dairy cattle;
          (c) for securing the cleanliness of vessels used for containing milk for sale;
          (d) prescribing precautions to be taken for protecting milk against infection or
              contamination;
          (e) prescribing precautions to be taken for protecting any article, whether solid or
              liquid intended for human consumption against infection or contamination;
          (f) prohibiting the washing of clothes in streams in the Settlement and prescribing
              other measures for preventing pollution of water supplies;
          (g) defining any portion of the Settlement as an area within which swine, goats or
              fowls may not be kept;
          (h) prescribing which infectious diseases are notifiable;
          (i) specifying the amount and types of privy accommodation which are to be
              provided in any building and for specifying the time within which repairs to or
              provision of privy accommodation are to be effected;
          (j) declaring the matters which are deemed to be a nuisance;
          (k) prescribing where and of what type public privy accommodation must be
              provided;
          (l) prescribing necessary measures for dealing with outbreaks of infectious
              diseases and the action to be taken to prevent or control the outbreak or spread
              of such diseases;
          (m) prescribing the period during which a body may remain unburied either
              generally or in terms of by-law 10 above;
          (n) prescribing the conditions under which any body, or the remains of any body,
              interred in any cemetery or burial ground or other place, may be exhumed:
                       Provided that this paragraph does not affect the right of a judicial or
              other lawful authority to order the exhumation of a body or the remains of a
              body for the purpose of enquiry into the cause of death of any person;
          (o) the construction, maintenance and method or cleansing of roads and streets in
              the Settlement, for the naming of them and for the provision of name boards;
          (p) providing the method and control of supplying water to factories, ships and the
              Settlement and for preventing the wastage of water as may be necessary;
          (q) providing the manner in which storm water is to be drained and for the
              maintenance of storm water drains and ditches;
          (r) providing the manner in which the public cemeteries are to be maintained and
              for the prescribing of hours of burial;
          (s) providing the manner in which fences and buildings are to be erected and
              providing minimum standards for all new buildings;
          (t) providing the method by which and times at which refuse is to be collected and
              for the disposal of refuse and the control of refuse dumps;
                                               71


          (u) providing for inspection, otherwise than as already provided for in these By-
              Laws, of cesspools, septic tanks, drains and sewers and the manner in which
              the public sewerage system is to be maintained;
          (v) providing for the inspection and licensing of dogs and for the conditions upon
              which and the manner in which they are to be destroyed.
          (w) providing the methods necessary and manner in which rodent control is to be
              effected;
          (x) prescribing the area within which and the manner in which animal pens are to
              be erected.
      15.      (1)    A person who 
          (a) wilfully damages any public sewer, drain or any part of the public water
              supply;
          (b) deposits rubbish anywhere but in the private or public receptacles provided for
              the purpose; or
          (c) fails to comply with the terms of any Regulation made under by-law 14,
commits an offence.
Penalty: As provided in paragraph (2).
       (2)      A person who commits any offence under these By-Laws is liable on
conviction to a fine not exceeding £5, or in the case of a continuing offence to a fine of £2 for
each day during which the offence continues and in the event of damage to pay the costs of
repair or replacement as directed by the court.
                                         ___________

                              PUBLIC HOLIDAYS BY-LAWS

     1.       The following days are to be Public Holidays on Tristan da Cunha:
  January 1st (New Year’s Day);
  January 6th (Epiphany);
  Good Friday;
  Easter Monday;
  Ascension day;
  Whit Monday;
   December 25th (Christmas Day);
   December 26th (Boxing Day);
       2.      In addition a Public Holiday to be called Queen’s Day is to be kept annually
on a date in October, not being a Sunday, to be fixed and announced by the Administrator as
may be most convenient.
       3.      The Administrator may by notice declare as a Public Holiday any additional
day intended to mark special and particular occasions.
                                        ___________

          SCHOOLCHILDREN MEDICAL AND DENTAL CARE BY-LAWS

      1.      The Education Officer must make arrangements with the Medical Officer for
the medical and dental inspection and treatment of all schoolchildren at least once every year.
      2.      The Head Teacher of any school, or any officer of the Public Health
Department who is authorised by the Medical Officer to carry out inspections of school
                                               72


children, may direct any child attending such school, whose person or clothing is infected
with vermin or is in a dirty condition, to leave the school until cleansed, and may give to the
parent of any such child written notice requiring the parent to cleanse properly the person and
clothing of the child, within a period specified in the notice.
       3.        If a notice is served on the parent of a child under these By-Laws requiring the
parent to cleanse the person and clothing of the child, the person signing the notice must at
the same time issue instructions to the parent describing the manner in which such cleansing
may be best effected.
       4.        The parent to whom a notice has been given must carry out the cleansing of
the child within the period prescribed in the notice, and at the expiration of the period must
cause the child to return to the school duly cleansed to the satisfaction of the Head Teacher or
the officer of the Public Health Department who signed the notice.
       5.        A parent who fails to comply with the requirements of a notice issued under
these By-Laws or who wilfully and without good cause prevents the medical or dental
inspection of a child commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £5.
                                            ___________

                             SLAUGHTERHOUSE BY-LAWS

     1.      These By-Laws may be cited as the Slaughterhouse By-Laws.
     2.      In these by-laws
“Agricultural Officer” means the Agricultural Officer of the Tristan da Cunha
     Administration;
“carcass” means the dead body of an animal from which the stomach and the intestines have
       been removed;
“Medical Officer” means the Medical Officer of the Tristan da Cunha Administration;
“Settlement” means that area of land lying between the ‘Big Watron’ on the East and
       ‘Hottentot Gulch’ on the West;
“slaughterhouse” means a place or building so designated by the Administrator in writing .
       3.       A slaughterhouse must be used exclusively for the processing of carcasses
intended for human consumption.
       4.       No person may cause or allow any live animal, whether intended for slaughter
or not, to enter or remain within a slaughterhouse building.
      5.       No person may bring or cause to be brought into a slaughterhouse or allow to
remain therein any carcass which he has reason to believe is unfit for human consumption,
whether through disease or otherwise.
      6.       No person shall bring or cause to be brought into a slaughterhouse or allow to
remain therein any carcass which has been deemed unfit for human consumption by either the
Agricultural Officer or the Medical Officer.
      7.       No person who has reason to believe that he or she has suffers from any
contagious disease liable to contaminate meat may enter a slaughterhouse while the
processing of carcasses is in progress.
      8.       No person who is considered by the Medical Officer to be suffering from any
contagious disease liable to contaminate meat may enter a slaughterhouse for such periods of
time as the Medical Officer specifies.
       9.       All knives, saws, hooks and other instruments to be used within a
slaughterhouse for the processing of carcasses must be clean, safe and in good repair, to the
satisfaction of the Agricultural Officer.
                                              73


       10.      A person using a slaughterhouse must exercise all reasonable care and
immediately upon completion of the processing of carcasses must clean the slaughterhouse to
the satisfaction of the Agricultural Officer, failing which the person is liable to pay the full
costs of any repairs and cleansing.
       11.      A person using a slaughterhouse must ensure that all offal resulting from the
processing of carcasses is stored outside the slaughterhouse building in a covered container
and is removed for safe burial outside the boundary of the Settlement within 3 hours of the
slaughtering.
       12.      The Agricultural Officer is responsible for the overall management and proper
functioning of slaughterhouses in accordance with the terms of these By-Laws.
       13.      The Administrator may prescribe a scale of charges for the use of
slaughterhouse facilities.
      14.     A person who contravenes or fails to comply with any of these By-Laws
commits an offence and is liable to prosecution under section 15(2) of the Public Health and
Public Works By-Laws.
                                       ___________

                           WOOD (CONTROL OF) BY-LAWS

       (1)      Every family or section of a family having or using one hearth or kitchen-
range for cooking purposes is be entitled to send one of its members or one agent to fell
living trees for drying and subsequent collection in the area between Big Point and Big Ridge
on one day only each year.
       (2)      The head of any family or section of a family found cutting down trees on
more than one occasion in each calendar year, unless in exceptional circumstances specially
permitted by the Administrator in Council, commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £1 for the first offence or £2 for any subsequent offence.
       (3)      A tree felled in accordance with by-law (1) must be marked and when so
marked is the property of the member of the family by or for whom it was felled and marked.
A member of a family who touches, removes or tampers with wood felled and marked in
accordance with this by-law by another family, unless given permission, commits an offence.
Penalty: A fine of £1 for the first offence or £2 for any subsequent offence.
                                          ___________

                                 YOUTH CLUB BY-LAWS

       1.       There is to be established a Youth Club under the direction of the Education
Committee of the Island Council.
       2.       The Youth Club is to be permitted the free use of such government buildings
as the Administrator in his or her discretion directs, during the hours the Administrator by
notice specifies.
       3.       The Youth Club is open to all unmarried person over the age of 13 who pay a
membership fee as hereinafter provided.
       4.       The Youth Club must conform to the Rules laid down in the Schedule to these
By-Laws.
       5.       The Administrator may in his or her discretion exclude all or any persons from
membership of the Youth Club and may delegate his or her powers under these By-Laws to
any person he or she appoints.

                                          SCHEDULE
                                           (By-Law 4)
                                              74



                                  YOUTH CLUB RULES

       1.      There is to be a committee to administer the Youth Club which is to consist
of—
       (a) the Administrator as President.
       (b) a person nominated by the Administrator.
       (c) 3 other persons, one of whom must be a female, elected by the members.
The Administrator’s nominee on the committee is to be Chair of the committee and also
Treasurer of the club. The committee must appoint one of the elected members to be
Secretary of the club.
       2.       All members must pay a membership fee of 5p per year which is due and
payable on or before the 15th January, in each year.
       3.       The funds of the club must be deposited in a Post Office Saving Bank account
and may only be withdrawn on the signature of 2 members of the committee one of whom
must be the person nominated to the committee by the administrator.
       4.       A general meeting of all members must be held at least once in every calendar
year on or before the 1st February in each year. At that meeting the accounts and the report of
the committee must be presented to the meeting and the committee must be elected. A copy
of the report and accounts must at the same time be submitted to the Administrator.
       5.       A person who misbehaves and when told to stop by a committee member
refuses to do so, or who when told for good and sufficient reason to leave the club premises
by a committee member refuses to do so, or who damages any club or government property is
liable to be banned from use of the club for a period the Administrator, after hearing the
recommendation of the club committee and the person concerned, directs.
       6.       No person other than a member of the committee may have access to the store
and record room. If no committee member is present in the club, the store and record room
must remain closed.
       7.       The duty committee member is responsible for checking the contents of the
store each night and for returning the cash and keys to the Chair each night.
                                         ___________
