                             ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA




                       THE PLANT PROTECTION ACT, 2012




                                     No. 18 of 2012

                  [ Published in the Official Gc, zette Vol. XXXIII Nb.13
                               dated March 14th, 2013.]




             Printed at the Government Printing Office, Antigua and Barbuda,
                            by Ralph George, Government Printer
                                   - by Authority, 2013.

600- 03.13                                                                     [Price $12 .05 j
' hl' P/0111 Protection Act, 2012.   2       No. 18 of 2012.




                                                               ,.



                                         j
No. 18 of 2012           3                                      The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


                              THE PLANT PROTECTION ACT, 2012
                                                                       f
                                ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS


                                             PARTI
                                          PRELIMINARY



1.   Short title
2.   Interpretation
                                         PART II
                                      ADMINISTRATION


3.   Powers of the Minister
4.   Designation of NPPO
5.   Functions of NPPO
6.   Appointment of inspectors
7.   Duties of an inspector
8.   Designation of laboratories and analysts
9.   Establishment, composition, procedure of Plant Protection Board
10. Disqualification of members of Plant Protection Board
11. Resignation of members of Plant Protection Board
12. Advisory role of Board
13. Sub-committees of Board
14. Phytosanitary Emergency Fund


                                            PART ID
                                           IMPORTS



15. Restrictions on importation
16. Import permit
17. Declaration to be signed by captain
18. Inspection on importation
19. Detention or destruction of imports
  The Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                4   No. 18 of 2012.



  20. Release of imports
  21. Minister may restrict certain imports
  22. Plant quarantine stations
  23. Duty to report and detain certain imports
  24. Consignments in transit



                                              PART IV
                                              EXPORTS


  25. Restriction on exports
  26. Inspection of exports

                                               PART V
                              CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATION OF PESTS

  27. Duty of occupier to notify NPPO
  28. Declaration of quarantine
  29. Procedure when quarantine pest is on premises
  30. Service of quarantine notice in absence of occupier
  31. Duration of quarantine notice
  32. Declaration of phytosanitary emergency
  33. Lifting of quarantine
  34. Declaration of pest free or low pest prevalence area

                                              PART VI
                                            ENFORCEMENf

 35. Entry and search by an inspector                                                  •
 36. Seizure and notice of seizure
 37. Storage or removal of affected items
 38. Confiscation and disposal of unclaimed items
 39. Appeal                       •
                                                                                       j
- 40. Offences
 41. Liability of officials
 42. Penalty
No. 18 of 2012           5                    The Plant Protection Act, 2012.



43. Forfeiture
                               ?
44. Notice to offender
45. Limitation on liability
46. Compensation

                                   PART VII
                              MISCELLANEOUS


47. Documents
48. Regulations
49. Repeal and Savings
50. Act to bind the State
The Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                             6         No. 18 of 2012.


[L.S.J
                                   •-




                                             ~
                                             •I Assent,


                                                                           Dame Louise Lake-Tack,
                                                                                Governor-General.

                                                                                  28th February, 2013


                                    ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA

                            THE PLANT PROTECTION ACT, 2012

                                           No. 18 of 2012

AN ACT to prevent the introduction and to control the spread of plant pests; to protect plant
resources; facilitate trade in plants and plant products; to regulate other matters connected thereto .

ENACTED by the Parliament of Antigua and Barbuda as follows:

                                             PART I
                                          PRELIMINARY

1. Shorttitle

This Act may be cited as the Plant Protection Act, 2012.

2. Interpretation

   (I) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-

      "affected" means infected or infested with a pest;

      "area" includes a place or site of production;

      ''area of low pest prevalence'· means an area, whether all of Antigua and Barbuda or part of
      Antigua and Barbuda, as prescribed, in which a specific pest occurs at low levels and which is
      subject to effe ctive survei llance , control or eradication measures;
....


       No. 18 of 2012          7                                            The Plant Protection Act. 2012 .


            "beneficial organism" means any organism including fLmgi, bacteria, viruses, virns-tike organ-
            isms anci invertebrate or other animals which is declared by the Minister in writing to be
            beneficial to flora or agricultural production ;

            "Board" means the Plant Protection Board established pursuant to section 9 of this Act;

            "consignment" means a quantity of plants , plant products or other regulated articles being
            moved from one country to another and covered, when required, by a single phytosanitary
            certificate;

            "contain" means to apply phytosanitary measures in and around an infested area to prevent
            the spread of a pest;

            "container" means a box, bag, wrapper, covering or other receptacle in which plants. plant
            products or other reg ulated articles that may carry pests have been or are being transported;

            "control" means to suppress, contain or eradicate a pest population;

            "conveyance" mean s any vessel, aircraft, train, vehicle, cart, container, animal or other thing
            that can convey plants, plant products, pests, beneficial organisms or other re g ulated articles
            from one place to another;

            "detain " means to keep a consignment in official custody or confinement for phytosanitary
            reasons, and " detention" shall have a corresponding meaning ;

            "e ndange red area" means an area where ecological factors favour the es tablishm ent of a pest
            whose presence in the area will result in economically important loss ;

            "entry" means the movement of a pest into an area where it is not yet present , or present but
            not widely distributed and being officially controlled;

            "e radicate'' means to apply phytosanitary measures to eliminate a pest from an area , and
            "e radication " shall have a corresponding meaning:

            "es tablishment" means the perpetuation, for the foreseeable future, of a pest within an area
            after entry;

            "Fund '' means the Phytosanitary Emergency Fund established under section 14;

            "germplas m'' means plants intended for use in breeding or conservation prog rammes;

            "import permit" means a permit issued under section 16( 1);

            "importer" means anyone who, whether as owner, consignor, consignee, agent, broker or
            otherwise, is in possession of or in any way entitled to the custody of any plant, plant product ,
            pest, beneficial organism or other regulated article landed or likely to be landed in Antigua and
            Barbuda from another country ;
The Plant Protection Act, 2012                                              8        No. 18 of 2012 .


     •'inspection" means offictal- visual examination of plants, plant pi'oducJs or other regulated
;    articles to determine if pests are present or to determine com~liance with phytosanitary regu-
     lation~;

     ''inspector" means a plant protection officer and any person designated or appointed
     under section 6:

     "introduction" means the entry of a pest resulting 111 its establishment in Antigua and
     Barbuda;

     "IPPC" means the New Revised Text of the International Plant Protection Convention;

     "IPPC Secretariat" means the Secretariat of the International Plant Protection Convention;

     "Minister" means the Minister responsible for plant protection;

     "Ministry" means the Ministry responsible for plant protection;

     "National Plant Protection Organisation" or "NPPO" means the official unit, department or
     office designated by the Minister under section 4;

     "occupier", in relation to any land or building, means a person in actual occupation thereof;

     "official" means established, authorized or performed by the NPPO;

     "official control" means the enforcement of mandatory phytosanitary regulations and the
     application of mandatory phytosanitary procedures with the objective of eradication or con-
     tainment of quarantine pests or for the management of regulated non-quarantine pests:

     ··outbreak" means an isolated pest population, recently detected and expected to survive for
     the immediate future;

     ·'owner'', in relation to any thing, includes any person having for the time being the possession,
     custody or control thereof;

     " packaging'' means any material used lo pack, contain or keep plants, plant products or other
     regulated articles;

     "pest" means any species, strain or biotype 9[ plant, animal or pathogenic agent injurious to
     plants or plant products ;

     .. pest free area" means an area in which a specific pest does not occur as demonstrated by
     sc ientific evidence and in which, where appropriate. this condition is being officially main -
     tain ed:
No. 18 of 2012      9                                               The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


     "pest risk analysis" means the process of 'evatuating biological or other scientific and economic
     evidence to determine whether a pest should be regulated and the strength of any phytosanitary
     measures to be taken against it;

     "phytosanitary certificate" means a certificate patterned after the model certificate of the IPPC;

     "phytosanitary emergency" means an emergency declared under section 21 (c) or 28;

     "phytosanitary measure" means any legislation, regulation or official procedure having the
     purpose of preventing the introduction and or spread of quarantine pests, or limiting the
     economic impact of regulated non-quarantine pests;

     "plant products" means any unmanufactured material of plant origin (including grain) and
     those manufactured products which, by their nature or that of their processing, may create a
     risk for the introduction and spread of pests;

     "plants" means living plants and parts thereof, including seeds and germplasm;

     "pre-clearance" means phytosanitary certification or clearance in the exporting country, per-
     formed by or under the supervision of the NPPO;

     "premises" means land or any building or other structure situated on land;

     "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;

     "quarantine pest" means a pest of potential economic importance to the area endangered
     thereby, not yet present there, or present but not widely distributed and being officially con-
     trolled, and declared as such in regulations;

     "regu lar business hours" means the normal operating hours of government offices 111
     Antigua and Barbuda;

     "regulated article" means any storage place, packaging, conveyance, container, soil and any
     other organism, object or material capable of harbouring or spreading pests, deemed to require
     phytosanitary measures, particularly where international transportation is involved, and in-
     cludes beneficial organisms;

     "regu lated non-quarantine pest" means any pest listed in regulations made under this
     Act, whose presence in plants for planting affects the intended use of those plants with an
     economically unacceptable impact;

     "regulated pest" means a quarantine pest or a regulated non-quarantine pest;
The Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                             10          No.18of 2012.


      "soil" means material wholly or partly derived from the upper layer of the earth's crust which is
      capable of sustaining plant life and which contains solid organic substances such as parts of
      plants, humus, peat or bark, but excluding any medium which is sterile, composed entirely of
      unused peat or otherwise incapable of harbouring or transmitting pests;

      "SPS Agreement" means the WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
      Measures to which Antigua and Barbuda is a party;

      "storage place" means a place where a plant, plant product or regulated article is stored;

      "suppression" means the application of phytosanitary measures in an affected area to reduce
      a pest population;

      "surveillance" means an official process which collects and records data on pest occurrence
      or absence by survey, monitoring or other procedures;

      "treatment" means an officially authorized procedure for the killing or removal of pests or
      rendering pests infertile;

      "WTO" means the World Trade Organisation established in 1995 of which Antigua and Barbuda
      is a member.

                                            PART II
                                         ADMINISTRATION


3. Powers of the Minister

   (I) The Minister shall have primary responsibility for the administration of this Act.

    (2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the Minister may, in writing, delegate specific functions under
this Act to the National Plant Protection Organisation or other government officials or agencies as the
Minister considers appropriate.

4. Designation of NPPO

   (l) The Minister shall designate a government unit, department or office to serve as the National
Plant Protection Organization of Antigua and Barbuda, and shall transmit the name of such unit to
the IPPC Secretariat.

   (2) The Minister may appoint individuals from time to time to serve as members of the National
Plant Protection Organisation.                                :i

5. Functions ofNPPO

The functions of the National Plant Protection Organisation shall include the following-
No. 18 of 2012           11                                          The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


     ( a) the implementation of the IPPC and the SPS-Agreement, and the following responsibilities-.

           (i)     issuing phytosanitary certificates;

           (ii)    can-ying out surveillance of an ornamental and growing plant, including areas
                   under cultivation and wild flora, and of a plant and a plant product in storage or in
                   transport, for the purpose of reporting the occurrence, outbreak and spread of
                   pests, and of controlling those pests;

           (iii)   inspecting any consignment of a plant and plant product and . where appropriate,
                   inspecting any regulated article or storage place, for the purpose of preventing the
                   introduction and spread of pests;

           (iv)    conducting pre-clearance inspections where requested ;

           (v)     disinfesting or disinfecting consignments of plants , plant products a nd other
                   regulated articles;

           (vi)    protecting endangered areas and plant species and designating, maintaining and
                   surveying pest free areas and areas of low pest prevalence;

           (vii) conducting pest risk analysis;

          (viii) providing information to other countries concerning phytosanitary measures
                 applied, either through pest risk analysis or by reference to applicable international
                 standards;

          (ix)     notifying trading partners of relevant instances of non-compliance with import
                   requirements that may be prescribed ;

          (x)      ensuring the phytosanitary security of consignments after certirication and before
                   export;

          (xi)     establishing auditing and trace-back procedures for plants , plant products and
                   other regulated articles for phytosanitary certification;

          (xii)    establishing any minimum qualifications for and overseeing training and
                   development of inspectors and other NPPO staff;

          (xiii) distributing information regarding regulated pests and the means of their prevention
                 and control;

          (xiv) proposing, reviewing, preparing and enforcing phytosanitary measures and other
                necessary legislation;
I he P/0111 Protectirm Act, 2012.                                                  12      No. 18 of 2012.


              (xv)    notifying phytosanitary measures to the designated national enquiry point for
                      SPS, the IPPC focal point, any local agency affected by the measures and to other
                      countries in accordance with international obligations; and

              (xvi) providing information regarding import and export regulations in force, and technical
                    requirements for plants, plant products and other regulated articles, on request of
                    any interested international, regional or other national plant protection
                    organisation.

      ( /J)   the enforcement or this Act, as well as any other legislation relating to plant protection
              that the Minister may direct;

      ( c)    the representation of Antigua and Barbuda in any bilateral, regional and international
              forum relating to phytosanitary matters;

      ( d)    the development and application of pest diagnostic, investigative and analytical capa-
              bilities as well as the establishment, of laboratories, plant quarantine stations and other
              phytosanitary facilities;

      ( e)    the establishment of procedures for accreditation of any plant quarantine station. offi -
              cial analyst, official laboratory or any other person or institution from the public or
              private sector involved in phytosanitary matters; and

      (f)     any other function that the Minister considers necessary for the purposes of this Act.

6. Appointment of inspectors

The Minister, acting in consultation with the Board, may appoint or designate officers of the NPPO
to carry out the duties assigned to an inspector under this Act.

7. Duties of an inspector

  (I) The duties of an inspector include the following-

     ( c1)    inspecting and certifying any-

              (i)     any plant, plant product under cultivation, in a storage place or in transit,;

                                                                                                             j
              (ii)    any regulaled article in a storage place or in transit; or

              (iii)   storage place in order to discover, prevent and report the existence, outbreak and
                      spread of a pest; and
No. 18 of 2012           13                                           The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


             (iv)   consignment of any plant, plant product or regulated article destined for import or
                    export to determine whether it is affected, and where necessary verifying the pest
                    status of consignments by the taking of samples or otherwise;

      ( b)   ensuring-

             (i)    the disinfection or disinfestation of the consignment of any plant, plant product or
                    regulated article destined for import or export, as well as its container, packaging,
                    storage place and transport facility;

             (ii)   that no threat to plant resources is caused by waste disposed from -

      ( a)   any aircraft, ship, pleasure craft or any vessel arriving in Antigua and Barbuda; and

      ( b)   premises which process or wash any imported plant, plant product or regulated article;

      ( c)   issuing phytosanitary certificates on behalf of the NPPO;

      ( d)   carrying out detection activities and maintaining up-to-date information on the pest
             status;

      ( e)   conducting surveillance and monitoring exercises in any land, premises or area as
             required under this Act;

      (f)    instituting inquiries and requesting information or documentation on reasonable
             suspicion that the provisions of this Act are being contravened; and

      ( g)   performing any other function relating to inspection or certification as the NPPO may
             assign to the inspector.

   (2) An inspector may carry out an inspection under subsection ( 1) (a) (iv)) on the territory of an
exporting country as a pre-clearance inspection, at the invitation of the exporting country.

   (3) In carrying out any duty under subsection (1) or (2), an inspector shall, identify himself as an
inspector by showing his identification card or other proof of his or appointment or designation as
an inspector.

8. Laboratories, Analysts

The NPPO shall designate one or more-

      ( a)   laboratories to be official laboratories; and
Thf Pion! Protection Act, 2012.                                                    14       No. l8 of 2012.



          ( b J· analysts to be official analysts;-

for the purposes of this Act.

>. Establishment, composition, procedure of Plant Protection Board
1




    (I) The Plant Protection Board is hereby established, and shall consist of-

          ( a)      three staff members of the Ministry responsible for agriculture, including -

                    (i)      the head of the NPPO;

                    (ii)     the Director of Agriculture; and

                    (iii)    one other person nominated by the Director of Agriculture;

          ( b)      one representativ e of each of the following -

                    (i)      the Ministry responsible for the environ ment ;

                    (ii)     the Ministry responsible for trade;

                    (ii i)   the Ministry of Legal Affairs;

                    (iv)     the Cus tom s Department;

                    ( v)     the Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force;

                    (v i)    Barbuda Council;

                    (v ii)   the Ministry re spo nsible for health;

                    (viii) the Royal Police Force of Antigua and Barbuda ;

          ( c)     one representative appointed by the Minister from each of the following -

                   (i)       importer and exporters;

                   (ii)      growers and nursery owners.


   C)    Members of the Board shall be nominated by th e ir respec tive Minister or president/c hair as
the case may be. and appointed by the Minister responsible for plant protection.

    (1)          Members s hall be paid an honorarium to be approved by the Mini ster.
No. 18 of 2012            15                                        The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


   (4) Members shall serve for a period,of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment.

   (5) The quorum at a meeting of the Board shall be at least one half of the membership, provided
that in the case of an emergency declared under this Act, the Board may act notwithstanding the
absence of a quorum.

   (6) The Board shall meet at least four times per year.

   (7) The Board shall elect a Chairperson at its first meeting , which shall take place within three
months from the date of commencement of this Act.

    (8) Except as provided in sub-sections (1) to (7) and sections 12 and 13, the Board shall regulate
its own procedure.

   (9) Minutes of each meeting shall be kept in proper form by a public officer who shall be desig-
nated by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry.



10. Disqualification of members of Plant Protection Board

   (I) The Minister may, terminate the appointment of the Chairperson or any other member of the
Board, if the member-

      ( o)    becomes of unsound mind, as certified by a duly appointed medical board;

      ( IJ)   is an un-discharged bankrupt;

      ( c)    has been found to be guilty of misconduct which is related to the performance of his
              functions pursuant to this Act;

      ( cl)   has been absent, in the case of the Chairperson, without leave granted by the Minister
              and in the case of a member, without leave granted by the Chairperson, from four con-
              secutive meetings of the Board; or

      ( e)    becomes incapable, wilfully or otherwise, of carrying out his functions pursuant to the
              provisions of this Act.

   (2) The appointment of a member of the Board shall not be terminated unless that member has
been given a reasonable opportunity to make representations.

  (3) The names of the members of the Board as first constituted and every change in the member-
ship thereafter must be published in the Gazette.
The Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                               16       No. 18 of 2012.



'11. Resignation of members of Plarit ~rotection Board
                                        •
A member of the Board, other than the Chairperson, may at any time resign his office by instrument
in writing addressed to the Minister and from the date of receipt of the instrument by the member that
member shall cease to be a member of the Board.



12Advisory role of Board

The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the Minister and the NPPO on issues of plant
protection and shall be responsible for-

        (a)    recommending changes to relevant legislation as required, and recommending regu-
               lations, schedules, notices and orders to be made, issued or amended under this
               Act;

        ( b)   assisting in the determination of criteria for the declaration of a phytosanitary emer-
               gency under section 21(c) or 32.

13. Sub-committees of Board
,.
The Board may appoint such sub-committees as it may consider necessary, including members of the
Board, to provide advice and technical input.



14. Phytosanitary Emergency Fund

     ( 1) There is established a Phytosanitary Emergency Fund which shall be administered by the Board.

     (2) There shall be paid into the Fund-

       ( a)    all monies voted by Parliament for the purposes of this Act;

       ( b)    donations , grants , awards and endowments given to the Board; and

       ( c)    any proceeds or fees collected under this Act, except fines imposed by a court.

   (3) All monies collected or received under this Act shall be paid into the general account of the
Fund in a bank approved by the Minister of Finance, and administered in accordance with the
Finance Administration Act, 2006.

  (4) The resources of the Fund shall be made available to the NPPO upon declaration of a
phytosanitary emergency under section 21( c) or 3 J.
No. 18 of 2012            17                                         The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


                                               PART ID
                      ?                       IMPORTS                                              .-

15. Restrictions on importation

   ( l) A Plant, plant product or other regulated article may be imported into Antigua and Barbuda
only at the prescribed ports of entry.

  (2) The NPPO may require that certain plants, plant products or other regulated articles not be
imported except-

      ( a)   by authority of an import permit granted under section 16(1 );

      ( b)   where accompanied by-

             (i)    an original phytosanitary certificate issued by the country of export that is dated
                    not more than thirty (30) days before the entry of the plant, plant product or
                    regulated article into Antigua and Barbuda; and

             (ii)   any other documentation that may be prescribed; and

      ( c)   where all prescribed requirements are satisfied.



16. Import permit

    (I) Where an import permit is required under section 15(2)( a), an importer shall apply to the NPPO
in the prescribed manner and may be granted a permit on payment of the prescribed fee.

   (2) In the evaluation of an application for an import permit, the NPPO shall apply existing interna-
tional standards or conduct pest risk analysis as the case may be in order to determine the applicable
phytosanitary requirements.

17. Declaration to be signed by captain

Where a plant, plant product or regulated article has been imported on a vessel or aircraft, in the
absence of the owner, the captain shal l sign a dec~aration in the prescribed form .

18. Inspection on importation

   (I) A person who has imported a plant, plant product or regulated article shall present it for
inspection by an inspector at the prescribed port of entry.
The Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                                 18         No. 18 of 2012.


   (2) Notwi!hstanding subsection (1 ), a ptarH, -plant product or regulated article may-be in)pected
by an inspector at a place other than the port of entry-                               f

      ( o)     on the application by an importer, and

      ( h)     if the container has been sealed and marked as prescribed or in a manner required under
               any other law.

   (3) An inspection carried out under subsection (l) or (2) is subject to the payment of the pre -
scribed fee.

   (4) An inspection referred to in subsection (I) or (2) shall be carried out during regular business
hours , except where the plant, plant product or regulated article is in tran sit or ex tre mely perishable
or where its entry has otherwise been delayed, in which case, on application by the importer and on
payment of the prescribed fee, the NPPO may agree to an inspection being carri ed out at any other
time.

19. Detention or destruction of imports

   ( l) Jr, on an in spection that is carried out in accordance with section 18. the in specto r determines
that the imported plant, plant product or regulated article-

      ( o)     is not accompanied by any relevant documentation required by sect ion I 5(2): or

      ( h)     presents any ri sk for the introduction or sp read of pests:

the inspcctrn shall detain the item and im111ediately serve written notice on the iinportt.-r Lh:11 part or
all or the i111portecl plant. plant product or regulated article may be subj ec t. wit hin the tim e period
-, pccil"ied in the notice. to-

               (i)     detention until the rece ipt of relevant documentation within a reasonable ti111e;

               (ii)    approp riate treatment in order to remove the risk:

               (iii)   re-exportation:

               (iv)    co nl"i sca tion : or

               (,·)    destruction.

   (2) The inspector may !"org:o notice and carry out any of the actions listed und e r subsection (I)
where in I hi s or her] opinion destruction of the imported plant, plant product or reg ulated article is
urgently required or the giving of notice is impracticable .
No. 18 of 2012           19                                            The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


   (3) Where, after its entry or treatment, any imported plant, plant product or regulated article
remains unclaimed for a period of time, as may be prescribed, the NPPO may take action to destroy
the imported plant, plant product or regulated article.

   ( 4) The costs and responsibility for any action taken under subsection ( 1), (2) or (3) shall be borne
by the importer, except where in exceptional cases the NPPO determines that the State should take
responsibility for the associated costs.]

   (5) The State may assume financial responsibility under subsection (4) without prejudice to its
right to recover costs from the importer as a debt.

   (6) Where any action is taken under subsection (I), (2) or (3), the method used to calculate costs
charged shall be in accordance with the prescribed procedure.

   (7) The State shall not be liable for the confiscation. destruction or disposal of any plant. plant
product or regulated article carried out in accordance with this sec tion.

20. Release of imports

If upon inspection carried out under section I 8 the inspe ctor determines that th e imported plant ,
plant product or other regulated article do not present m1y risk for the importation and spread or
pests, he may release the consignment to the importer.

21. Minister may restrict certain imports

In order to protect plant resources. human and an irnal health o r the cnvironrnent, the Minister may.
on the advice of the Board-

      ( u)   permit the entry of any plant. plant product or regulated article for scientific or experi-
             mental purposes, subject to such terms and conditions that the Minister. on the advice
             of the Board, considers appropriate;

      (I?)   prohibit or restrict the entry of any plant. plant product or regulated article;

      ( c)   declare a phytosanitary emergency; or

     (cl)    take any other necessary action to prevent the introduction or spread or a quarantine
             pest and regulated non-quarantine pest.

22. Plant quarantine stations

The NPPO may-
The P!C111f Protection Act, 2012.                                              20         No. 18 of 2012.


      ( a)    -designate certain places as plant quarant{ne st(l.tions where a, plant, plant product or
               other regulated article may be kept fur phytosanitary observation, research. inspection ,
               testing, treatment, detention or destruction;

      ( b)    require that imported material be kept or cultivated at a plant quarantine station. or at any
              other location identified by the NPPO , and kept under the NPPO 's supervision for such
              time as the NPPO deems necessary.

23. Duty to report and detain imports

   ( 1) An employee of the postal service or an official of the Customs Department, Port Authority.
Royal Police Force or Defence Force who has knowl edge of the arrival or importation of any plant,
plant product or regulated article, shall. in the absence of an inspector-

      (Cl)    as soon as practicable, notify the arrival or importation to the NPPO; and

      (h)     detain the plant , plant product or regulated article for inspection by an in spector.

   (2) A detention carried out under subsection ( l J sha l I be deem ed to be an action taken by or on
delegation from the NPPO.

   (3) The NPPO shall take custody of any item detained und er subsection (I) within three clays or its
deten tion.

24. Consignments in transit

   ( 1) The movement of consignments of regulated articles which pass through Antigua and Barbuda
without being imported and which may present a ph ytosan it ary ri sk to Anti gua and Barbuda shal l be
subject to the appli ca tion or meas ures to redu ce or remove this ri sk. T he elements or such a transit
system shall be as presc ribed.

   (2) No twithstandin g subsec ti on ( 1) above. all cons ignments con tainin g regulated articles as
described, shall. in no less than 48 hours prior to arrival in Antigua and Barbuda, be notifi ed in
writing to th e NPPO and wri tten permission sought to facilitate the transit or such reg ulated articles
thro ugh Antigua and Barbuda.

                                                PART IV
                                                EXPORTS

25. Restriction on exports

A person shall not export a plant. plant product or regu lated article unl ess that person-
     No. 18 of 2012           21                                            The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


           ( a)   appl ies to the NPP(? in the prescribed manner:
                                      •
           ( b)   provides to the NPPO all documentations that are prescribed:

           ( c)   makes the consignment available for inspection under section 26:

           (cl)   pays the prescribed fees: and

     has been granted a phytosanitary certificate .

     26. Inspection of exports

     (I) The NPPO shall. on application by an ex porter under section 25. cause an inspection or the
     consignment to be carried out. and:

           ( o)   iss ue a phyto san itary certificate, in a form as may be prescribed. where th e consig n-
                  ment-

                  (i)    meets the documentary and other requirements for import or the country to which
                         the consignment is to be exported: and

                  (ii)   satisfies any other requirements for export speci f'ied by the NPPO or under any
                         app li cable law: or

           (h)    deny the is s ue or a phytosanitary certificate where the requirement'.-- s pecified in para-
                  gr:i ph ( o) have not been met.

        (2) The issuance of a phytosanitary certif'icate shall nol release the exporter l'rom co mpliance with
     this Act or any other law.

                                                     PART V

                            CONTAINMENT AND ERADICATIONNOF PESTS

     27. Duty of occupier to notify NPPO
,.
     The occupier or owner of any land or pre1nises , who has knowledge of or suspects the prese nce of
     a quarantine pest thereon shall immediately notify the NPPO.

     28.Dec~rationofquarantine

       ( l) The Minister may. on the advice of the Board-
n,e Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                                22         No. 18 of 20 12.


      ( ct)    declare any land, 'Premises·or area that is affected or is suspected of being affected witlr
                                                                          .
               any pest to be under quarantine;                           .-

      ( b)     presc ribe measures for the treatment or disposal of a plant, plant product, regulated
               article. and the treatment of a storage place whether or not it has been found to be
               affected, in order to limit the spread of any quarantine pest:

      ( c)     prescribe the period of quarantine.

   (2) For the purpose of sub- sec tion ( 1), "quarantine·· includes-


      ( a)     prohibiting th e movement of people, conveyances. plants, plant products or other regu-
               lated articles from or to a specified locati o n (land, premi ses or area):

      ( b)     prohibiting the planting or replanting of a specified location :

      ( c)     the takin g of any other measure which the Minister on the advice or the Board deems
               necessary under the circu mstances.

29. Procedure when quarantine pest is on premises

   (I) 11' the NPPO believes that a quarantine pest is present on any premises. it may. subject to
sect ion

15 (2)-

      ( c,)    authorize an inspector to-

              (i)     en ter the premises at any reasonabl e time .

              (ii)    inspect any plant, plant product. regulated article or storage place. and

              (iii)   take a sample as he may consider necessary; and

      ( IJ)    require, by noti ce in writing. the owner or occupier of the premises, and where the NPPO
               deems it appropriate, the owner or occupier of any premi ses in the vicinity, to take within
               a spec ifi ed period such measures on hjs premises that th e NPPO co nsiders appropriate
               to eradica te. contain or res trict th e spread of the pest.

   (2) If an owner or occupier of premises fa il s to comply with any term or a notice iss ued under
subsection (I) (hJ, the NPPO may direct an in spector or othe r au th orized person to en ter th e pre-
mises in question in order to-
      No.18of2012              23                                            The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


           ( a) - -carry out the requirements of the notice:-
                                                        ?
           (b)     where necessary, destroy the plant, plant product or regulated article:
•                  and eradicate, contain or restrict the spread of the pest.

         (3) The owner shall be liable to pay the costs for any action taken under subsection (2), except
      where in exceptional cases the NPPO determines that the State should take responsibility for the
      associated costs.

         (4) The State may assume financial responsibility under subsection (3) without prejudice to its
      right to recover its costs from the owner as a civil debt.

         (5) Where the NPPO takes any action under subsection (2), the method used to calculate the costs
      shall be as prescribed.

         (6) The State shall not be liable for the destruction or disposal of' any plant. plant product or
      regulated article carried out in accordance with this section.

      30. Service of quarantine notice in absence of occupier

      If a person is not in actual occupation of any premises. or if the occupier cannot be found, service of
      any notice under this Act may be made by affixing the same in a conspicuous place on the premises,
      and such affixing shall be deemed to be sufficient service or notice



      J 1. Duration of quarantine notice

         (I) Any notice issued under section 29 (I) (IJ) or 30 shall remain in force until an inspector gives
      any affected owner or occupier a certificate in writing th ~1t the premises or area is free from pests.

          (2) A person shall not remove, or allow or cause to be removed any plant, plant product or
      regulated article from the premises or area under quarantine while a notice issued under section 29 (I)
      (h) or 30 is in force.



.,.   32. Declaration of phytosanitary emergency

      The Minister may. on the advice of the NPPO , declare a phytosanitary emergency based on-

            ( o)   an inspection carried out under this Act; or

            (h)    an analysis of a sample taken under section 29 (I) (o) (iii).
The Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                                     24          No. 18 of 2012.



33. Lifting of quarantine

The Minister shall, upon the advice of the Board, serve written notice on all affected owners or
occup iers of land to lift the quarantine where-

      ( a)   he determines that the relevant quarantine pest is no longer considered to be present; or

      ( b)   the NPPO determines that it is no lon ger appropriate for the quarantine to be maintained
             in respect of some or all of the affected land.

34. Declaration of pest free or low pest prevalence area

The Minister may, on the recommendation of the NPPO-

      (et)   declare an area pest free where the NPPO is satisfied that-

             (i)     a pest is not present in an area:

             (ii)    phytosanitary measures have been implemented to keep the area free or the pest ;
                     and

             (iii)   a surveillance system has been instituted to verify that the area remains l rec or the
                     pest.

      ( h)   declare an area or low pest prevalence where the NPPO is satisfied that -

             (i)     a pest occurs at low levels in an area

             (ii)    phytos anilary me asure s have been implemented to kee p the pest IC\ cb low: and

             (iii)   a s urveillance sy stem has been instit_uted to verify that the pest le ve ls re m a in lo w.

                                                   PART VI
                                               ENFORCEMENT

35. Entry and search by an inspector

  ( l) For the purpose of detecting a quarantine· pest or a regulated quarantine pest or e nsuring
compliance with this Act, an inspector may-

     (rt )   stop and without a warrant search a person. container or conveyance. entering or mov -
             ing within Antigua and Barbuda that the inspector believes on reasonable grounds is
             harbouring such pe st:
No.18 of 2012               25                                             The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


       ( b)    subject to subse~tions (2) and (3 ), at a reas-onable time , enter and inspect any premi ses:
                   f                                                                                   ;
       ( c)    open any container, receptacle or other thing that the inspector believes on reasonabl e
               gro und s contains any thing in respect of which this Act applies;

       ( d)    examine any thing in respect of which this Act applies and take a sample of it.

   (2) An in spector shall not enter a dwelling house except with the co nsent of the occ upi er or under
the authority of a warrant iss ued by a Magistrate.

   (3) An in spector may, with a warrant issued by a Magistrate, enter and search any premises. where
there is reasonable ca use to believe that an offence against this Act has taken or is tak in g place .

   (4) A person shall not break a seal on a sealed container containing a plant, plant product or
reg ulated arti cle unless an inspector is present.

   (5) An in spec tor may, in the performance of his duties under thi s section. be acc o:r.pa ni cd ancl
assis ted by a police officer.

   (6) In the cou rse of an in spec tion carried out under subsect ions (I). (2) and (1 ). an in spec tor may.
as he co nsiders necessary. seize. destro y. detain . trea t or otherwise di spose of any plant. rl,111t
product or regulated article. or order that any such action be taken . at the expense o r the owner.

36. Seizure and notice of seizure

   (I) In the co urse   or an inspect ion carried ou t under thi s Act. if an inspector believes on rcas;onable
grou nds that a provision of this Act has been or is bein g contravened. or any plant. plant product or
regulated artic le prese nts a risk of the introduction or sp read of a pest, the in spec tor ma y se ize the
planL plant product or reg ulated article-

       ( o)    by means of or in relation to which he believ~s on reasonable grounds that the contra-
               ve ntion has been or is being committed;

       ( /J)   that he believes on reasonable grounds will afford evidence in res pec t or the co ntra ven-
               tion of th e provi sion of this Act.

   (2) An inspector who se izes and detains a plant, plant product or regulated article und er thi s
Act-
       (c t ) shall imm ediately iss ue to the owner of the plant, plant product or reg ulated article a
detention certificate in the prescribed form and shall, as soon as practicable, advise the ow ner that
part or all of the plant, plant product or regulated article may be subject within a spec ified time to any
actio n speciCied in sec tion 37: or
The Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                                   26         No.18of2012.


       ( b)   may forego advising- the owner of the plant, plant product or regulc_!ted article of the
  ;           reason for the seizure if, in the opinion of the inspector. it i! urgently required to destroy
              the plant, plant product or regulated article or the giving of the reason for the seiz ure is
              impractical.

37. Storage or removal of affected items

Where an in spector has seized and detained a plant. plant product or regulated article under this
Act-

       ( o)   the inspector, or

       ( b)   any other person designated by the NPPO.

may-

              (iJ      store. treat, quarantine or dispose of the plant. plant product or regulated article at
                       the place where it was se ized or move it to any other place for :-,torage. treatment.
                       quarantine or disposal,

              (ii)     require its owner to sto re , treat, dispos;e of. re-export or move it to any other
                       place.

38. Confiscation and disposal of unclaimed items

   ( I J An in -,pcctnr nrny confi-,cate and dispose or-

       ( o)   any plant. plant product or regulated article thaL arter its entry into Antigua and Barbuda
              after treatment. remains unclaimed for a pre-,cribed time; or

       ( b)   any thing that the inspector believes on reasonable grounds contains or harbours a
              quarantine pest or regulated non quarantine pest.

   (2) J\n in-;pcctor who confr-,catcs a plant. plant product or regulated article or a quarantine pest or
regulated non quarantine pest-

       ( o)   shall. as soon as is practicable, advise .the owne r of the reason !"or its confiscation and
              is-,ue a confiscation certificate; or

       / b)   may forego advising the owner of the plant. plant product or regulated article or pest of
              the reason for the confiscation if the giving of the reason for the confiscation is imprac-
              ticli.
No. 18 of 2012            27                                              Th e Plant Prot ection Act, 20 12.


39.Appeal

    ( l) Any owner or occupier of land. owner or operator of a co nveyance or ow ner or importer of
pl ants , plant products or other re gulated arti cles who is agg ri eved by the decision of an inspector to
destroy. di spose of or treat such plants, plant products or other reg ulated articles may lodge an
appeal within fourteen days in the manner prescribed under thi s Act.

   ('.2) Where an appea l has been filed the Minister sha ll take reasonabl e steps to stay the destruc-
tion. disposa l or treatment of the articles pending a determination of the appeal by the co mmittee
appointed, exce pt where in the opinion of the Mini ster any dela y would create a significant risk or
harm to plant resources in Antigua and Barbuda.

   (3) Subject to sec tion s 19(7) and 29(5). a determination by the comm ittee under sub-sectio n (4)
shall not prejudice the right of any aggrieved party to see k recourse in the courts.

   (4) The com mitt ee. which shall hea r and determine any matter within three wo rking days. 'ihall
com prise th ree perso ns appo inted by the Board and 'i hall reg ul ate it '-i own procedure.

   (5) The commitlee may, upon hearing any appeal, confirm. vary or set aside the dec ision or the
inspector or determine th e matter and impose additional co nditi ons.

40. Offences

It sha ll be an offence for any person, either personally or indirectly through an emp loyee . serv~mt or
agent to-

      ( o)   grow. possess, se ll , o ffer for sa le. tran sport or distribute in any manner any plant s, plant
             products or other reg ulated articl es knowing that th ey are affected by a quarantin e pest:

      ( h)   assault. res ist. intimidate , threate n. abu se in any manner whatsoeve r. or obst ru ct any
             ins pec tor exercising lawful powers under this Act:

      ( c)   tamper with an y samples taken pursuant to this Act:

      ( d)   Cail to comply with any order or direction lawf'ully made or given under this Act;

      ( e)   import any plants , plant produ cts or other reg ulated articles at a port of entry not li sted
             in regulation s:

      (!)    import any plants. plant products or other reg ulated articles contrary to any oth er re-
             quirements prescribed under thi s Act:

      (g)    in tenti o nall y permit or cause the introducti on or spread of any pest:
The P/0111 Protection Act, 2012.                                                    28         No.       or 2012.


       ( h)     export any plants, plant p-roduc;t s or other regulated articles except i.n accordance with
                Part IV of this Act. ?                                                                              ..

       ( i)     fail to safeguard within 48 hours the phytosanitary security of a con:-,ignment after
                issuance of a phytosanitary cert ificate under section 26(l)(a);

       (j)      fail to al low a search or inspection or the taking of any sample authorized under this Act:

       ( k)     break the seal on a sealed container containing plants. plant products or other regulated
                articles or removing detained items from a re-sealed container except in the presence of
                an inspector:

       ( 1)     knowingly or recklessly provide information which is false, for the purpose of obtaining
                any document under this Act:

       (111)    intentionally or deliberately alter, forge. deface or destroy any document issued under
                this Act:

       ( 11)    submit any wr itt en material for publication referring to the occurrence of a quarantine
                pest in Antigua and Barbuda without prior or simultaneous communication of the ex ist-
                ence or the pest to the N PPO:

       (o)      otherwise contravene the provisions or this Act.

..it. I ,iability of officials

It shall be an olTenc~ for any in .'> pechi r. official analyst or other NPPO staff to-

       (o)      directl y or 111directl y ask for or take any per:-onal payment or other reward in C()fl!lec tion
                with any official duties:

       (h)      agree to du . abstain from doing. jJCrmit. conceal or connive at anvJ act or thing which is
                 L                               L                                                   L


                contrary to the proper execution or official duties under this Act. or otherwise con I rary
                to the Lnv s or Antigua and Barbuda:

       (c)      disclose ,111y infor111a1ion acqu ired in the performance of official dutie s relating ltl any
                person. firm or business. except when required by his supervisor in the course of official
                duties. or where ordered to do so by any court.

..i2. Penalty

/\ per'>On who commits an offence under thi s Act i-., liable-
No.       of 2012           29                                                   The Plctnt Protection Act. 2012.



       ( o)   in the c"ase of a first offence. on summary conviction, to a fine or five thousand dollars.
              or to impri~onrnent for a period of one year. or both:                           f

       ( b)   in the case or a second or a subsequent offence. to a fine of ten thousand dollars. or to
              imprisonment for a period of two years. or both.

43. Forfeiture

Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act the court may. in addition to an; other
penalty imposed. order that any thing used in the perpetration or the offence . he forfeitccl to the
State.

44. Notice to Offender

   ( l J This section applic, to any offence as may be prescribed.

   (2) Where an inspector has reason to believe that a person is committing or ha -. com111ittcd <111
offence to \\ hiL·h thi..., . . cct iun applies . the in-.pector ma~ immed iat e ly . . erve th at pe1v)11 ,, itll the
prescribed notice in writmg offering the discharge of any liability to conviction ul the ul le11cc by
payment of a i'ixnl penalt y under this section .

   (3) Where a person is served with a notice under subsection (2)-


      (u !    tktt pcr . . u11 ...,J1itll not be liable to be cun viLtcd !'or the ollcncc if the fixcJ pen,tlt ), is paid
              in dccordancc with this section -

              (iJ    before the expiration or twenty-one days following the date or the noti l'. c 01 such
                     longer period as may be specified therein. or

              (ii)   before the elate on which proceedings ,ire begun . whichever is later:

      ( h)    proceedings shall nut be taken against the person for the offence by any inspector or
              other authorized officer until the end of the twenty-one clays following the date or the
              notice or such longer period as may ha ve been spec ified in the notice .

   (-+) Payment or a i'ixed penalty under this section shall be made to the NPPO or to such body, on
behalf of the NPPO . as the Minister may. by order, designate and the NPPO may retain the amount
paid. which shall be allocated to the Fund.

   (:'i) In an y proceedings . a certificate that payment of a fixed penalty was or was not made to the
NPPO, or to a bocly cle:-.ignated under subsection (4 ), by a date specified in the certificate shall. if the
ccrti ficatc purports to be signed by the inspector or other authorized officer of the NPPO. or of that
bocl y. he sufficient evidence of the !'acts stated. unless the contrary is proved.
The P/0111 Protection Act, 2012.                                                    30          No. 18 or 2012.


   (9) A n-otice~~erved under subsection (2) must-·
    f
      (a)      specify the offence alleged:

      ( /J)    give such particulars of th e offence as are nee ,   >-ii)   .'o r gi\' ing reasonable information
               or the allegmion: and

      ( c)     state-

               (i)    he period during which, by virtue of subsection (3). proceedings will not be insti-
                      tuted against any person for the offence: and

               (ii)   the amount of the fixed penalty.

   (7) !n any proceedings for an offence to which this section applies. reference shall not be made
after the conviction or the accused to the giving of any notice under this section or to the payment
or non-pa ymen t or a fixed penalty hereunder unles s, in th e co urse or the proceedings or in some
document which is before the Court in connection with the proceedings , referenc e has been made by
or 011 hcllalr of the accused lo the giving of such notice or. as the case may be . to such IXl) 1uent or
non-payment.

   ( 8) In this sec tion --proceed ings" means any criminal proceedings in re spect of the act or omission
constituting the offence specified in the notice served under subsection (2). and --co nvictecf' shall
be com,trucd in like manner.

.is. Limitation on liability

   ( I J The costs for any action taken by an inspector under section 35 shall be borne by the o,vner.
L'XCept where in exceptional cases the NPPO determines th:tt the State shall bear the cosh .

   (2) Subject to scl'lion 46, the State shall not be liable for loss resulting lrom the destruction or
disrosal of any plant. plant product or regulated article carried out under th is Act.

46. Compensation

   ( I J The Minister may, on the recommendation or the Board, out or money vo ted f'or that purpose
hy Parliament, order compensation to be paid in respect of'-

      ( o)     the treatment required of premises for ,the purposes or this Act: or

      ( /1 !   the prohibition or restriction imposed under thi s Act on the use ol rrcmises .

(2) Compensation      is not payable to a person who commits an offence under this Act and claims
compe n'.-.ation in respect or any premises or thing by mean s or or in relation to which th e offence was
C() llllllitted.
No. 18 of 2012            31                                              Th e Plont Protection Act, 20 12.


                                             - PAE.TVII
                                         ? MISCELLANEOUS

47. Documents

   ( I) A docum ent required to be furni shed to the Mini ster or an inspector under this Act or any
regulation or order made there under may be furnished in electronic form.

   (2) Where a document referred to in subsection (I) is furnished in electronic form, an original hard
copy of the document mu st be furnished to the Minister or an inspec tor within a reaso nabl e period
after the doc ument is furnished in e lec tronic form.

48. Regulations

  ( I) The Minister may. on the advice of the Board. make regulations and issue orders or notices
which he consider'> appropriate to give effect to the provisio ns o f this Act.

   {2) In particular c1nd with out prejudice to the genera lit y ol" subsection (I). regulation '>. orde r'> or
notices made under sub section! I) may provide for all or any of the following: matters-

      ( u)   procedures to be fo ll owed by an in spector in the exercise of his duties under this /\et :

      ( h)   cond it ions ror the import of any plant_ plant product or regulated article;

      (c )   the designation of the ports of e ntry that are approp riate for th e import and export of any
             plant. pla nt product and regulated arti c le:

      (cl)   the ci rcumsta nces under which phytosanitary re4uireme nt s for import may be modil'ied
             based on pest risk analysis:

      ( c)   procedures and guide lin es for pre -c learance inspections;

      (/)    the manner in whic h permits and certificates shall be issued under thi s Act and th e ir
             form. co nt en t and langu age:

      (g)    the procedures by which an importer may apply for inspection to take place at any
             location other than th e port of en try. and or outside of reg ular bu si ness hours. and pay
             any applicable rees:

      (h )   the manner in wh ich co ntain ers must be scaled. marked and tran sported if they are to be
             in spe cted at their final dest ination rather than at th e port of entry:

      (i)    the way in which any plant. plant product and regulated article mu st be stored or trans-
             ported in Anti gua and Barbuda:
T/1e Plant Protection Act, 2012.                                                 32         No . 18 of 2012.


     (j)      the procec:!Lfres to be adopted for the treatmen-t of any imported plant. plant product ot'
              regulated artitle and the conveyance used for its importation ;                     ?

     ( k)     the location , management and functioning of any plant quarantine station es tabli shed            •
              under this Act;

     (I)      the requirements for the control and care of any plant, plant product and regulated article
              kept or maintained at a plant quarantine station;

     ( m)     the manner in which an inspector shall arrange for the destruction. removal , uproot ing or
              treatment of any plant. plant product or regulated article within an area or loc ation
              declared as under quarantine:

     ( 11 )   the period within and conditions under which it shall not be lawful lo plant or re-plant
              any thin g in all or part of an area declared as under quarantine;

     ( n)     the manner in wh ich any sample being transported or in storage must be taken. marked
              and retained under thi:-; Act:

     (I')     the ope ra ting procedures of any offic ial laboratories designated under this Act:

     ( cJ)    the process or procedure by which an area may be declared pest free or an area or low
              pest prevalence:

     ( r)     conditions for the export of any plant, plant product or regulated art icle :

     (s)      ope rating procedures for the inspection of any plant, plant product or regulated article,
              ancl any physical structu re or premi ses containing such a produ ct or art icle . for purpose s
              or export:
     (I)      the offences subject to the fixed pe na lty procedure outlined in section -.:J.4 :

     ( u)     the notice to be issued to an offender pursuant to section 44:

     ( \')    criteria ror th e declaration or a phytosanitary emergency under section 2 1(c) or 32 :

     (11·)    determination or sca le of fees to be c harged:

     ( .r)    guide li nes. policy directives or protocols promoting cooperation between relevant dc -
              partrncnts relating to plant protection;

     (_, J    additional measures to be take n !"or the purpo se of preventing the introduction or sp read
              or a pest.
    No. 18of2012            33                                            The Plant Protection Act, 2012.


    49 Repeal and Savings
      1

       (1) The Plant Protection Act, CAP. 329 is hereby repealed.
"
       (2) An order issued by the Minister under section 48 may revoke or modify any permit or certifi-
    cate granted by authority of the legislation referred to in sub-section (1).

      (3) All regulations in effect upon the coming into force of this Act shall continue in force as if they
    were issued under the present Act, except where they conflict with the provisions or purposes of this
    Act.

    50. Act to bind State

    This Act binds the State.


    Passed by the House of Representatives on                        Passed by the Senate 29th November,
    the 26th November, 2012.                                         2012.

              D. Gisele Isaac-Arrindel,                                 Hazelyn M. Francis,
                       Speaker.                                                President.


                    Romona Small                                            Romona Small
          Clerk to the House of Representatives.                         Clerk to the Senate.
