     PLANT PROTECTION TRADE REGULATION INFORMATION
                                         Antigua and Barbuda


                               he Plant Protection Unit, Department of Agriculture, operates
                             under the legal mandate of the Plant Protection Act No. 18 of 2012.
                             The Unit is therefore responsible for all activities designed to
                             prevent the introduction and/or spread of quarantine pests and to
                             ensure their official control in the event that these pests enter the
                             country. In order to achieve these goals, technical personnel are
                             required to carry out inspections at the ports of entry, ensure
                             regulations are adhered to and issue documents when relevant.

           An IMPORT PERMIT is issued for the importation of regulated articles, including:
                All planting material (including seeds, plant cuttings, live plants)
                Cut flowers and ornamentals (including floral blooms and greenery)
                Unprocessed plant products or other regulated items
                Plants, plant products and other regulated items not previously imported or not
                imported for a period exceeding two years.
                Plant growth media (including soil, soil substitutes, mulches, potting mixes)

           Import permits must be obtained from the Plant Protection Unit prior to placing orders for
           consignments of regulated articles and such permit must be presented to the exporter upon
           placement of such orders. Since a pest risk assessment may be required, it is advised that
           importers make application for each import permit at least one week prior to placement of
           orders for same. Some commodities may require chemical or their treatment prior to
           shipment and will not be permitted entry without the required pre-export treatments.


Every inbound consignment of regulated and non-regulated items of plant origin must be
accompanied by a PHYTOSANITARY CERTIFICATE stating, where required by an Import
Permit, any necessary treatment – chemical or otherwise. Upon inspection, consignments which
are determined by Plant Quarantine Inspectors not to be in compliance with import requirements
will be refused entry OR confiscated and/or destroyed at the importer’s expense.

Like Antigua and Barbuda, most countries regulate commodities of plants and plant products
entering such countries. As such, a Phytosanitary Certificate must also be sought from the Plant
Protection Unit for such outbound consignments. The certificates will be issued once the Plant
Quarantine Inspector, upon inspection, is satisfied that the consignment meets all known
requirements of the country of import.



                           FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT THE PLANT
                         PROTECTION UNIT AT (268)562-2776, (268)764-1255, (268)462-6776/7 OR
                                   PLANTPROTECTION@ANTIGUA.GOV.AG
