                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                         [CH.293– 1



                             CHAPTER 293
                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT

LIST OF AUTHORISED PAGES

1 – 448      LRO 1/2017


              ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
                                  PART I
                               PRELIMINARY
SECTION
1.   Short title.
2.   Interpretation.
3.   Application.
4.   Application restricted in certain cases.
5.   Application outside Customs territory.

                                   PART II
                             ADMINISTRATION
6.     The Bahamas Customs Department.
7.     Appointment and Removal of Comptroller.
8.     General authority and powers of the Comptroller.
9.     Powers of the Comptroller to delegate functions.
10.    Protection, independence and obligations of Customs officers.
11.    Identity cards and oaths.
12.    Customs flag and symbol.

                             PART III
                       CUSTOMS PLACES AND
                    CUSTOMS CONTROLLED AREAS
                    DIVISION ONE - CUSTOMS PLACES
13.    Custom places.
            DIVISION TWO - CUSTOMS CONTROLLED AREAS
14.    Customs controlled areas.
15.    Application for licence.
16.    Grant or refusal of lience.
17.    Variation or revocation of conditions and revocation or suspension of
       licence.
18.    Surrender of licence.
19.    Closing of Customs controlled area.
20.    Customs facilities.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 2]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


              21.   Storage charges.

                                                 PART IV
                                 POWERS OF CUSTOMS OFFICERS
              22.   Patrols and surveillance.
              23.   Landing or mooring of Customs craft.
              24.   Boarding of means of transport.
              25.   Search of means of transport.
              26.   Securing goods in means of transport.
              27.   Firing on a vessel.
              28.   Detention of means of transport.
              29.   Searching vehicles.
              30.   Questioning persons.
              31.   Questions about identity, address, travel movements, entitlement etc.
              32.   Questioning employees of owners or operators of certain means of
                    transport.
              33.   Evidence of identity and entitlement to travel.
              34.   Preliminary search of persons by use of aids.
              35.   Detention and search of suspected persons.
              36.   Access of Customs officers to Customs controlled areas.
              37.   Search of premises.
              38.   Examination of goods subject to control of Customs.
              39.   Examination of goods no longer subject to control of Customs.
              40.   Accounting for goods.
              41.   Production of goods.
              42.   Verification of goods declarations.
              43.   Securities for payment of duty.
              44.   Requiring new securities.
              45.   Requisition to produce written authority of Customs agents or
                    representatives.
              46.   Audit or examination of business records.
              47.   Powers in relation to documents.
              48.   Legal privilege in respect of confidential communications.
              49.   Translation of documents in foreign language.
              50.   Customs authority may take possession of and retain documents and
                    records.
              51.   Copying documents during search.
              52.   Retention of records, documents and goods obtained during search.
              53.   Customs search warrants.
              54.   Magistrates’ search warrants.
              55.   Entry and search under search warrant.
              56.   Search warrant to be produced.
              57.   Obligation to inform owner or occupier when thing seized.
              58.   Emergency warrants.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                      LRO 1/2017
                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                             [CH.293– 3


59.    Use of approved aids by Customs officer.
60.    Conditions applying to entry of building.
61.    Arrest of offenders.
62.    Arrest of offenders after escape from officer.
62A.   Export of scrap metal and copper.
62B.   Requirement to keep records to document chain of custody.
62C.   Special investigation unit.
62D.   Grant of permission to export.
62E.   Repeal of No. 66 of 2011.
63.    Power to require attendance.
64.    Power to require information and the production of evidence.
65.    Detention of dangerous goods.
66.    Use of reasonable force and firearms.

                                     PART V
                           CUSTOMS CONTROLS
67.    Goods subject to Customs controls.
68.    Principles of Customs controls.
69.    Post-release verification or audit.
70.    Keeping of records.
71.    Access to business records.

                           PART VI
               ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE OF GOODS,
               PERSONS AND MEANS OF TRANSPORT
                 DIVISION ONE - ARRIVAL OF MEANS OF
                TRANSPORT IN THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY
72.    Notification of arrival.
73.    Requirement to answer questions.
74.    Bringing-to a ship.
75.    Means of transportation to arrive at designated Customs place only.
76.    Means of transportation arriving at place other than designated Customs
        place.
77.    Control of pleasure and small craft.
78.    Inward report.
79.    Vessel or aircraft commissioned by the Crown.
 DIVISION TWO - ARRIVAL OF PERSONS IN THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY
80.    Persons arriving in the Customs territory to report to a Customs officer.
81.    Disembarkation.
82.    Baggage to be presented.
            DIVISION THREE - UNLOADING OF GOODS AND
             TEMPORARY HOLDING OF IMPORTED GOODS

83.    Unloading of goods from aircraft or vessels.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 4]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


              84.    Approved transit sheds.
              85.    Conditions for entering and keeping goods in approved transit shed.
                             DIVISION FOUR - DEPARTURE OF PERSONS
              86.    Persons departing from the Customs territory to depart from Customs
                     place.
              87.    Embarkation.
              88.    Outgoing baggage to be presented.
                      DIVISION FIVE - DEPARTURE OF MEANS OF TRANSPORT
              89.    Clearance of means of transport.
              90.    Certificate of clearance.
              91.    Boarding of outward means of transport by Customs officers.
              92.    Production of certificate of clearance.
              93.    Departure to be from Customs place only.
              94.    Regulations relating to stores of means of transport.

                                         PART VII
                             ENTRY AND ACCOUNTING FOR GOODS
                                DIVISION ONE-GENERAL PROVISIONS
              95.    Obligation to clear goods from Customs.
              96.    Pre-arrival declaration.
              97.    Fees and charges relating to importation and exportation of goods.
                     DIVISION TWO - PERSONS AUTHORISED TO MAKE ENTRIES
              98.    Owners of goods.
              99.    Customs representation.
              100.   Empowerment of authorised agent.
              101.   Authorised economic operator.
              102.   Granting of status of authorised economic operator.
              103.   Implementing provisions for establishing authorised economic operators.
                            DIVISION THREE - IMPORTATION OF GOODS

              104.   Entry of imported goods.
              105.   Regulations relating to the entry of goods for importation.
              106.   Imported goods to be dealt with according to entry.
              107.   Cancellation and amendments of goods declarations.
              108.   Means of transportation imported otherwise than as cargo.
              109.   Samples and illustrations.
                             DIVISION FOUR - TRANSPORTATION WITHIN
                                        THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY

              110.   Transportation of imported goods.
              111.   Removal of goods from Customs controlled area.
              112.   Temporary removal of goods from Customs controlled area.
                             DIVISION FIVE - EXPORTATION OF GOODS



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                         LRO 1/2017
                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 5


113.    Entry of goods for exportation.
114.    Regulations relating to the entry of goods for exportation.
115.    Goods for exportation to be dealt with according to entry.
116.    Loading of goods for export.
117.    Keeping goods in temporary storage facilities.
118.    Goods for export not to be landed.
119.    Time of exportation.
       DIVISION SIX - EXAMINATION AND VERIFICATION OF GOODS
120.    Rules and conditions applying to the examination of goods.
121.    Settlement of disputes arising from the examination of goods and
        concerning classification, origin and valuation.
122.    Application of the results of the examination of goods.
                     DIVISION SEVEN - CUSTOMS SEALS
122A. Appointment of Customs Seal.
123. Customs seals to be applied to goods for exportation.
124. Conditions applying to sealed goods.
DIVISION EIGHT - CUSTOMS-APPROVED SECURE EXPORTS SCHEMES
125.    Comptroller may approve secure exports scheme.
126.    Purpose of secure exports scheme.
127.    Matters to be specified in secure exports scheme.
128.    Acknowledgements required in secure exports scheme.
129.    Goods to be exported under secure exports scheme may be exported
        under drawback.
130.    Application of Customs seals to goods to be exported under secure
        exports scheme.
131.    Review of secure exports scheme.
              DIVISION NINE - GOODS FOR TRANSSHIPMENT
132.    Transshipment.

                                    PART VIII
                               COASTING TRADE
133.    Definition of coasting trade.
134.    Provisions relating to vessels and aircraft from places outside the Customs
        territory.
135.    Limits on coasting trade.
136.    Clearance of coasting vessels and aircraft.
137.    Coastwise passengers.
138.    Cargo book.
139.    Examination of goods in coasting vessels.
                                      PART IX
                        GOODS FOR PERSONAL USE
140.    Exemption from Customs duties of goods imported for personal use.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 6]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


              141.   Exemption from duties and taxes of goods exported for personal use.

                                           PART X
                                     CONDITIONS FOR THE
                                APPLICATION OF THE TARIFF ACT
                                DIVISION ONE - GENERAL PROVISIONS
              142.   Application of Tariff Act.
              143.   Application of Tariff Act to goods as presented.
                        DIVISION TWO-TARIFF CLASSIFICATION OF GOODS
              144.   Use of the Harmonised System.
              145.   Appeals of classification decisions.
                              DIVISION THREE - VALUATION OF GOODS
              146.   Declarant to specify Customs value on goods declaration.
              147.   Amendment of customs value.
              148.   Implementing provisions.
              149.   Foreign currency.
               DIVISION FOUR - ORIGIN AND PREFERENTIAL TARIFF PROVISIONS
              150.   Rules for the determination of Origin.
              151.   Conditions precedent to entry of good s at preferential rates of duty.
              152.   Unsubstantiated and incorrect preference claims.
              153.   Cooperation in Customs authorities (international administrative
                     assistance).

                                                  PART XI
                                                  DUTIES
                      DIVISION ONE - ASSESSMENT AND RECOVERY OF DUTY
              154.   Duty on imported goods a Crown debt.
              155.   Additional duty imposed.
              156.   Rate of duty.
              157.   Assessment of duty.
              158.   Amendment of assessment.
              159.   Due date for payment of duty.
              160.   Assessment presumed to be correct.
              161.   Payment of duty.
              162.   Goods remaining on board and exported.
              163.   Goods entered in bond for transshipment, export or stores.
              164.   Goods arriving otherwise than cargo, stores or baggage.
              165.   Obligation to pay duty not suspended by appeal.
              166.   Customs authority to pay interest on duty refunded on appeal.
              167.   Limitation of time for amendment of assessments.
              168.   Duty constitutes a charge on goods.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                         LRO 1/2017
                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                          [CH.293– 7


169.   Meaning of “related”.
170.   Application of section 171.
171.   Rights and duties of Customs authority in recovery of duty.
172.   Release of goods subject to duty.
173.   Liability for duty on goods wrongly removed or missing.
174.   Liability of owners of means of transport for duty on goods unlawfully
        landed.
175.   Effect of payment of duty by one person on liability of other person.
176.   Incidence of altered duties.
177.   Reimportation of goods exported.
178.   Economic operators leaving The Bahamas.
         Division Two - Refunds, Remissions and Drawbacks of Duty
179.   Application of duties.
180.   Goods exported in other than normal package.
181.   Goods subject to ad valorem duty.
182.   Customs may refund duty paid in error.
183.   Refunds and remission of duty.
184.   Power to apply refunds towards payment of other Customs debt.
185.   Recovery of duty refunded in error.
186.   Goods temporarily imported.
187.   Drawbacks of duty on certain goods.
188.   Drawbacks do not apply to safeguard measures.

                                   PART XII
                       BONDED WAREHOUSES AND
                      WAREHOUSING PROCEDURE
189.   Categories of warehouses and effects of warehousing.
190.   Authorised goods, prohibited goods and other restrictions.
191.   Licensing of bonded warehouses.
192.   Entry of goods in bonded warehouses.
193.   Maintenance of goods.
194.   Loss or deterioration of goods.
195.   Removal of goods from bonded warehouses.
196.   Payment of duty.

                                  PART XIII
                         TEMPORARY ADMISSION
197.   Prior authorisation and conditions of use of the regime.
198.   Payment of duty.

                                  PART XIV
                       TEMPORARY EXPORTATION
199.   Prior authorisation and conditions of use of the regime.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 8]                          CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                                                 PART XV
                                      CUSTOMS WAREHOUSES
              200.   Depositing goods in Customs warehouses.
              201.   Sale by public auction of goods deposited in Customs warehouse.

                                                PART XVI
                                               FREE ZONES
              202.   Definition.
              203.   Establishment and concession.
              204.   Authorised goods, prohibited goods and other restrictions.
              205.   Authorised operations.
              206.   Entry and removal of goods.
              207.   Payment of duty.

                                                 PART XVII
                             PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED GOODS
              208.   Prohibited and restricted imports.
              209.   Prohibited and restricted exports.
              210.   Production of licence or permit for goods.
              211.   Goods in transit, for transshipment or as stores for vessel or aircraft.

                                                PART XVIII
                                COUNTERFEIT AND PIRATED GOODS
              212.   Customs action against goods suspected of infringing certain intellectual
                     property rights.
              213.   Application for action by the Customs authority.
              214.   Provision of security.
              215.   Detention of suspected counterfeit or pirated goods.
              216.   Release of goods.
              217.   Provisions applicable to goods found to infringe intellectual property
                     rights.
              218.   Liability of the Customs authority and the right holder.

                                                PART XIX
                                   CUSTOMS ADVANCE RULINGS
              219.   Application for Customs ruling.
              220.   Making of Customs ruling.
              221.   Advance binding rulings.
              222.   Notice of Customs ruling.
              223.   Effect of Customs ruling.
              224.   Confirmation of basis of Customs ruling.
              225.   Amendment or revocation of Customs ruling.
              226.   Cessation of Customs ruling.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                           LRO 1/2017
                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 9


227.   No liability where Customs ruling relied on.
228.   Appeal from rulings or decisions of Customs authority and suspension of
       implementation.
229.   Rulings or decisions on appeal.

                              PART XX
                       OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
                    DIVISION I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
230.   Customs penalties.
231.   Imposition of penalty.
232.   No penalty in certain cases.
233.   General penalty.
   DIVISION II - OFFENCES IN RELATION TO CUSTOMS AUTHORITY
234.   Threatening or resisting a Customs officer.
235.   Obstructing a Customs officer or interfering with Customs property.
236.   Carrying away officers.
237.   Impersonation of Customs officer.
238.   Bribery and collusion.
239.   Counterfeit seals or marks.
240.   Obligations of persons arriving in or departing from the Customs territory.
241.   Unauthorised presence in certain Customs controlled areas.
                DIVISION III - OFFENCES IN RELATION TO
                    POWERS OF CUSTOMS OFFICERS
242.   Failure to answer questions.
243.   Failure to produce evidence of identity or entitlement to travel.
244.   Failure to produce or account for goods.
245.   Failure to comply with requisition to produce documents.
246.   Failure or refusal to remain at place.
             DIVISION IV - OFFENCES IN RELATION TO
          CUSTOMS CONTROLLED AREAS AND WAREHOUSES
247.   Absence of licence.
248.   Failure to comply with conditions of licence.
249.   Unauthorised access to bonded warehouses.
250.   Other offences in relation to warehouses.
        DIVISION V - OFFENCES IN RELATION TO ARRIVAL AND
               DEPARTURE OF MEANS OF TRANSPORT
251.   Offences in relation to arrival of means of transport.
252.   Offences in relation to inward report.
253.   Signalling to smugglers.
254.   Communicating with arriving means of transport.
255.   Offences in relation to departure of means of transport.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 10]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


               256.   Offences in relation to outward report.
                                     DIVISION VI -OTHER OFFENCES
               257.   Offences in relation to coasting trade.
               258.   Adapting means of transport for smuggling.
               259.   Interference with seals and fastenings.
               260.   Interference with cargo.
               261.   Unloading goods without authorisation.
               262.   Offences in relation to movement and storage of goods.
               263.   Interference with goods subject to Customs control.
               264.   Offences in relation to entries.
               265.   Offences in relation to other declarations and documents.
               266.   Offences in relation to records.
               267.   Possession of incomplete documents.
               268.   Offences in relation to use of goods.
               269.   Provisions relating to offences against sections 264 to 269.
               270.   Offences in relation to importation or exportation of prohibited or
                       restricted goods.
               271.   Offences in relation to importation and exportation of goods.
               272.   Offences in relation to Customs-approved secure export schemes.
               273.   Defrauding the Customs authority of revenue.
               274.   Possession or custody of uncustomed goods or prohibited or restricted
                       goods.
               275.   Purchase, sale, exchange, etc. of uncustomed goods or prohibited or
                       restricted goods.
               276.   Possession or control of concealed goods.
               277.   Offences in relation to seized goods.
               278.   Offences in relation to Customs Appeal Commission.
               279.   Unauthorised access to or improper use of Customs computerized
                       management system.
               280.   Interference with Customs computerised systems.
               281.   Offences in relation to unauthorised use of codes for accessing Customs
                       computerised systems.
                             DIVISION VII - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
                                      RELATING TO OFFENCES
               282.   Liability of officers and corporations.
               283.   Liability of principal and authorised agent.
               284.   Accomplices and other persons having interest in offence.
               285.   Attempts to commit an offence.
               286.   Power of Customs authority to deal with petty offences.
               287.   Assembling to evade Customs enactment.
               288.   Second convictions.
               289.   Fine up to three times the value of goods may be imposed.
               290.   Compounding of offences by the Comptroller.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                        LRO 1/2017
                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                        [CH.293– 11


                              PART XXI
                       FORFEITURE AND SEIZURE
291.   Application.
292.   Goods liable to forfeiture.
293.   Procedure for seizure.
294.   Notice of seizure.
295.   Forfeiture to relate back.
296.   Delivery of goods seized on deposit of value.
297.   Sale of certain seized goods.
298.   Application to the Comptroller for notice disallowing seizure.
299.   Procedure after notice of claim.
300.   Application for order disallowing seizure where notice not received.
301.   Forfeiture if no claim against seizure.
302.   Forfeiture if claim against seizure is discontinued.
303.   Waiver of forfeiture.
304.   Forfeiture of seized goods on conviction.
305.   Disposal of forfeited goods.
306.   Application of forfeiture provisions.

                                  PART XXII
                                  EVIDENCE
307.   Burden of proof.
308.   Documents made overseas.
309.   Prescribed forms.
310.   Record of computer transmission admissible in evidence.
311.   Presumption of authenticity of documents.

                                   PART XXIII
                            LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
312.   Jurisdictions in respect of appeals in Customs matters.
313.   Actions by or against the Comptroller.
314.   Limitation of Customs action.
315.   Protection of witnesses.
316.   Enforcement of court’s decisions.

                             PART XXIV
                      APPEALS AGAINST CUSTOMS
                       RULINGS AND DECISIONS
                     DIVISION I-GENERAL PROVISIONS
317.   Right of appeal.
318.   Suspension of implementation.
                 DIVISION II - APPEAL TO COMPTROLLER

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 12]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


               319.   Conditions and proceedings.
                            DIVISION III - CUSTOMS APPEAL COMMISSION
               320.   Establishment of Customs Appeal Commission.
               321.   Right to further appeal.
                                      DIVISION IV - PROCEEDINGS
               322.   Procedure.
               323.   Nature of appeal.
               324.   Commission may extend time for appeal.
               325.   Hearing.
               326.   Commission may decide appeal without oral hearing if both parties
                      consent.
               327.   Commission’s powers.
               328.   Evidence.
               329.   Power of investigation.
               330.   Power to summon witnesses.
               331.   Service of summons.
               332.   Protection of persons appearing.
               333.   Grounds of appeal and burden of proof.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                      LRO 1/2017
                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                            [CH.293– 13


334.   Sittings of Commission.
335.   Commission may dismiss frivolous or vexatious appeal.
336.   Decision of Commission.
337.   Appeals to the Supreme Court.
338.   Stating case for Supreme Court.

                                   PART XXV
                                  SECURITIES
339.   Requirement to give security.
340.   Provisions relating to giving of security.
341.   Provisions relating to sureties.
342.   Enforcement of bond.

                                  PART XXVI
                       MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
343.   Simplification of the application of the Act. 344. Application of Act to
        postal articles.
345.   Issuance of guidelines and administrative instructions.
346.   Cooperation between State agencies.
347.   Disclosure of information overseas.
348.   Arrival and departure information.
349.   Customs may collect, use or disclose certain information.
350.   Exchange of data and data protection.
351.   Provision of information by and to the Customs authority.
352.   Giving of notice.
353.   Payment by Customs authority out of public money.
354.   Regulations to be issued by the Minister.
355.   Regulations for fees and charges.
356.   Witnessing of signature.
357.   Time limits.
358.   Repeals.
FIRST SCHEDULE (SECTION 202) - Prohibited and Restricted Imports.
SECOND SCHEDULE (SECTION 203) - Prohibited and Restricted Exports.
THIRD SCHEDULE(SECTION 146) - Valuation of Goods for the purposes of
the Customs Tariff.
FOURTH SCHEDULE (SECTIONS 150(5), 151(2) AND 153) - Rules and
Criteria used for determining the Origin of Goods in the Context of the
Economic Partnership Agreement.
FIFTH SCHEDULE (SECTION 53) - Customs Search Warrant.




LRO 1/2017                                                 STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 15



                      CHAPTER 293

              CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT ACT
     An Act to reform the law relating to Customs; to            30 of 2011
                                                                 43 of 2011
provide General Rules applicable to the administration           23 of 2013
of the Customs business in the Customs Territory of              19 of 2015
The Bahamas; to repeal the Customs Management Act,               19 of 2016
Chapter 293 and for connected matters.
                                [Assent - 27th July, 2011]
                          [Commencement – 1st July, 2011]
                                                        3]


                         PART I
                      PRELIMINARY

      1. This Act may be cited as the Customs                    Short title.
Management Act.
      2. In this Act unless the context otherwise                Interpretation.
requires —
      “administrative settlement of a Customs offence”
           means the procedure laid down in sections 286
           and 290 which the Customs authority is
           empowered to settle a Customs offence either
           by a ruling or by means of a compromise
           settlement;
      “airport” means any area of land or water equipped,
           set apart or commonly used for the landing and
           departure of aircraft;
      “appeal” means the act by which a person who is
           directly affected by a decision, act or omission
           of the Customs authority and who considers
           himself to be aggrieved seeks redress before a
           competent authority;
      “approved place of loading” and “approved place of
           unloading” means any quay, jetty, wharf or
           other place within a port, or any part of a
           Customs airport, appointed by the Minister
           under section 13 to be a place where goods may
           be loaded or unloaded;



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 16]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                  “arrival” means —
                  (a) in relation to a means of transport, the entry
                       whether lawfully or unlawfully into the Customs
                       territory from a point outside the Customs
                       territory whether or not the means of transport
                       lands at, hovers above, berths, moors, anchors,
                       stops or otherwise arrives at any place within the
                       Customs territory; and
                  (b) in relation to a person, the entry of the person by
                       any means, whether lawfully or unlawfully, into
                       the Customs territory from a point outside that
                       territory;
                  “arrival hall” means a place designated under this
                        Act for the processing of persons arriving in the
                        Customs territory;
                  “attorney-at-law” means a counsel and attorney
                        called to The Bahamas Bar in accordance with
Ch. 64.                 section 13 of the Legal Profession Act;
                  “authorised economic operator” means a party
                        involved in the international movement of
                        goods in whatever function that has been
                        approved by or on behalf of the Customs
                        authority as complying with World Trade
                        Organization or World Customs Organization
                        supply chain security standards and includes
                        inter alia manufacturers, importers, exporters,
                        Customs brokers, carriers, consolidators,
                        intermediaries, port operators, airport operators,
                        terminal operators, integrated operators,
                        warehouse operators and distributors;
                  “authorised person” means any person for the time
                        being authorised under provisions of this Act;
                  “BOI, BTC and BVI rulings” means Binding Origin
                        Information, Binding Tariff Classification and
                        Binding     Valuation     Information      rulings
                        respectively, issued pursuant to section 221;
                  “bonded warehouse” means any warehouse licensed
                        by the Comptroller under Part XII for the
                        deposit of dutiable goods which have been
                        entered to be warehoused and on which duty
                        has not been paid;



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                     LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 17



      “cargo” includes all goods imported, exported or
            carried coastwise in any aircraft or vessel other
            than such goods as are required as stores for the
            consumption or use by or for the aircraft or
            vessel, its crew and passengers, and the bona
            fide personal baggage of such passengers;
      “certificate of origin” means a specific form issued
            by a duly authorized entity that certifies
            expressly that the goods to which the certificate
            relates originate in a specific country and may
            include a declaration by the manufacturer,
            producer, supplier, exporter or other competent
            person;
      “clearance” means the accomplishment of the
            Customs formalities necessary to allow craft or
            goods to be released for free circulation, to be
            exported or to be placed under another Customs
            procedure;
      “coasting cargo” means, in relation to any vessel or
           aircraft, goods loaded on the vessel or aircraft at
           any port or airport in the Customs territory for
           carriage to and unloading at any other port or
           airport in the Customs territory;
      “Code of Conduct” means the Code of Conduct for
          Customs Officers promulgated by the
          Comptroller pursuant to section 8(3)(o);
      “Commission” means the Customs Appeal
          Commission;
      “compensating products” means products resulting
          from the manufacturing, processing or repair of
          goods for which the use of the inward
          processing procedure is authorised;
      “compromise settlement” means an agreement under
          which the Comptroller, being so empowered,
          consents to waive proceedings in respect of a
          Customs offence subject to compliance with
          certain conditions by the person(s) implicated in
          such offence;
      “Comptroller” means the Comptroller of Customs or
          any other public officer acting on his behalf or
          under his authority;


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 18]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                  “contractor” means a person who does work for
                       valuable consideration on or in respect of any
                       goods at the request of any other person,
                       otherwise than as an employee of that other
                       person, in circumstances where that other
                       person supplies, but retains ownership of, some
                       or all of the material used in the work;
                  “country of origin” means the country in which the
                       goods have been produced or manufactured
                       according to the criteria laid down for the
                       purposes of application of the Customs Tariff,
                       of quantitative restrictions, or, of any other
                       measure related to trade;
                  “craft” includes any aircraft, ship, boat, or other
                       machine, vessel or device, used or capable of
                       being used for the carriage or transportation of
                       persons or goods, or both, by air, water or over
                       or under water;
                  “customs airport” means an aerodrome designated as
                       a Customs place under this Act;
                  “Customs Appeal Commission” means the body
                       established pursuant to section 320;
                  “Customs-approved secure exports scheme” means a
                       scheme, in relation to goods that are to be
                       exported, whether under drawback or not,
                       approved by the Comptroller under section 125
                       for —
                  (a) the packing of the goods, in a Customs-approved
                      secure package, by approved persons, in
                      approved conditions, and subject to approved
                      requirements including, without limitation, a
                      requirement that a seal or markings in an
                      approved form be applied to the package as soon
                      as it is secured;
                  (b) the immediate conveyance, on the completion of
                      the packing of the goods in accordance with
                      paragraph (a), of the Customs-approved secure
                      package, by approved persons and in an
                      approved manner, to the place of shipment for
                      shipping, or, if it is not in that way immediately
                      conveyed and shipped, to some approved place
                      or places of security en route to the place of
                      shipment;


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                   LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 19


      (c) for the goods, from the time when they are first
          secured in a Customs-approved secure package
          until the exportation of the goods to a point
          outside the Customs territory, to be goods
          subject to the control of the Customs authority;
      (d) for the powers of detention and search to be
          available in respect of a means of transport in
          the Customs territory if there are suspected to be
          in or on the means of transport goods that are, or
          are suspected to be —
          (i) subject to the control of the Customs
                authority; and
          (ii) in a Customs-approved secure package;
      (e) for a Customs officer to question any or all of
          the following persons about any cargo destined
          to be exported from the Customs territory —
          (i) a person who is the owner or operator of a
                means of transport that a Customs officer
                has reasonable cause to suspect has in or on
                it, or has within the previous 72 hours had
                in or on it, goods subject to the control of
                the Customs authority and in a Customs-
                approved secure package;
          (ii) a person who is the owner or occupier of
                premises that a Customs officer has
                reasonable cause to suspect have in or on
                them, or have within the previous 72 hours
                had in or on them, goods subject to the
                control of the Customs authority and in a
                Customs-approved secure package; or
          (iii) a person employed by a person described in
                sub- paragraph (i) or (ii);
      “Customs-approved secure package” means a
           package of a kind that is approved by the
           Customs authority for the purposes of a
           Customs- approved secure exports scheme;
      “Customs area” means any place appointed by the
           Comptroller for the deposit of goods subject to
           Customs control;
      “Customs authority” or “the Customs” means the
          Customs Department of the Commonwealth of
          The Bahamas;


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 20]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                  “Customs controls” means specific acts performed by
                       the Customs authority pursuant to this Act;
                  “Customs direction” means a request, order,
                       command, or instruction, given by a Customs
                       officer to any person to do or to refrain from
                       doing an act or to submit to a procedure for the
                       purposes of this Act and includes —
                  (a) any notice, poster, or sign displayed in a
                      Customs place or Customs controlled area; and
                  (b) a direction contained in a form prescribed under
                      this Act or any other relevant Customs
                      legislation;
                  “Customs enactment” includes this Act and any
                       subsidiary legislation made under it and any
                       other enactment that relates to a Customs
                       matter;
                  “Customs formalities” means all operations carried
                       out by a person or entity concerned, and by the
                       Customs authority, from the time goods are
                       introduced into the Customs territory until the
                       release of such goods;
                  “Customs laws” or “Customs legislation” means the
                       body of Customs legislation of The Bahamas
                       comprising —
                  (a) this Act together with its Schedules, associated
                      regulations and rules made under the authority
                      of this Act; and
                  (b) other national legislation, the administration of
                      which, in whole or part, is vested in the Customs
                      authority;
                  “Customs offence” means any breach, or attempted
                       breach, of the provisions of this Act or any
                       other relevant Customs legislation;
                  “Customs officer” or “officer” means a person
                       appointed by the Public Service Commission as
                       a Customs officer for the purpose of this Act or
                       any other person employed by the Bahamas
                       Customs Department who is designated by the
                       Bahamas Customs Department to be a Customs
                       officer for the purpose of this Act, whether at
                       the time of appointment or otherwise;



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                   LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 21


      “Customs places” means customs ports, customs               23 of 2013, s. 2.
           airports and sufferance wharves designated or
           appointed under section 13;
      “Customs procedure” means any of the following
           procedures under which goods may be placed in
           accordance with this Act —
      (a) release for free circulation;
      (b) special procedures, such as bonded warehouse,
          temporary admission and temporary exportation;
          or
      (c) export;
      “Customs revenue” means any amounts collectible
           by the Customs authority in accordance with the
           Customs laws;
      “Customs seal” means a seal approved by the                23 of 2013, s. 2.
           Customs authority and appointed by the
           Minister by notice published in the Gazette in
           accordance with section 122A;
      “Customs territory” means the entire territory of the
           Commonwealth of The Bahamas, including its
           territorial waters, airspace and its Exclusive
           Economic Zone;
      “Customs transit” means the transport of goods from
           one Customs place to another Customs place
           under Customs control;
      “Customs value”, in relation to goods, means the
           Customs value of such goods determined in
           accordance with the Third Schedule;
      “Customs warehouse” means any place designated
           by the Customs authority for the deposit of
           unentered, abandoned, detained, or seized
           goods for the security of, or duties due on, such
           goods;
      “declarant” means any person who makes a
           declaration or in whose name such a declaration
           is made;
      “declaration of arrival” or “declaration of departure”,
           as the case may be, means any declaration
           required to be made or produced to the Customs
           authority upon arrival or departure of the means
           of transport by the person responsible for the

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 22]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       means of transport and containing the necessary
                       particulars relating to the means of transport
                       and to the journey, cargo, stores, crew or
                       passengers;
                  “declaration of origin” means an appropriate
                       statement as to the origin of the goods, made in
                       connection with their exportation, by the
                       manufacturer, producer, supplier, exporter or
                       other competent person on the commercial
                       invoice or any other document relating to the
                       goods;
                  “Defence area” means an area under the control of
                       the Defence Force or any authorised foreign
                       armed services within The Bahamas;
                  “Disciplinary Board” means the Committee
                        established within The Bahamas Customs
                        Department in accordance with Public Service
                        Commission Regulations;
                  “documentary evidence of origin” means a certificate
                        of origin, a certified declaration of origin or a
                        declaration of origin;
                  “dollars” means Bahamian Dollars;
                  “domestic goods” means goods which fall into any of
                        the following categories —
                  (a) goods wholly obtained in the Customs territory
                       and not incorporating goods imported from
                       countries or territories outside of that territory;
                  (b) goods imported from countries or territories
                       outside the Customs territory and released for
                       free circulation; or
                  (c) goods obtained or produced in the Customs
                       territory, either solely from goods referred to in
                       paragraph (b) or from goods referred to in
                       paragraphs (a) and (b);
                  “drawback” means the refund of import duties on
                        goods released for free circulation if such goods
                        are exported from the Customs territory in an
                        unaltered state or in the form of processed
                        products;
                  “dual-channel system” means a simplified Customs
                        control system allowing travelers on arrival to



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                     LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 23


           make a declaration by choosing between two
           types of channels —
      (a) one type, identified by green symbols, being for
          the use of travelers carrying goods in quantities
          or values not exceeding those admissible duty-
          free allowances and which are not subject to
          import prohibitions or restrictions; and
      (b) the other type, identified by red symbols, being
          for other travelers;
      “dutiable goods” means goods of a kind subject to
            duty within the meaning of this Act;
      “duty” means a duty, additional duty, excise duty,
            additional excise duty, value added tax, or other
            tax, fee, charge, or levy, imposed on goods
            under this Act or other Customs legislation and
            the terms “import duties” and “export duties”
            have corresponding meanings;
      “economic operator” means a person who is
            commercially involved in the import or export
            of goods to or from the Customs territory;
      “entered” in relation to goods imported, exported,         23 of 2013, s. 2.
            warehoused, or put on board a ship or aircraft as
            stores, means —
           (i) the acceptance and signature by the proper
               officer of an entry, specification, or shipping
               bill;
          (ii) a declaration on the prescribed form
               completed and signed by the importer or
               exporter in the prescribed manner;
         (iii) the payment by the importer or exporter to
               the proper officer of—
               (A) all rents and charges due to the Crown in
                    respect of the goods;
               (B) subject to paragraphs (d) and (e), all
                    duties payable in respect of dutiable
                    goods except in respect of the entry for
                    warehousing of imported goods;
               (C) where permitted, the deposit of a sum of
                    money or the giving of security for
                    dutiable goods; and
               (D) in the case of goods for which security by
                    bond is required on exportation, removal

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 24]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                              or use as stores, the giving of security in
                              respect of such goods;
                  “equivalent goods” means domestic or international
                       goods identical in description, quality and
                       technical characteristics to those goods which
                       they replace under the drawback procedure;
                  “exportation”, with its grammatical variations and
                       cognate expressions except where otherwise
                       expressly provided —
                  (a) means any shipment in any means of transport
                      for transportation to a point outside the Customs
                      territory; and
                  (b) in relation to an electronic publication, includes
                      the sending of the electronic publication from
                      the Customs territory by any means, other than
                      by broadcasting, to a point outside the Customs
                      territory;
                  “exporter” means a person by or for whom goods are
                       exported and includes a person who is or
                       becomes the owner of or entitled to the
                       possession of or beneficially interested in goods
                       on or any time after entry for export and before
                       they are exported;
                  “foreign” means any place beyond the limits of the
                       Customs territory;
                  “forfeited goods” means goods that are forfeited to
                       the Crown under the Act;
                  “Free Zone” has the meaning set out in section
                       202(1);
                  “goods” means all kinds of articles, documents,
                       wares, merchandise, means of transport,
                       animals and electrical energy; and includes,
                       where goods are sold under the provisions of
                       this Act, the proceeds of sale;
                  “Government” means the Government of The
                       Bahamas;
                  “Harmonised System” means the Harmonised
                       Commodity Description and Coding System;
                  “holder of the goods” means the person who is the
                       owner of the goods or who has a similar right of



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                    LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 25


            disposal over them or who has physical control
            over them;
      “importation” with its grammatical variations and
            cognate expressions —
      (a) in relation to goods, means the arrival of the
           goods in the Customs territory in any manner
           whatever, whether lawfully or unlawfully, from
           a point outside the Customs territory;
      (b) in relation to electronic publications, includes
           the arrival of the electronic publication into the
           Customs territory by transmission by any means,
           other than by broadcasting, from a point outside
           the Customs territory;
      “importer” means a person by or for whom goods are
            imported and includes the consignee of goods
            and a person who is or becomes the owner of or
            entitled to the possession of or beneficially
            interested in any goods on or at any time after
            their importation;
      “intellectual property” means any intellectual
            property rights as defined under the laws of The
            Bahamas including copyright and related rights,
            trademarks, geographical indications, industrial
            designs, patents, layout-designs (topographies)
            of integrated circuits and protection of
            undisclosed information;
      “international crew” means the crew or any member
            of the crew of a means of transport that is on a
            journey that —
      (a) began outside the Customs territory; or
      (b) began in the Customs territory and is to continue
           outside the Customs territory;
      “internationally ticketed passenger” means a person
            who has an entitlement to travel for a domestic
            sector, being a sector included in tickets for an
            international journey that —
      (a) began outside the Customs territory; or
      (b) began within the Customs territory and is to
           continue outside the Customs territory;
      “international passenger” means a person who has an
            entitlement to travel on or in a means of


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 26]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       transport within the Customs territory where
                       that travel is part of an international journey
                       that —
                  (a) began outside the Customs territory; or
                  (b) began in the Customs territory and is to continue
                      outside the Customs territory;
                  “inward processing” means the Customs procedure
                       under which certain goods can be brought into a
                       Customs territory conditionally relieved from
                       payment of import duties and taxes on the basis
                       that such goods are intended for manufacturing,
                       processing or         repair   and    subsequent
                       exportation;
                  “master” includes any person for the time being
                       having or taking charge or command of any
                       vessel or aircraft;
                  “means of transport” means any craft, vehicle or
                       animal used for the transportation of passengers
                       or goods and including containers and other
                       transport equipment;
                  “means of transport for private use” means vehicles
                       and craft, together with their spare parts and
                       normal accessories and equipment, imported or
                       exported exclusively for personal use by the
                       person concerned and not for the transport of
                       persons for remuneration or the industrial or
                       commercial transport of goods, whether or not
                       for remuneration;
                  “Minister” means the Minister responsible for
                       Finance;
                  “occupier”, in relation to land, means the owner; and
                       includes a lessee or tenant, a licensee, or a
                       person who has the right to occupy land under
                       other authority;
4 of 1976.        “Old Act” means the Customs Management Act;
                  “operator”, in relation to a business, means the
                       person actively engaged, whether alone or with
                       others, in the carrying on of the business, and
                       whether registered as such and, in the case of a
                       body corporate, includes every director,
                       manager, secretary, or other similar officer
                       engaged in the direct control or management of


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                   LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 27


           its business, and a person who purports to act in
           any of such capacities;
      “outward processing” means the Customs procedure
           under which goods which are in free circulation
           in a Customs territory may be temporarily
           exported for manufacturing, processing or
           repair abroad and then re-imported with total or
           partial exemption from import duties and taxes;
      “owner” —
      (a) in relation to a means of transport, includes the
          master or other responsible officer of a ship or
          aircraft, or the driver or other responsible person
          in relation to a means of transport, or the owner
          or charterer of the means of transport, and a
          person acting as agent or representative for the
          owner or charterer;
      (b) in relation to goods, includes any person being
          or holding themselves out to be the owner,
          importer, exporter, consignee, or any person
          having possession of or beneficially interested in
          or having control or power of disposal over the
          goods; and
      (c) in relation to land, means the person entitled to
          receive the rent or who would be so entitled if
          the land were let to a tenant;
      “package” includes any means used or capable of
           being used to pack, cover, enclose, contain, or
           encase goods for carriage, a bulk cargo
           container, a pallet, or a similar device;
      “person” means natural persons, legal persons and
           any association of persons which is not a legal
           person but which is recognized under the laws
           of The Bahamas as having the capacity to
           perform legal acts;
      “person established in the Customs territory”
           means—
      (a) in the case of a natural person, any person who
          has their habitual residence in the Customs
          territory; and
      (b) in the case of a legal person or an association of
          persons, any person who has their registered



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 28]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      office, central headquarters or a permanent
                      business establishment in the Customs territory;
                  “personal effects” means all new or used articles
                       which a traveler may reasonably require for his
                       personal use during the journey, taking into
                       account all the circumstances of the journey but
                       excluding any goods imported or exported for
                       commercial purposes;
                  “prescribed” means prescribed by laws, regulations,
                       orders, rules or other measures made under
                       authority of this Act or other relevant Customs
                       legislation and, in relation to forms, includes
                       those prescribed by the Minister or the
                       Comptroller;
                  “presentation of goods to Customs” means the
                       notification to the Customs authority of the
                       arrival of the goods at a place designated for
                       inspection and the availability of such goods for
                       Customs controls;
                  “prime lending rate” means the rate of interest as
                       published by the commercial banks;
                  “processed products” means goods which have
                       undergone processing operations;
                  “processing operations” means any of the
                       following—
                  (a) working of goods, including erecting or
                      assembling them or fitting them to other goods;
                  (b) processing of goods;
                  (c) destruction of goods;
                  (d) repair of goods, including restoring them and
                      putting them in order; or
                  (e) use of production accessories;
                  “production accessories” means goods which are not
                       to be found in the processed products but which
                       allow or facilitate the production of those
                       products, even if they are entirely or partially
                       used up in the process;
                  “prohibited exports” means the goods the exportation
                       of which is prohibited by or under this Act;




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                   LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 29



      “prohibited goods” means the goods the importation
            of which is prohibited by or under this Act and
            any other law of the Commonwealth of The
            Bahamas;
      “prohibited imports” means the goods the
            importation of which is prohibited by or under
            this Act;
      “prohibited or restricted goods” means goods of a
            class or description of which the importation,
            exportation or carriage coastwise is prohibited
            by or restricted under this Act;
      “proper officer” in relation to any power or duty
            under this Act means a Customs officer who, by
            instruction, or with the concurrence, of the
            Comptroller exercises or performs such power
            or duty;
      “rate of yield” means the quantity or percentage of
            processed products obtained from the
            processing of a given quantity of goods placed
            under a processing procedure;
      “refund” means the repayment by the Customs
            authority of any amount paid as a duty —
      (a) where such an amount is found by the Customs
           authority to be in excess of the duty due or
           payable;
      (b) where goods are of faulty manufacture; or
      (c) where goods have been abandoned to the Crown
           for destruction or other form of disposal prior to
           their release from the control of the Customs
           authority;
      “re-importation in the same state” means the
           Customs procedure under which goods which
           were exported may be taken into home use free
           of Customs duties and taxes provided —
      (a) they have not undergone any manufacturing,
           processing or repairs abroad;
      (b) any sums chargeable as a result of repayment or
           remission of or conditional relief from duties
           and taxes or of any subsidies or other amounts
           granted in connection with exportation shall be
           paid; and


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 30]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                  (c) such goods eligible for re-importation in the
                       same state may be goods that were in free
                       circulation or were compensating products;
                  “release of goods” means the act whereby the
                        Customs authority authorises the removal of
                        goods from a Customs place or other place
                        designated for Customs procedures, including
                        free warehouses, for free circulation within the
                        Customs territory;
                  “remission” means the waiver of payment, in whole
                        or in part, of import duties and taxes where
                        payment has not been made;
                  “restricted goods” means any goods the importation,
                        exportation or carriage coastwise of which —
                  (a) is prohibited, save in accordance with any
                       conditions     regulating     such    importation,
                       exportation or carriage coastwise;
                  (b) is in any way regulated by or under the Customs
                       laws or any other law of The Bahamas;
                  “risk” means the likelihood of an event that may
                        occur, with regard to the entry, exit, transit,
                        transfer or end-use, of goods moved between
                        the Customs territory of The Bahamas and
                        countries or territories outside that territory as
                        well as to the presence of goods which do not
                        have domestic status, which could —
                  (a) prevent or impede the correct application of
                       national laws or other measures;
                  (b) compromise the financial interests of The
                       Bahamas;
                  (c) pose a threat to the security and safety of The
                       Bahamas and its citizens; to human, animal or
                       plant life or health and to the environment or
                       consumers;
                  “risk     management”       means     the systematic
                        identification of risk and the implementation of
                        all measures necessary for limiting exposure to
                        risk;
                  “right holder” means a natural or legal person
                       regarded under the laws of The Bahamas as the
                       owner of protected intellectual or industrial
                       property rights together with a successor in title,


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                     LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 31


           or duly authorised exclusive licensee, as well as
           an individual, a corporation or an association
           authorised by any of the aforementioned
           persons to protect its rights;
      “rules of origin” means the specific provisions
            applied by the Customs authority to determine
            the origin of goods for Customs purposes;
      “search warrant” means a Customs search warrant or
            a Magistrate’s search warrant, as the case may
            be, issued pursuant to this Act;
       “shipment” includes loading into or onto a means of
            transport and “to ship” and cognate expressions
            have corresponding meanings;
      “small craft” means a vessel less than fifty tons
            burden;
      “stores” means stores for consumption, and stores to
            be taken away;
      “stores for consumption” means goods which are
            either on board a means of transport upon
            arrival or are taken on board during the stay in
            the Customs territory which are —
      (a) intended for consumption by the passengers and
           or crew on board such means of transport,
           whether or not sold;
      (b) are necessary for the operation and maintenance
           of such means of transport, including fuel and
           lubricants, but excluding spare parts and
           equipment;
      “stores to be taken away” means goods for sale to
            passengers and crew of a means of transport
            with a view to being landed which are either on
            board upon arrival or are taken on board during
            the stay in the Customs territory and are used or
            intended to be used in international travel of the
            means of transport;
      “substantial transformation criterion” means the
            criterion according to which origin is
            determined by regarding as the country of
            origin the country in which the last substantial
            manufacturing or processing, deemed sufficient



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 32]                  CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         to give the commodity its essential character,
                         has been carried out;
23 of 2013, s. 2.   “sufferance wharf” means a place for the loading or
                         unloading of goods that is owned or operated by
                         or on behalf of a person or entity other than the
                         Government and appointed under section 13 as
                         a Customs place;
                    “summary declaration” means a declaration to be
                         made before goods are brought into or out of
                         the Customs territory;
                    “temporary admission” means the Customs
                         procedure under which goods that are imported
                         for a specific purpose, intended for re-
                         exportation within a specified period and that
                         have not undergone any change except normal
                         depreciation due to their use, may be brought
                         into the Customs territory conditionally relieved
                         from payment of duties and taxes;
                    “temporary storage of goods” means the storage of
                         goods under Customs control in premises and
                         enclosed or unenclosed spaces approved by the
                         Customs authority pending presentation of an
                         entry to Customs;
                    “The Universal Postal Union” means the inter-
                         governmental organization created in 1874
                         under the Treaty of Bern and now a specialised
                         agency of the United Nations;
                    “transshipment” with its grammatical variations and
                         cognate expressions means the transfer of goods
                         under Customs control from a means of
                         transport arriving in the Customs territory to a
                         means of transport departing from the Customs
                         territory within the area of one Customs place
                         that is the place of both importation and
                         exportation;
                    “transit shed” means locked premises in or
                         comprising a building or an open area, enclosed
                         or unenclosed, approved as such by the
                         Comptroller for the temporary deposit and
                         storage of goods that are imported or are to be
                         exported pending clearance;




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                     LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 33



      “traveller” means any person who temporarily enters
            the Customs territory of another country in
            which he or she does not normally reside (“non-
            resident”); and any person who leaves the
            Customs territory of a country in which he or
            she normally resides (“departing resident”) or
            who returns to that Customs territory
            (“returning resident”);
      “uncustomed goods” means goods, whether dutiable
            or not, which are imported or in any way dealt
            with contrary to the Customs laws, including
            non-payment of duty owing;
      “unlawfully exported” means exported in breach of
            this Act or any other Customs legislation;
      “unlawfully imported” means imported in breach of
            this Act or any other Customs legislation.
      (2) Words importing male persons include female
persons and corporations and words importing female
persons include male persons and corporations.
      3. (1) This Act shall apply, without prejudice to          Application.
the provisions of other laws, in relation to —
      (a) the importation of goods into The Bahamas;
      (b) the exportation of goods from The Bahamas;
      (c) the arrival of persons from outside the territory
           of The Bahamas and the departure of persons to
           a destination outside the territory of The
           Bahamas; and
      (d) the control of coasting trade.
      (2) This Act shall apply without prejudice to the
position, capacity and status of a person.
      (3) This Act shall apply to goods imported or
exported by the Crown.
      (4) Subject to section 4, this Act binds the Crown
and shall apply uniformly throughout the Customs territory
without prejudice to other Customs legislation.
                                                                 Application
      4. (1) The Minister shall, by regulation made              restricted in
pursuant to section 354, prescribe the circumstances and         certain cases.
the conditions under which the powers conferred by Part          23 of 2013, s. 3.
IV of this Act may be exercised in relation to —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 34]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     (a) a member of the Police and Defence Force;
                     (b) access to a Defence area; or
                     (c) a means of transport or a conveyance under the
                          control of the Defence Force.
                     (2) Subject to subsection (5), sections 104 to 108
               shall not apply to a member of the Security Forces or a
               means of transport under the control of the Defence Force
               during such time as such person or means of transport is
               required to respond to an emergency.
                     (3) For purposes of this section, “emergency”
               means —
                     (a) a national emergency as defined in the Disaster
Ch. 34A.                  Preparedness and Response Act;
                     (b) a search and rescue event at a point outside the
                          Customs territory involving a serious and
                          imminent threat to the safety of persons or
                          means of transports;
                     (c) a state of war or other like emergency in a place
                          outside the Customs territory; or
                     (d) such other circumstances as are agreed after
                          consultation with the Minister responsible for
                          National Security.
                     (4) Subject to subsection (5), sections 89 to 93 shall
               not apply to a member of the Security Forces or a means of
               transport or conveyance under the control of the Defence
               Force during the time as such person or means of transport
               is involved in an emergency described in paragraph (a) or
               (d) of subsection (3)
                     (5) The Defence Force shall, where a means of
               transport under its control which is involved in or required
               to respond to an emergency departs from or returns to the
               Customs territory —
                     (a) notify the Customs authority within a period of
                          forty eight hours or such longer period as the
                          Minister may reasonably determine that the
                          means of transport has departed from or arrived
                          in the Customs territory, as the case may be; and
                     (b) provide to the Customs authority such details
                          relating to goods and persons on or in the means
                          of transport as the Minister specifies.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 35



       (6) The power of the Minister under subsection (5)
to determine a time or specify details required may be
exercised generally or in respect of any particular case.
      (7) Nothing in this Act or in any regulations made
under this Act shall be interpreted as limiting the
immunities of—
      (a) a foreign warship or other foreign governmental
           ship operated for non-commercial purposes;
      (b) a foreign military aircraft; or
      (c) members of the crew of a ship or aircraft to
           which paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) applies.
      5. (1) For the purposes of this Act, territories of        Application
Free Zones and free warehouses shall, insofar as duties and      outside Customs
                                                                 territory.
taxes are concerned, be regarded as existing outside the
Customs territory.
      (2) Subject to subsection (3), this Act shall in all
respects, except insofar as duties and taxes are concerned,
apply to —
      (a) Free Zones and free warehouses; and
      (b) all goods and materials entering, existing or
           being processed within, and or exiting from,
           Free Zones and free warehouses.
      (3) The Minister may by regulation prescribe areas
outside the Customs territory, or regarded as existing
outside the Customs territory, where this Act shall,
including insofar as duties and taxes are concerned, apply.

                       PART II
                   ADMINISTRATION
      6. (1) The Customs authority of The Bahamas                The Bahamas
shall be the Bahamas Customs Department.                         Customs
                                                                 Department.
      (2) The mission of the Customs authority shall be to
enhance and protect the economic welfare and security of
the people of The Bahamas through provision of
appropriate Customs services in accordance with best
international practices consistent with the requirements of
international agreements relating to Customs activities to
which The Bahamas is party.
      (3) The Customs authority shall —
      (a) assess, levy and collect all duties and taxes on
           imports and exports; and

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
 CH.293 – 36]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (b) undertake any other relevant functions as may
                                be assigned to the Customs by the Government.
                           (4) All duties and taxes collected by the Customs
                    shall be deposited into the Consolidated Fund.
                           (5) The Customs authority shall be responsible for
                    facilitating international trade at the external borders, coast
                    and territorial waters of The Bahamas and such
                    responsibilities shall include —
                           (a) co-operating closely with other competent
                                authorities of The Bahamas which have
                                responsibilities in relation to border security so
                                as to provide effective and efficient integrated
                                border management services while achieving
                                positive and standard results at every Customs
                                place in the Customs territory;
                           (b) ensuring the security and safety of citizens and
                                the environment in close co-operation with other
                                authorities;
                           (c) protecting the economic interests of the nation;
                           (d) acting in partnership with economic operators to
                                facilitate legitimate international trade, thereby
                                contributing towards the ability of The Bahamas
                                business community to compete in the global
                                market place.
                          (6) The Minister shall have responsibility for the
                    administration of this Act.
                          (7) All persons who immediately before the
                    commencement of this Act held office or were otherwise
                    employed in the Customs authority shall be deemed to be
                    employed under this Act and continue to hold office in the
                    Customs authority.
Appointment of            7. (1) There       shall   be    appointed,    upon
Comptroller.
                    recommendation of the Minister, a Comptroller of
23 of 2013, s. 4.
                    Customs.
19 of 2015, s.2.          (2) The Comptroller shall report to the Financial
                    Secretary.
                          (3) The Minister may delegate all or part of his
                    responsibilities under this Act, on such terms and
                    conditions as he may determine, to the Comptroller.
General authority
and powers of             8. (1) The Comptroller shall, under the control and
the Comptroller.    direction of the Minister, exercise the powers and perform
                    the duties of the Minister under this Act.

STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 37



      (2) The Comptroller shall, in addition to his duties
and powers under subsection (1), be responsible for—
     (a) the general management and administration of
          the Customs authority;
     (b) the efficient working of the Customs authority;
          and
     (c) any other matter in respect of which a duty is
          conferred on the Comptroller by or under this
          Act or other Customs legislation.
      (3) The Comptroller may from time to time
prescribe rules for the purposes of this Act and for
administering the Customs in relation to any or all of the
following matters —
      (a) designating Customs controlled areas;
      (b) prescribing the working hours of the Customs
          Department and providing for the fixing of
          particular working hours in respect of any
          particular location, including Customs places;
      (c) prescribing the charges to be paid to the
          Customs authority for the attendance of Customs
          officers outside the normal working hours of the
          Customs authority;
      (d) prescribing the time within which goods to
          which section 104 of this Act applies shall be
          entered;
      (e) prescribing the time within which goods to
          which section 113 of this Act applies shall be
          entered;
      (f) prescribing the form and content of, and the
          particulars to be verified by declaration in
          inward reports required to be delivered under
          this Act and the manner in which such reports
          shall be delivered to the Customs authority;
      (g) prescribing the form and content of, and the
          particulars to be verified by declaration in
          outward reports required to be delivered under
          this Act and the manner in which such reports
          shall be delivered to the Customs authority;
      (h) prescribing the form, or forms, of certificates of
          clearance to be issued under this Act;
      (i) prescribing the form and manner in which goods
          to which section 104 of this Act applies shall be

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 38]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      entered, and the particulars to be provided in the
                      entry, and the form of any declaration to be
                      made in the entry;
                  (j) prescribing the form and manner in which goods
                      to which section 113 of this Act applies shall be
                      entered, and the particulars to be provided in the
                      entry, and the form of any declaration to be
                      made in the entry;
                  (k) prescribing procedures for permitting the entry,
                      unloading, removal and loading of goods, and
                      the report and clearance of conveyances in such
                      form and manner as the Comptroller may direct
                      to meet the exigencies of any case to which
                      Customs legislation cannot be conveniently
                      applied;
                  (l) prescribing the forms and the contents for
                      applications to be lodged with the Customs
                      authority by the owner of an intellectual
                      property right to obtain the assistance of the
                      Customs authority in the detection and
                      suspension of release of goods suspected of
                      infringing intellectual property rights;
                  (m) establishing a unit within the Customs authority
                      authorised to receive applications lodged with
                      the Customs authority by holders of intellectual
                      property rights;
                  (n) prescribing      the     conditions      for    the
                      implementation of a formal system for the
                      issuance of advance BTC, BOI and BVI rulings
                      prescribing the form of application for such
                      advance binding rulings;
                  (o) promulgating a Code of Conduct for Customs
                      Officers and related disciplinary procedures that
                      shall set out the standards, principles, norms of
                      conduct and rules of behavior to be observed by
                      all Customs officers in the course of their duties;
                  (p) establishing an Internal Inspection Unit within
                      the Customs Authority;
                  (q) establishing a Professional Standards Unit to
                      enforce provisions contained in the Code of
                      Conduct for Customs officers; and
                  (r) prescribing rules in relation to any matter related
                      to the administration of this Act as may be
                      required by the Minister.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                   LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 39


      (4) A rule made by the Comptroller under
subsection (3) shall be signed by the Comptroller.
      (5) A rule made under paragraphs (a) to (n) of
subsection (3) shall be published in the Gazette.
      (6) The Comptroller shall make copies of rules
prescribed under paragraphs (a) to (n) of subsection (3)
available for public inspection in the Central Customs
Office in Nassau.
      (7) The Comptroller may, from time to time, amend
or revoke any rules made under this section and the
provisions of this section, with all necessary modifications,
shall apply in respect of any such amendment or
revocation.
      (8) The Comptroller may, in addition to the passage
of rules prescribed under subsection (3) —
      (a) with the approval of the Minister, recruit
           Customs officers and support employees in such
           numbers as may be appropriate for the Customs
           authority through open competition in
           accordance with the Public Service Act;               Ch. 39.

      (b) nominate heads of units based on the
           recommendations of an internal committee
           established for this purpose within the Customs
           Department and through an internal recruitment
           process as appropriate;
      (c) recommend to the Public Service Commission
           the promotion of any Customs officer in
           accordance with recommendations issued by an
           internal committee established for this purpose
           within the Customs Department and through an
           internal recruitment process and open
           competition;
      (d) recommend disciplinary action in cases of
           breach of the Code of Conduct by Customs
           officers or by other persons appointed or
           employed to serve in the Customs Department;
      (e) take disciplinary decisions in accordance with
           recommendations issued by the Disciplinary
           Board;
      (f) with the approval of the Minister, reward or give
           an award to a Customs officer or any other
           person for any service in relation to an assigned


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 40]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            matter that appears to the Comptroller to merit
                            such reward or award; and
                       (g) after consulting with the Minister, procure such
                            equipment as is in his judgement appropriate.
                       (9) The Comptroller in accordance with section 290
                 may, where satisfied that a person has committed an
                 offence under this Act in respect of which a fine is
                 provided or anything is liable to forfeiture —
                       (a) compound the offence; and
                       (b) order the person to pay such sum of money, not
                            exceeding the amount of the fine to which the
                            person would be liable if he were convicted of
                            the offence, as the Comptroller may think fit.
                       (10) Subject to section 53, the Comptroller may issue
                 a Customs search warrant.
Powers of the          9. (1) The Comptroller, where in this Act he is
Comptroller to
delegate
                 under any duty or has any power to do any act —
functions.             (a) may delegate such duty or power to any named
                            person, any rank of Customs officer, or any rank
                            of officer of the Armed Services, at any
                            particular place; and
                       (b) shall make a delegation under paragraph (a) in
                            writing, including writing in electronic form,
                            stating —
                            (i) the functions or powers that may be
                                 performed or exercised by the person
                                 delegated to perform them together with the
                                 terms and conditions under which such
                                 functions or powers are to be exercised; and
                            (ii) the term of the delegation, which shall be
                                 such period, not exceeding three years, as
                                 the Comptroller thinks fit.
                       (2) The Comptroller may, from time to time, renew
                 any delegation given under this section for such further
                 period, not exceeding three years, as the Comptroller
                 thinks fit.
                       (3) A person to whom a power or duty is delegated
                 under this section shall be deemed to be a Customs officer
                 or authorised person for the purposes of this Act for the
                 duration of the term of such person’s delegation.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 41



       (4) The Comptroller may revoke a delegation given
under this section —
       (a) for incapacity, neglect of duty, or misconduct by
            the delegatee;
       (b) where the delegatee gives written notice to the
            Comptroller that he or she wishes the delegation
            to be revoked; or
       (c) in any other circumstance where, in the opinion
            of the Comptroller, the delegation is no longer
            necessary.
       (5) Where a person ceases to be a delegatee under
this section such person shall surrender to the Comptroller
all articles and documents received by him or her in
relation to the delegation.
       10. (1) No person shall —                                 Protection,
                                                                 independence
       (a) manhandle or disturb a Customs officer during         and obligations
            the performance of, or in relation to any work       of Customs
            done in the exercise of that officer’s duties; or    officers.

       (b) obstruct Customs officers in the execution of
            their Customs duties.
       (2) Officers of the Security Services shall assist
Customs officers in the performance of their duties when
required.
       (3) Neither the Crown, the Customs authority, an
employee of the Customs authority, nor a person lawfully
assisting any such person, unless they have not acted in
good faith or have acted without reasonable care, shall be
liable for the loss of or damage to any document, goods or
means of transport occasioned by anything done, omitted
to be done or purporting to have been done by —
       (a) an employee of the Customs authority; or
       (b) a person lawfully assisting in the exercise of any
            power conferred on the Crown, the Customs
            authority, or an employee of the Customs
            authority, by this Act or other Customs
            legislation.
       (4) Neither the Crown, the Customs authority, nor
any employee of the Customs authority, shall be liable
for —




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 42]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     (a) any loss or damages arising from the lawful
                           execution of authority conferred by this Act and
                           other Customs legislation; and
                     (b) any losses or damages that may be caused by
                           reasonable delays or inactivity on behalf of the
                           Customs authority, or its personnel, in executing
                           lawful decisions or actions.
                     (5) Neither the Crown, the Customs authority, nor
               any employee of the Customs authority, shall when acting
               in good faith and having followed the approved procedures
               be liable for —
                     (a) a failure to detect goods infringing intellectual
                           property rights;
                     (b) the inadvertent release of goods infringing
                           intellectual property rights; or
                     (c) any other action in respect of goods infringing
                           intellectual property rights.
                     (6) Customs officers and other employees of the
               Customs authority shall bear disciplinary, administrative,
               criminal and other responsibility in compliance with the
               laws of The Bahamas for any inappropriate or unlawful
               activity initiated, undertaken or facilitated by use of their
               position as an employee of the Customs authority.
                     (7) No person shall give or attempt to give persons
               acting under the authority of this Act or other Customs
               legislation assignments, obligations or instructions that
               would interfere with the effective and lawful performance
               of Customs activities.
                     (8) A person having an official duty or being
               employed in the Customs Department shall —
                     (a) treat as confidential all documents and
                           information acquired in the exercise of any
                           power under this Act; and
                     (b) not communicate to any unauthorised person,
                           directly or indirectly, any information or
                           document obtained in the exercise of any power
                           under this Act or in relation to an assigned
                           matter.
                    (9) Nothing shall prevent the disclosure of any
               document or information where such disclosure is
               authorised by the Comptroller in accordance with
               subsection (10) and sections 348 and 350.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 43


      (10) The Comptroller may disclose or authorise the
disclosure of any document or information pursuant to any
law, treaty, agreement or arrangement concluded by The
Bahamas.
      11. (1) The Comptroller shall issue an identity card,      Identity cards
or other means of identification, to each Customs officer        and oaths.
and any authorised person other than a member of the
Armed Services.
      (2) A person who is appointed to any permanent
office or employment in the Customs Department shall, on
his appointment to such office, make and subscribe before
a magistrate, justice of peace or commissioner for oaths, a
declaration in such form as may be prescribed.
      (3) Customs officers shall always, when on duty,
carry their identity card or other means of identification
issued pursuant to subsection (1) upon which shall be
transcribed the declaration referred to in subsection (2).
      (4) The oath of the Comptroller shall be taken by
the Minister.
      (5) A Customs officer or authorised person shall,
when exercising any power under this Act, produce on
request his identity card and any other means of
identification.
      (6) A person who ceases to be a Customs officer or
authorised person shall, forthwith, surrender to the
Comptroller his identity card or other means of
identification or authority.
      12. (1) The Customs authority shall have a Customs         Customs flag and
flag to be flown at Customs locations and on Customs             symbol.
vessels in accordance with procedures as may be approved
by the Comptroller.
      (2) Customs vehicles, aircraft, ships and boats shall
display approved Government or Customs symbols in
prominent positions.
      (3) The Minister shall approve the description and         23 of 2013, s. 5.
design of and appoint, by notice published in the
Gazette —
      (a) a Customs flag; and
      (b) a Customs symbol.
      (4) The Customs symbol —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 44]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          (a) shall be borne on Customs officers’ uniform,
                               identity cards and other means of identification;
                               and
                          (b) may be displayed on awards granted to Customs
                               officers and reference materials issued by the
                               Customs authority.
23 of 2013, s. 5.         (5) The Customs flag shall be gold in colour with
                    the Customs crest in the top left corner with seven blue
                    stripes extending to the outer limits of the flag.

                                       PART III
                             CUSTOMS PLACES AND CUSTOMS
                                 CONTROLLED AREAS
                               DIVISION ONE - CUSTOMS PLACES
Customs places.            13. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Minister
                    may upon recommendation from the Comptroller, by order
                    published in the Gazette and subject to such conditions or
                    restrictions as the Minister may determine, designate as
                    Customs places —
                           (a) customs ports; and
                           (b) customs airports.
                          (2) All Customs ports and Customs airports in use
                    at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have
                    been designated under this section.
23 of 2013, s. 6.         (3) The Minister may, by notice published in the
                    Gazette and subject to such conditions or restrictions as the
                    Minister may determine, appoint as Customs places
                    sufferance wharves.
23 of 2013, s. 6.         (4) All sufferance wharves approved by the
                    Minister and in use at the commencement of this Act shall
                    be deemed to have been appointed under this section.
23 of 2013, s. 6.         (5) The Minister may, upon recommendation of the
                    Comptroller, by order published in the Gazette and subject
                    to such conditions or restrictions as the Minister may
                    determine —
                          (a) vary or revoke a designation under this section;
                              or
                          (b) vary, revoke or replace any or all conditions or
                              restrictions to which a designation was
                              previously subject.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 45


      (6) The Minister may, by notice published in the           23 of 2013, s 6.
Gazette and subject to such conditions or restrictions as the
Minister may determine —
      (a) vary or revoke an appointment under this
           section;
      (b) vary, revoke or replace any or all conditions or
           restrictions to which an approval or appointment
           was previously subject.
      (7) The Comptroller shall, pursuant to section             23 of 2013, s. 6.
8(3)(b) of this Act, prescribe the opening and closing hours
of Customs places and provide for the fixing of particular
working hours in respect of any particular Customs place.

  DIVISION TWO - CUSTOMS CONTROLLED AREAS
      14. (1) Subject to such exemptions as may be               Customs
prescribed under this Act, no area shall, unless that area is    controlled areas.
appointed by the Comptroller in such manner as he may            23 of 2013, s. 7.
determine as a Customs controlled area, be used for —
      (a) processing of means of transport arriving in or
          departing from the Customs territory;
      (b) unloading or loading of any goods from or onto
          means of transport arriving in or departing from
          the Customs territory;
      (c) disembarkation, embarkation, or processing of
          persons arriving in or departing from the
          Customs territory;
      (d) temporary deposit and storage of goods in
          locked premises and enclosed or unenclosed
          spaces, called “transit sheds”, in which goods
          may be stored pending clearance;
      (e) temporary storage of goods cleared for export,
          temporarily or otherwise, which cannot be
          immediately loaded on a vessel or an aircraft
          departing the Customs territory;
      (f) temporary holding of imported or exported
          goods for the purposes of the examination of
          those goods, including the holding of the goods
          while they are awaiting examination;
      (g) deposit, keeping or securing of imported goods,
          or excisable goods, without payment of duty on
          the goods; or


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 46]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (h) any other prescribed purpose.
                        (2) The Comptroller may, in such manner as the
                  Comptroller thinks fit, license any place —
                        (a) as a boarding station for the processing of means
                             of transport arriving in or departing from the
                             Customs territory;
                        (b) for loading and unloading of goods within ports
                             and airports;
                        (c) for disembarkation and embarkation of persons;
                        (d) for examination of goods, including baggage;
                        (e) as a transit shed for the temporary deposit and
                             storage of goods imported or to be exported;
                        (f) as a Customs-approved area for storing exports.
                        (3) The places described in paragraphs (a) to (e) in
                  use at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to
                  have been duly licensed under this section —
                        (a) all places of loading and unloading;
                        (b) boarding stations;
                        (c) transit sheds;
                        (d) places for disembarkation or embarkation or
                             processing of persons arriving in or departing
                             from the Customs territory; and
                        (e) places for the examination of goods.
Application for         15. (1) An application for an area to be licensed as a
licence.          Customs controlled area —
                        (a) may be made by the owner or occupier of, or
                             person operating in, the area; and
                        (b) shall be made in such form and contain such
                             particulars as may be prescribed by the
                             Comptroller.
                        (2) The Customs authority may, at any time, request
                  further information from an applicant if the Customs
                  authority considers that such information is relevant to the
                  application.
                        (3) An applicant may, at any time before the
                  Comptroller makes a decision on the application, advise
                  the Customs authority of any variations that the applicant
                  wishes to make to the application.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                 [CH.293– 47


       16. (1) The Comptroller may grant or refuse an              Grant or refusal
                                                                   of licence.
application for an area to be licensed as a Customs
controlled area on receipt of —
       (a) an application for a licence;
       (b) any further information requested by the
            Comptroller under section 15(2); and
       (c) any variations to the application made under
            section 15(3).
       (2) A licence granted under subsection (1) may be
granted subject to —
       (a) such terms, conditions, or restrictions as the
            Comptroller thinks fit; and
       (b) the payment by the licensee of the prescribed
            annual licence fee, if any.
       (3) A licence granted under this section shall
specify —
       (a) the area in respect of which it is granted;
       (b) the applicant as the licensee; and
       (c) the purpose or purposes described in paragraphs
            (a) to (g) of section 14 for which the area is
            licensed.
       (4) The Comptroller may in his discretion and under
such conditions as the Comptroller thinks fit direct that an
area stall not be licensed as a Customs controlled area
where, on an application under section 15, the Comptroller
is of the opinion that —
       (a) it is not in the public interest that the area should
            be licensed as a Customs controlled area; or
       (b) it is impracticable or unnecessary that the area
            should be licensed as a Customs controlled area.
       (5) A direction given under subsection (4) —
       (a) may be given in respect of the whole or any
            specified part of the business carried on in the
            area; and
       (b) shall exempt the area from such provisions of
            this Act as may be specified in the direction.
      (6) An applicant shall be advised by notice in
writing of any decision of the Comptroller under this
section.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 48]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (7) An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision
                 of the Comptroller under this section may within fifteen
                 working days after the date on which notice of the decision
                 is given appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under
                 Division Three of Part XXIV.
Variation or            17. (1) The Comptroller may, by notice in writing,
revocation of
conditions and
                 vary or revoke the terms, conditions, or restrictions
revocation or    imposed on a licence and impose new terms, conditions, or
suspension of    restrictions.
licence.
                        (2) A licensee who is dissatisfied with a decision of
                 the Comptroller under this section may, within fifteen
                 working days after the date on which notice of the decision
                 of the Comptroller is given to the licensee, appeal to the
                 Customs Appeal Commission under Division Three of Part
                 XXIV.
                        (3) A licence issued under section 16 may, at any
                 time, be revoked or suspended by the Comptroller
                 where —
                        (a) a term, condition, or restriction specified in the
                             licence has been contravened;
                        (b) the area in respect of which the licence was
                             granted ceases to be used for any of the purposes
                             described in paragraphs (a) to (h) of section
                             14(1) for which the area is licensed;
                        (c) the licensee ceases to be the owner or occupier
                             of, or operator in, the area in respect of which
                             the licence was granted; or
                        (d) the Comptroller considers that the licensee is no
                             longer a fit and proper person to hold a licence.
                        (4) Notice in writing of the Comptroller’s intention
                 to revoke or suspend a licence shall be given to the licensee
                 unless the Comptroller considers that there is good reason
                 not to give such notice.
                        (5) The Comptroller shall, where the Comptroller
                 revokes or suspends a licence under subsection (3), notify
                 the licensee in writing of the revocation or suspension.
                        (6) A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of
                 the Comptroller under this section may within fifteen
                 working days after the date on which notice of the decision
                 is given appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under
                 Division Three of Part XXIV.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 49


      18. A licence for a Customs controlled area may be         Surrender of
surrendered at any time by the licensee by the giving of         licence.
twenty working days notice in writing to the Comptroller.
      19. (1) Duty shall, where any licence issued under         Closing of
section 16 is suspended, revoked, or surrendered, become         Customs
                                                                 controlled area.
due and payable on all goods within the area that are or
were subject to the control of Customs immediately prior
to the suspension, revocation, or surrender unless the
Comptroller permits the goods to be removed to another
Customs controlled area or to be exported.
      (2) The obligations and liabilities of a licensee
under this Act in respect of anything done or omitted to be
done by the licensee while licensed shall not be affected by
the fact that —
      (a) the licensee ceases to act as such; or
      (b) the licence is surrendered or suspended or
            revoked.
      20. (1) The licensee of any Customs controlled area        Customs
licensed under this Act shall provide, equip, and maintain       facilities.
such operating areas, accommodation, facilities, buildings,
equipment, and storage as the Comptroller shall determine
are reasonably necessary and suitable for the carrying out
of the functions and responsibilities of the Customs
authority.
      (2) Notwithstanding anything that may be stated in
other legislation, no charge shall be levied on the Customs
authority in respect of any operating area in a Customs
controlled area where such operating area is used for —
      (a) processing of persons arriving in or departing
            from the Customs territory;
      (b) processing of means of transport arriving in or
            departing from the Customs territory; or
      (c) processing of postal articles arriving in or
            departing from the Customs territory.
      (3) The licensee of every Customs controlled area
shall store goods subject to the control of the Customs
authority in such manner and in such location as the
Comptroller may direct.
       (4) A licensee shall be advised by notice in writing
of —



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 50]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          (a) a determination of the Comptroller under
                               subsection (1); or
23 of 2013, s. 8.         (b) a direction of the Comptroller under subsection
                               (3).
23 of 2013, s. 8.         (5) A licensee may, if dissatisfied with a
                    determination by the Comptroller under subsection (1) or a
                    direction under subsection (3), appeal within fifteen
                    working days after the date on which notice of the
                    determination or direction is given to the licensee to the
                    Customs Appeal Commission under Division Three of Part
                    XXIV.
Storage charges.          21. No charges shall, in such circumstances and for
                    such period of time as may be prescribed by the
                    Comptroller, be made to the Customs authority by a
                    licensee of a Customs controlled area for the reception or
                    storage in that area of any—
                          (a) imported goods;
                          (b) goods awaiting export processing; or
                          (c) goods awaiting export.
                                       PART IV
                             POWERS OF CUSTOMS OFFICERS
Patrols and                22. (1) A Customs officer or authorised person
surveillance.       assisting the officer may, for the purposes of the detection
                    of offences against this Act or other Customs legislation, at
                    any time and in such manner as the officer considers
                    appropriate —
                           (a) patrol on or over any part of the foreshore or the
                               shore of any body of water and any structure
                               extending there from, or any part of the adjacent
                               land, or any customs place or Customs
                               controlled area;
                           (b) enter and inspect any aircraft landing strip and
                               any building thereon, and may remain in any
                               such area for the purposes of carrying out
                               investigations or surveillance;
                           (c) patrol upon and pass freely along and over any
                               other part of The Bahamas whether or not that
                               part is private property and remain in any such
                               part for the purpose of carrying out search,
                               investigations or surveillance when there are
                               reasonable grounds to suspect that a Customs
                               offence has taken place, is being taking place or
                               is about to take place.

STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 51


       (2) This section shall not authorise the entry into a
private dwelling-house without a search warrant except
with the permission of the occupant.
       (3) Pursuant to section 10, any officer proceeding as
authorised by subsection (1) shall not be liable to any
criminal or civil proceeding for so doing.
       23. A Customs officer or other person in charge of        Landing or
any craft employed in the service of the Customs authority       mooring of
                                                                 Customs craft.
may anchor, moor, berth or land the craft, or haul the craft
ashore, at any place within the Customs territory and, in
any such case —
       (a) no charge shall be levied against the Customs
           authority; and
       (b) the proper officer shall, pursuant to section 10,
           not be liable to any criminal or civil proceedings
           for so doing.
       24. (1) A Customs officer and any authorised              Boarding of
person assisting the officer may at any time stop and board      means of
                                                                 transport.
any means of transport that is within the Customs territory
if—
       (a) the means of transport has arrived in the
           Customs territory from a point outside the
           Customs territory;
       (b) the means of transport is departing from the
           Customs territory to a point outside the Customs
           territory including while the means of transport
           is travelling within the Customs territory, en
           route to a point outside the Customs territory;
       (c) the means of transport is carrying any domestic
           cargo or international cargo while the means of
           transport remains within the Customs territory;
           or
       (d) the Customs officer has reasonable cause to
           suspect that the means of transport —
           (i) is carrying any dutiable, uncustomed,
                 prohibited, or forfeited goods; or
           (ii) has been, is being, or is about to be,
                 involved in the commission of an offence
                 under this Act or other Customs legislation.
       (2) The Comptroller may station Customs officers
on board any means of transport that has arrived in the
Customs territory from a point outside the Customs
territory for the purposes of performing any function or
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 52]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                  exercising any power that such officers may be required,
                  authorised, or empowered to perform or exercise under this
                  Act.
                        (3) The person in charge of the means of transport
                  shall, where a Customs officer is stationed on board a
                  means of transport pursuant to subsection (2), ensure that
                  the officer is provided with —
                        (a) suitable accommodation and board in
                             accordance with the reasonable requirements of
                             that officer;
                        (b) safe access to any part of the means of transport;
                             and
                        (c) safe means of boarding and leaving the means of
                             transport.
                        (4) No charge shall be levied against the Customs
                  authority for the carriage of a Customs officer who is
                  stationed on board a means of transport or for their
                  accommodation and board.
Search of means         25. (1) A Customs officer may search a means of
of transport.     transport —
                        (a) which has arrived into the Customs territory
                             from a point outside the Customs territory;
                        (b) which is departing from the Customs territory to
                             a place outside the Customs territory and at all
                             times while the conveyance is travelling within
                             the Customs territory en route to a point outside
                             the Customs territory;
                        (c) which is not a means of transport to which
                             subsection (l)(a) or (b) of this section applies,
                             and is carrying any international cargo,
                             passengers or crew, while the conveyance
                             remains within the Customs territory;
                        (d) which is not a conveyance to which subsection
                             (l)(a) (b) or (c) of this section applies, and is
                             within the Customs territory, and which such
                             officer has reasonable cause to suspect —
                             (i) is      carrying      dutiable,     uncustomed,
                                   prohibited, restricted or forfeited goods; or
                             (ii) has been, is being, or is about to be
                                   involved in the commission of an offence
                                   against this Act.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 53


       (2) A Customs officer in the exercise of the powers
conferred by subsection (1) may, using such force as in the
circumstances is reasonable —
       (a) enter every part of a conveyance;
       (b) open any package, locker or other place; and
       (c) examine all goods found in the means of
           transport.
       26. A Customs officer and an authorised person            Securing goods
assisting the officer may, for the purpose of performing         in means of
                                                                 transport.
any function or exercising any power that the Customs
authority is required, authorised, or empowered to perform
or exercise under this Act, at any time while boarding or
searching a means of transport under sections 24 or 25 —
       (a) secure, by appropriate means, goods on board
           the means of transport; or
       (b) remove goods on board from the means of
           transport to a secure place.
      27. The officer commanding or in charge of any             Firing on a
Customs craft, or any marine craft in government service,        vessel.
having hoisted and carrying or displaying the Customs
flag —
      (a) shall, at the specific request of the Customs
          authority and whilst within the Customs
          territory, chase any vessel where —
          (i) the vessel does not immediately bring-to
                when signalled or required to do so; or
          (ii) the master refuses to permit the ship to be
                boarded; and
      (b) may as a last resort, after having fired a warning,
          fire at or into the vessel to compel it to bring-to.
      28. (1) A means of transport may be detained by the        Detention of
Customs authority where —                                        means of
                                                                 transport.
      (a) a Customs officer has reasonable cause to
          believe that an offence under this Act or other
          Customs legislation has been, is being or is
          about to be committed on or in respect of such
          means of transport while it was or is within the
          Customs territory; or
      (b) the means of transport is within the Customs
          territory, and the Customs officer has reasonable
          cause to believe that —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 54]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          (i) there is on or in the means of transport a
                                 person who was carried into the Customs
                                 territory on it; and
                          (ii) the carriage of the person into the Customs
                                 territory on or in the means of transport
                                 constituted an offence under this Act or
                                 other Customs legislation.
                     (2) A Customs officer may, if the conditions set out
               in subsection (1) exist —
                     (a) direct the means of transport to proceed to the
                          nearest Customs place, or such other place as the
                          officer considers appropriate;
                     (b) direct that the means of transport remain where
                          it is; or
                     (c) in addition to (a) or (b), detain the means of
                          transport for such time and for such purposes as
                          are reasonably necessary to carry out an
                          investigation into the commission of the
                          suspected offence.
                     (3) A Customs officer may seize and detain a means
               of transport until a certificate of clearance has been
               obtained where the person in charge of the means of
               transport, without a certificate of clearance —
                     (a) attempts or threatens to cause the means of
                          transport to depart from a place to which it has
                          been directed to proceed pursuant to subsection
                          (2); or
                     (b) attempts or threatens to cause the means of
                          transport to depart from a place in which it has
                          been directed to remain pursuant to subsection
                          (2).
Searching            29. (1) A Customs officer may stop and search, and
vehicles.      detain for such period as may be reasonably necessary to
               conduct the search, a vehicle where he has reasonable
               cause to suspect that —
                     (a) there is in or on such vehicle which is within a
                          Customs place or a Customs controlled area any
                          dutiable, uncustomed, prohibited or forfeited
                          goods;
                     (b) there is evidence relating to goods referred to in
                          paragraph (a);




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 55



      (c) there is in or on such vehicle any dangerous
           goods; or
      (d) there is evidence relating to an offence under
           this Act or other Customs legislation.
      (2) A Customs officer may stop and search, and
detain for such period as may be reasonably necessary to
conduct the search, a vehicle where he has reasonable
grounds to believe that —
      (a) there is in or on such vehicle goods that have
           been unlawfully imported or are in the process
           of being unlawfully exported; or
      (b) there is evidence relating to the unlawful
           importation of goods or an attempt to unlawfully
           export goods.
      (3) A Customs officer who has reasonable cause to
suspect that there is in or on a vehicle goods subject to the
control of the Customs Authority because they are goods to
be exported that have been brought to a Customs-approved
secure export area may —
      (a) stop the vehicle and search it; and
      (b) detain the vehicle for such period as may be
           reasonably necessary to conduct the search and
           to exercise powers conferred under this Act or
           other Customs legislation in relation to goods of
           that kind.
      (4) A Customs officer who has reasonable cause to
suspect that there is in or on a vehicle goods subject to the
control of the Customs authority and in a Customs-
approved secure package or in a package to which a
Customs seal has been applied may —
      (a) stop the vehicle and search it; and
      (b) detain the vehicle for such period as may be
           reasonably necessary to conduct the search and
           to exercise other powers conferred on the officer
           under this Act or other Customs legislation.
      (5) The driver of any vehicle who fails to stop or to
permit a search whenever required by any Customs officer
under this section shall be guilty of an offence punishable
on summary conviction.
                                                                 Questioning
      30. (1) This section applies to —                          persons.
      (a) a person who —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 56]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         (i) has within the proceeding seventy two
                               hours arrived in the Customs territory; or
                         (ii) is departing from the Customs territory;
                     (b) a person, not being a person to whom paragraph
                         (a) applies, who is within a Customs controlled
                         area licensed for —
                         (i) temporary holding of international goods
                               for the purposes of the examination of those
                               goods, including the holding of the goods
                               while they are awaiting examination;
                         (ii) disembarkation, embarkation, or processing
                               of persons arriving in or departing from the
                               Customs territory;
                         (iii) processing of means of transport arriving in
                               or departing from the Customs territory or
                               the loading or unloading of goods on to or
                               from such means of transport; or
                     (c) a person, not being a person to whom paragraph
                         (a) applies, who is on board or is in the process
                         of embarking onto or disembarking from a
                         means of transport which has arrived from, or is
                         departing to, a point outside the Customs
                         territory, while the means of transport is within
                         the Customs territory.
                     (2) A Customs officer may question a person to
               whom this section applies as to any one or more of the
               following matters —
                     (a) whether or not such person has or has had in
                         their possession any dutiable, prohibited,
                         restricted, uncustomed, or forfeited goods;
                     (b) the nature, origin, value, ownership, or intended
                         destination of any goods of the kind described in
                         paragraph (a);
                     (c) whether, under this Act or other Customs
                         legislation, any Customs debt, such as a debt in
                         respect of any duty, duty refunded in error,
                         recovery of the drawback of any duty, or
                         penalty —
                         (i) is due to the Crown; and
                         (ii) payable by such person or a corporate body,
                               trust, partnership or other enterprise, of
                               which such person is or was a director,
                               manager, secretary, officer or agent;


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 57


      (d) the nature and extent of the Customs debt, if
          any, of that kind; and
      (e) any other questions as are relevant to the issue.
      31. (1) This section applies to —                          Questions about
                                                                 identity, address,
      (a) a person who —                                         travel
          (i) has, or is suspected of having, disembarked        movements,
                                                                 entitlement etc.
               from a means of transport that has arrived
               in the Customs territory; and
          (ii) has not, or is suspected of having not,
               reported to a Customs officer or a police
               station on their arrival, as required under
               this Act;
      (b) a person who is, or is suspected of, attempting to
          depart from the Customs territory from a place
          other than from a Customs place, contrary to
          provisions of this Act.
      (2) A Customs officer may question a person to
whom this section applies as to any one or more of the
following matters —
      (a) the person’s identity;
      (b) the person’s residential address;
      (c) the person’s travel movements;
      (d) the person’s entitlement to travel;
      (e) the means of transport —
          (i) from which the person disembarked or is
               suspected of disembarking; or
          (ii) on which the person attempted to depart, or
               is suspected of attempting to depart, from
               the Customs territory;
      (f) any other person who is, or was, involved in the
          person’s arrival, suspected arrival, departure,
          attempted departure, or suspected departure,
          whether or not the other person was on or in the
          means of transport —
          (i) from which the person disembarked or is
               suspected of disembarking; or
          (ii) on which the person attempted to depart, or
               is suspected of attempting to depart, from
               the Customs territory.
      (3) A question under paragraph (e) of subsection (2)
may, but need not, relate to —

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 58]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         (a) the means of transport’s voyage or journey; and
                         (b) any persons or goods carried by the means of
                              transport.
Questioning              32. (1) A Customs officer may question any or all
employees of
owners or
                   of the persons described in paragraphs (a) to (c) about any
operators of       means of transport, passenger, crew member or cargo —
certain means of
transport.
                         (a) a person who, as an employee of an airline,
                              shipping company, or other commercial
                              transport operator, manages or carries out the
                              receipt, handling, custody, or dispatch of
                              international or domestic passengers or cargo by
                              that airline, shipping company, or other
                              commercial transport operator;
                         (b) a person employed by the licensee of a Customs
                              controlled area licensed for —
                              (i) the temporary holding of international
                                   goods or persons for the purposes of the
                                   examination of those goods or persons
                                   under provisions of this Act or other
                                   Customs legislation, including the holding
                                   of the goods or persons while they are
                                   awaiting examination; or
                              (ii) the processing of craft or vehicles arriving
                                   in or departing from the Customs territory
                                   or the loading or unloading of goods,
                                   passengers or crew onto or from such craft
                                   or vehicles;
                         (c) a person who is in a Customs controlled area
                              licensed for a purpose described in subsection
                              (l)(b)(i) or (ii).
                         (2) A Customs officer may question any or all of
                   the persons described in paragraphs (a) to (c) about any
                   passengers, crew or goods destined to be imported or
                   exported from the Customs territory —
                         (a) a person who is the owner or operator of a
                              means of transport or vehicle that a Customs
                              officer has reasonable cause to suspect has in or
                              on it, or has within the previous seventy two
                              hours had in or on it —
                              (i) goods, or persons subject to the control of
                                   the Customs authority;
                              (ii) goods in a Customs-approved secure
                                   package; or


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 59


            (iii) goods in a package to which a Customs seal
                  or approved mark has been applied;
       (b) a person who is the owner or occupier of
            premises that a Customs officer has reasonable
            cause to suspect have in or on them, or have
            within the previous seventy two hours had in or
            on them —
            (i) goods or persons subject to the control of
                  the Customs authority;
            (ii) goods in a Customs-approved secure
                  package; or
            (iii) goods in a package to which a Customs seal
                  or approved mark has been applied;
       (c) a person employed by a person described in
            paragraphs (a) or (b).
       (3) A question under subsection (2) about cargo
destined to be exported from the Customs territory may
relate to any or all of the following —
       (a) whether, and if so how, goods that are or were
            some or all of the cargo are or were —
            (i) packed in a package to which a Customs
                  seal or approved mark was applied; or
            (ii) in a Customs-approved secure package to
                  which a Customs seal or approved mark
                  was applied;
       (b) the transportation or storage of packages of the
            kind referred to in paragraph (a) at any time
            before they are or were exported;
       (c) the tampering or interference with a package of
            the kind referred to in paragraph (a) or with a
            Customs seal or approved mark.
       33. (1) This section applies to a natural person who      Evidence of
is —                                                             identity and
                                                                 entitlement to
       (a) an internationally ticketed passenger or crew         travel.
            member using a means of transport for travel for
            a domestic sector;
       (b) a domestic passenger or crew member using a
            means of transport for travel for a domestic
            sector; or
       (c) within a Customs controlled area licensed for
            the disembarkation, embarkation, or processing


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 60]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                               of persons arriving in or departing from the
                               Customs territory.
                          (2) A person to whom this section applies, on
                    demand by a Customs officer, shall —
                          (a) state his full name and residential address;
                          (b) if required, produce for inspection such
                               prescribed document as the Customs officer may
                               specify; and
                          (c) if the person is unable to produce the prescribed
                               document specified, complete a declaration in
                               the prescribed form.
                          (3) A document produced by a person to a Customs
                    officer under paragraph (b) of subsection (2) shall be —
                          (a) either inspected immediately and returned to the
                               person as soon as the inspection has concluded;
                               or
                          (b) retained by the Customs officer for as long as is
                               necessary to ascertain whether or not the
                               Customs authority wishes to exercise its power
                               under this Act or other Customs legislation to
                               retain, copy or scan the document.
Preliminary               34. (1) A Customs officer, or a member of the
search of persons
by use of aids.
                    Bahamas Police Force —
                          (a) may conduct a preliminary search of a person to
                              whom this section applies; and
                          (b) may detain a person to whom this section
                              applies for the purpose of conducting a
                              preliminary search.
                          (2) A preliminary search is a search that —
                          (a) involves little or no physical contact between the
                              person conducting the search and the person
                              being searched; and
                          (b) is conducted by using an aid or aids such as an
                              animal; a chemical substance; an x-ray; imaging
                              equipment, or some other mechanical, electrical,
                              or electronic device or other similar aid, but not
                              by any more invasive means.
                          (3) Section 35 shall apply if, after a preliminary
                    search under subsection (1), a Customs officer or a
                    member of the Bahamas Police Force has reasonable cause




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 61


to suspect that a person has hidden on or about their
person —
       (a) any dutiable, uncustomed, prohibited, or
           forfeited goods;
       (b) evidence relating to any such goods;
       (c) a dangerous item; or
       (d) anything that is or might be evidence of the
           contravention or possible contravention of this
           Act or other Customs legislation.
       35. (1) Subject to subsection (8), a Customs officer      Detention and
may cause to be detained and searched any person whom            search of
                                                                 suspected
he has reasonable cause to suspect is carrying, or has           persons.
hidden on or about his person —
       (a) any dutiable, uncustomed, prohibited, or
           forfeited goods;
       (b) evidence relating to any such goods;
       (c) a dangerous item; or
       (d) anything that is or might be evidence of the
           contravention or possible contravention of this
           Act or other Customs legislation.
       (2) Force, which in the circumstances is deemed to
be reasonable, may be used if it is necessary to detain and
search a person pursuant to subsection (1), and —
       (a) such force includes the lawful use of approved
           technical aids to subdue persons when used in
           accordance with approved procedures and
           guidelines issued by the Customs authority; and
       (b) approved technical aids referred to in paragraph
           (a) may include but are not limited to the use of
           immobilizing sprays such as pepper spray, the
           use of batons, hand-cuffs, and as a last resort the
           deployment of official fire arms.
       (3) A Customs officer who searches a person under
this section may —
       (a) be assisted by a member of the Bahamas Police
           Force; and
       (b) require such other persons as the officer or
           member of the Bahamas Police Force thinks
           necessary to assist them.
       (4) A detained person shall only be searched by
Customs officers, or Police officers assisting the Customs

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 62]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    officer, who are of the same sex as the detained person and
                    no persons of the opposite sex shall be present during such
                    a search.
                          (5) A person who proves to be a minor shall not be
                    searched except with the presence of his parent or
                    guardian.
                          (6) All intimate searches shall be conducted by a
                    medical practitioner.
                          (7) A person detained under this Act to be searched
                    may, where there is no suitable Customs officer, Police
                    officer or medical practitioner to conduct the search
                    available at the place where the search is to take place, be
                    taken to another place to be searched.
                          (8) A person who is to be searched may require to
                    be taken forthwith before a Justice of the Peace, or a
                    Customs officer of no lesser rank than that of supervisor,
                    who shall consider the grounds for suspicion and direct
                    whether or not the search is to take place.
                          (9) Any Customs officer, or person assisting such
                    Customs officer, who searches a person under this section
                    may seize any thing found in carrying out the search that
                    the Customs officer has reasonable cause to suspect is a
                    thing described in subsection (1).
                          (10) Reasonable force may be used to seize a thing
                    pursuant to subsection (9).
                          (11) Pursuant to section 10(3), a proper officer shall
                    not be liable to any prosecution or action at law based on
                    any search made in accordance with this section.
                          (12) A person shall only be detained under this
                    section for the period of the search or for a period not
                    exceeding twenty four hours.
Access of
Customs officers          36. Subject to section 60 and without prejudice to
to Customs          any other power contained in this Act, the Customs
controlled areas.   authority at any time of the day or night —
                          (a) shall have a right of access to, and a power of
                               search of, any part of a Customs controlled area
                               including buildings and any vehicle;
                          (b) may examine goods found in the Customs
                               controlled area; and




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 63


       (c) may, for the purposes of paragraphs (a) and (b),
           enter any other area that it is necessary to pass
           through.
       37. (1) Subject to section 60 and for the purpose of      Search of
performing any function or exercising any power under            premises.
this Act, where a Customs officer has reasonable grounds
to believe that an article subject to forfeiture under any
Customs enactment is kept at or concealed in any building
or other place that is situated in a Customs controlled area,
the Customs officer may —
       (a) enter that building or place at any time, and
           search for, seize, detain or remove any article
           that appears to him to be liable to forfeiture;
       (b) so far as is reasonably necessary for the purpose
           of the entry, search, detention or removal, break
           open any door, window or container and force
           and remove any other impediment or
           obstruction; and
       (c) search for and remove any invoice, bill of
           lading, Customs declaration, correspondence
           and or any other documents relating to the
           importation and or exportation of goods.
       (2) A Customs officer shall not enter any private
dwelling being an independent building or a part of the
searched premises except with the consent of an occupier
or owner of that dwelling or pursuant to a search warrant
issued under this Act.
       (3) Where in the case of any entry, search, seizure,
detention or removal, damage is caused and no goods
liable to forfeiture are found, the owner of the damaged
building or damaged goods shall be entitled to recover
from the Comptroller the costs of repairing that damage.
       (4) A Customs officer shall not enter any building
situated outside of a Customs controlled area except with
the consent of an occupier or owner of that building or
pursuant to a search warrant issued under this Act.
       38. (1) A Customs officer may examine, weigh,             Examination of
measure, count, analyse, or test, or cause to be examined,       goods subject to
                                                                 control of
weighed, measured, counted, analysed or tested goods             Customs.
subject to the control of the Customs authority or goods
that the officer has reasonable cause to suspect are subject
to the control of the Customs authority and may, for that
purpose, open or cause to be opened any packages in which

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 64]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



               the goods are contained or suspected to be contained and
               cause such goods and packages to be brought to a
               predesignated place for examination.
                      (2) All reasonable expenses incurred by the
               Customs authority under subsection (1) shall be a debt due
               to the Crown by the importer or exporter or the owner of
               the goods, as the case may be, and shall be recoverable in
               the same manner as duty under this Act.
                      (3) The powers conferred by subsection (1) extend
               to the examination, weighing, measuring, analysing, or
               testing of a bag, suitcase, pallet, bulk cargo container, or
               any other container or package.
                      (4) The examination under this section may include
               physical, chemical, or technology-based examination,
               weighing, measuring, analysis, or testing, and may be
               facilitated by any means whatever, including the use of
               detector dogs, chemical substances, x-ray or imaging
               equipment, or some other mechanical, electrical, or
               electronic device, or the drilling into, or the dismantling of,
               the goods and their packaging.
                      (5) Samples of goods subject to the control of the
               Customs authority or suspected to be subject to the control
               of the Customs authority may, for the purposes of this
               section, be taken, used, and disposed of by a Customs
               officer in the prescribed manner.
                      (6) Any sample taken in accordance with subsection
               (5) shall be as small as possible for the purpose for which it
               is taken.
                      (7) A Customs officer shall be allowed free access
               to all lands, buildings, and places, and to all goods in or on
               any lands, buildings, or places, for the purpose of
               exercising powers under this section in respect of goods
               that are, or are suspected to be —
                      (a) subject to the control of the Customs authority;
                           or
                      (b) in a Customs-approved secure package or in a
                           package to which a Customs seal has been
                           applied.
                      (8) Notwithstanding subsection (7), a Customs
               officer shall not enter a private dwelling except with the
               consent of an occupier or owner of that dwelling or
               pursuant to a search warrant issued under this Act.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 65


       39. (1) The Customs authority may, if it has              Examination of
reasonable cause to suspect that any offence has been            goods no longer
                                                                 subject to control
committed against this Act or other Customs legislation in       of Customs.
respect of goods that have ceased to be subject to the
control of the Customs authority, require any person who
has, or who the Customs authority believes has, possession
or control of those goods to produce them for inspection by
a Customs officer.
       (2) A Customs officer may exercise in respect of
such goods all the powers conferred by section 38.
       (3) A Customs officer may take and retain
possession of goods produced under subsection (1) for the
purposes of exercising the powers conferred by subsection
(2), and may retain possession of the goods until
completion of the investigation into the commission of the
offence.
       40. The Customs Authority may, at any time, by            Accounting for
notice in writing or otherwise, require the licensee of a        goods.
Customs controlled area to —
       (a) account forthwith for goods that the Customs
           authority believes have been entered into that
           Customs controlled area; and
       (b) produce any documents relating to the
           movement of goods into or out of that Customs
           controlled area.
       41. A Customs officer may require the licensee of a       Production of
Customs controlled area to produce to such officer goods         goods.
that are shown in any record as being within that area.
       42. (1) The Customs authority may require from a          Verification of
person making entry of goods proof by declaration or the         goods
                                                                 declarations.
production of documents, in addition to any declaration or
documents otherwise required by this Act or by other
Customs legislation, of the correctness of the goods
declaration and may refuse to deliver the goods or to pass
the goods declaration before such proof is provided.
       (2) Where the Customs authority is not satisfied
with the correctness of any goods declaration in relation to
any goods, or with any other aspect of the importation or
exportation of those goods, as the case may be, the
Customs authority may detain the goods for a period that is
reasonably necessary to enable the goods to be examined
and, if necessary, to cause an investigation or an audit to be


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 66]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   made, whether in the Customs territory or elsewhere, into
                   the importation or exportation, as the case may be, of those
                   goods.
                          (3) The Customs authority may, pursuant to section
                   215(1), on its own initiative —
                          (a) suspend the clearance of goods in respect of
                               which it has acquired prima facie evidence that
                               an intellectual property right has been infringed
                               or is about to be infringed; and
                          (b) suspend the clearance of goods whenever there
                               are reasonable grounds to suspect that the goods
                               are infringing intellectual property rights.
                          (4) The Customs authority may, where on its own
                   initiative it has suspended the clearance of goods in
                   accordance with subsection (3), seek from the right holder
                   of the intellectual property right the provision of any
                   information or assistance, including technical expertise and
                   facilities, for the purpose of determining whether suspect
                   goods are counterfeit or pirated or otherwise infringe an
                   intellectual property right.
                          (5) The Customs authority shall pursuant to section
                   215(3) immediately inform the right holder or their
                   representative and the Customs broker, importer or
                   exporter of the place and the date of the suspension of
                   Customs clearance.
Securities for            43. (1) The Customs authority may require and take
payment of duty.   securities of such kinds as may be prescribed for payment
                   of duty in sections 339 to 342.
                          (2) The Customs authority may, pending the giving
                   of the required security, refuse to pass a goods declaration
                   or to do any other act in relation to any matter in respect of
                   which the security is required.
                          (3) A security may be required in relation to a
                   particular transaction, or in relation to transactions
                   generally or to a class of transactions, and for such period
                   and amount, and subject to such conditions as to penalty or
                   otherwise, as the Customs authority may direct.
                          (4) A security may be in such other form as the
                   Customs authority approves.
                          (5) If the Customs authority is satisfied that the
                   obligations for which any security given in accordance
                   with this section have been fulfilled, the person who gave


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 67


the security shall be released from the conditions of the
security within five working days.
       (6) Any security given under this Act may be
forfeited under such conditions as the Customs authority
may direct.
       (7) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
the Customs authority under this section may, within
fifteen working days after the date on which notice of the
decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under Division
Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision
made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days
after the date on which notice of the decision is given
appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under Division
Three of Part XXIV.
       44. (1) The Customs authority may, if at any time         Requiring new
the Customs authority is dissatisfied with the sufficiency of    securities.
any security, require a new security in place of or in
addition to the existing security.
      (2) The Customs authority may, if a new security
required is not given, refuse to pass a goods declaration or
to do any other act in relation to any matter in respect of
which the new security is required.
      (3) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
the Customs authority under this section may, within
fourteen working days after the date on which notice of the
decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under Division
Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision
made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days
after the date on which notice of the decision is given
appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under Division
Three of Part XXIV.
                                                                 Requisition to
      45. A Customs officer may require a person acting          produce written
or holding themselves out as the agent or representative of      authority of
                                                                 Customs agents
another person in any matter relating to this Act or other       or
Customs legislation to produce a written authority from          representatives.
their principal and if such an authority is not produced the
officer may refuse to recognise the agency or
representation.
      46. (1) A Customs officer of a rank designated by          Audit or
the Comptroller by rule may, at all reasonable times, enter      examination of
                                                                 business records.
any premises or place where business records are kept and
audit or examine those records either in relation to specific


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 68]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



               transactions or to the adequacy and integrity of the manual
               or electronic system or systems by which such records are
               created and stored.
                      (2) Subject to section 60, a Customs officer shall for
               the purposes of subsection (1) have full and free access to
               all lands, buildings, and places and to all books, records,
               and documents, whether in the custody or under the control
               of the importer, exporter, licensee or any other person, for
               the purpose of inspecting any books, records, and
               documents and any property, process, or matter that the
               officer considers —
                      (a) necessary or relevant for the purpose of
                          collecting any duty under this Act or other
                          Customs legislation or for the purpose of
                          carrying out any other function lawfully
                          conferred on the officer; or
                      (b) likely to provide any information otherwise
                          required for the purposes of this Act or other
                          Customs legislation or any function lawfully
                          conferred on the officer.
                      (3) The Customs officer may, without fee or
               reward, make or cause to be made, extracts from or copies
               of any books, records or documents accessed under this
               section.
                      (4) Notwithstanding subsections (2) and (3), a
               Customs officer shall not enter any private dwelling except
               with the consent of an occupier or owner thereof or
               pursuant to a search warrant issued under this Act.
Powers in             47. (1) Where —
relation to
documents.            (a) a Customs officer has reasonable cause to
                          suspect that goods have been unlawfully
                          imported, exported, manufactured, undervalued,
                          entered, removed, or otherwise unlawfully dealt
                          with by any person contrary to this Act or other
                          Customs legislation, or that any person intends
                          to so import, export, manufacture, undervalue,
                          enter, remove or otherwise deal with any goods;
                          or
                      (b) goods have been seized under this Act,
               the Customs authority may, by notice in writing, require
               that person or any person whom the officer suspects to be
               or to have been the owner, importer, exporter or
               manufacturer of those goods, or agent or representative


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 69


thereof, as the case may be, as and when required, to
produce and deliver to that officer or any other specified
Customs officer all books of account, invoice books, or
other books, records, or documents in which any entry or
memorandum appears or may be supposed to appear in
respect of the purchase, importation, exportation,
manufacture, cost, or value of, or payment for, the goods
and any other goods so imported or exported or
manufactured or otherwise dealt with within a period of
three years preceding the date of the notice.
      (2) In addition to the requirements of subsection
(1), the Customs authority may require the owner,
importer, exporter or manufacturer of those goods, or agent
or representative thereof, as the case may be, to —
      (a) produce for the inspection of the officer or any
           specified Customs officer, and allow the officer
           to make copies or extracts, or cause copies or
           extracts to be made of or from, any of the books,
           records, or documents referred to in subsection
           (1); and
      (b) answer, or cause to be answered, any question
           concerning those books, records, or documents.
      (3) The Customs authority may, by notice in
writing, require any person, including any officer
employed in or in connection with any government agency
or corporation, as and when required, to —
      (a) produce for inspection by a specified Customs
          officer any documents or records that the
          Customs authority considers necessary or
          relevant to an investigation or audit under this
          Act or other Customs legislation, or to the
          recovery of a debt due and payable to the Crown
          under this Act or other Customs legislation;
      (b) allow the specified Customs officer to make
          copies of or take extracts from any such
          documents or records;
      (c) appear before a specified Customs officer and
          answer all questions put to them concerning any
          goods or any transactions relating to those goods
          that are the subject of any such investigation, or
          audit, or that are relevant to the recovery of the
          debt referred to in paragraph (a) or to documents
          or records that are relevant to any such
          investigation or audit.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 70]                          CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



Legal privilege in
                           48. (1) Subject to subsection (2), any information or
respect of           document is, for the purposes of sections 46 and 47,
confidential         privileged from disclosure if it is a confidential
communications.      communication, whether oral or written, passing
                     between —
                           (a) a legal practitioner in their professional capacity
                                and another legal practitioner in that capacity; or
                           (b) a legal practitioner in their professional capacity
                                and their client.
                           (2) Except as provided in subsection (1), no
                     information or document shall, for the purposes of sections
                     46 and 47, be privileged from disclosure on the grounds
                     that it is a communication passing between one legal
                     practitioner and another legal practitioner or between a
                     legal practitioner and their client.
                           (3) For the purposes of this section, the term ‘legal
                     practitioner’ means an attorney-at-law.
Translation of              49. Where a document in a foreign language is
documents in
foreign language.
                     presented to a Customs officer in relation to the carrying
                     out of any duty or the exercise of any power of the
                     Customs authority under this Act, or other Customs
                     legislation, the officer may require the person who
                     presented the document to supply to the officer a
                     translation of the document in English, prepared by such
                     person as the Customs authority may approve and at the
                     expense of the person who presented it.
Customs                     50. (1) The Customs authority may take possession
authority may
take possession
                     of and retain any document or record presented in
of and retain        connection with any entry, or required to be produced
documents and        under this Act or other Customs legislation.
records.
                            (2) The Customs authority shall, where the Customs
                     authority takes possession of a document or record under
                     subsection (1), provide on request to the person otherwise
                     entitled to the document or record —
                            (a) a copy of the document or record certified under
                                 seal by or on behalf of the Customs authority as
                                 a true copy; or
                            (b) a receipt of the document or record taken.
                            (3) Every copy of a document or record certified
                     pursuant to subsection (2) shall be admissible as evidence
                     in all courts as if it were the original.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 71


       51. (1) A Customs officer or other authorised              Copying
                                                                  documents
person may remove documents for the purpose of making             during search.
copies and give a receipt for what has been taken where
such officer or other authorised person —
       (a) carries out any lawful search, inspection, audit,
            or examination under this Act or other Customs
            legislation; and
       (b) has reasonable cause to believe that documents
            coming into their possession during such search,
            inspection, audit, or examination are evidence of
            the commission of an offence under this Act or
            other Customs legislation.
       (2) Documents taken pursuant to subsection (1)
shall, as soon as practicable after copies of the documents
have been taken, be returned to the person otherwise
entitled to them.
       (3) A copy of any document certified by or on
behalf of the Customs authority under the seal or approved
mark of the Customs authority shall be admissible in
evidence in all courts as if it were the original.
       52. (1) Subject to subsection (4), a Customs officer       Retention of
or authorised person may take possession of and retain            records,
                                                                  documents and
records, documents or goods where such officer or                 goods obtained
authorised person —                                               during search.
       (a) carries out any lawful search, inspection, audit,
            or examination under this Act or other Customs
            legislation; and
       (b) has reasonable cause to believe that any records,
            documents or goods coming into his possession
            during such search, inspection, audit, or
            examination are evidence of the commission of
            an offence or are intended to be used for the
            purpose of committing any offence.
       (2) A Customs officer or authorised person shall,
where he takes possession of a document under subsection
(1), provide on request to the person otherwise entitled to
the document a copy of the document certified by or on
behalf and under the seal or mark of the Customs authority
as a true copy.
       (3) Every copy certified pursuant to subsection (2)
shall be admissible in evidence in all courts as if it were the
original.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 72]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     (4) Where a Customs officer or authorised person
               takes possession of and retains records, documents or
               goods under this section —
                     (a) in any proceedings for an offence relating to the
                          documents or goods, the court may order, either
                          at the hearing or on a subsequent application,
                          that the records, documents or goods be
                          delivered to the person appearing to the court to
                          be entitled to them or that they be otherwise
                          disposed of in such manner and under such
                          conditions as the court thinks fit;
                     (b) he may at any time, unless an order has been
                          made under paragraph (a), return the records,
                          documents or goods to the person from whom
                          they were taken or apply to a Magistrate for an
                          order as to their disposal and, on any such
                          application, the Magistrate may make any order
                          that a court may make under paragraph (a);
                     (c) if proceedings for an offence relating to the
                          goods or documents are not brought within a
                          period of three months from the date on which
                          possession of the records, documents or goods
                          was taken, any person claiming to be entitled to
                          the records, documents or goods may, after the
                          expiration of that period, apply to a Magistrate
                          for an order that they be delivered to that person
                          and, on any such application, the Magistrate
                          may adjourn the application on such terms as he
                          thinks fit for proceedings to be brought or may
                          make any order that a court may make under
                          paragraph (a).
                     (5) Where a person is convicted in proceedings for
               an offence relating to records, documents or goods to
               which this section applies, and an order is made under this
               section, the operation of the order shall be suspended —
                     (a) until the expiration of the time prescribed by the
                          appropriate legislation or procedure, as the case
                          may be, for the filing of notice of appeal or of an
                          application for leave to appeal;
                     (b) where notice of appeal is filed within the
                          prescribed time, until the determination of the
                          appeal; or
                     (c) where application for leave to appeal is filed
                          within the time so prescribed, until the


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 73


            application is determined and, where leave to
            appeal is granted, until the determination of the
            appeal.
       (6) Where the operation of an order is suspended
until the determination of the appeal, the court determining
the appeal may by order annul or vary the order made
under this section and such order, if annulled, shall not take
effect, and, if varied, shall take effect as so varied.
       53. (1) The Comptroller may issue a Customs               Customs search
warrant in the form set out in the Fifth Schedule, and under     warrants.
the seal of the Customs authority, to any Customs officer
not being below the rank of first grade.
       (2) The Comptroller may issue a Customs warrant if
satisfied, on an application by a Customs officer made on
oath, that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there
is in or on any place or thing any —
       (a) uncustomed goods;
       (b) goods relating to uncustomed goods; or
       (c) documents relating to uncustomed goods.
       (3) The Comptroller shall, before issuing a Customs
warrant, be satisfied that reasonable enquiries in relation to
the alleged offence have been made.
       (4) A Customs warrant issued pursuant to
subsection (1) shall, unless sooner revoked by the
Comptroller, remain in force as long as the person to whom
it has been issued remains a Customs officer whether in the
same capacity or not.
       (5) A Customs officer shall, whenever he proposes
to use his Customs warrant, first obtain the permission of
his superior officer who shall not grant permission unless
satisfied that reasonable grounds exist for such use.
       (6) A Customs warrant issued by the Comptroller
shall —
       (a) be directed to and executed by the designated
            Customs officer;
       (b) be recorded and a receipt for the warrant given
            by the designated Customs Officer; and
       (c) be returned immediately —
            (i) after revocation of the search warrant by the
                 Comptroller; or


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 74]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                              (ii) after the person to whom the search warrant
                                    has been issued ceases to be a Customs
                                    officer.
                         (7) A Customs officer in possession of a Customs
                   warrant issued pursuant to subsection (1) may —
                         (a) at any time enter into and search any house,
                              shop, cellar, warehouse, room, or any other
                              place, if he has reasonable grounds to believe
                              that in such premises there are —
                              (i) any uncustomed or prohibited goods; or
                              (ii) any goods or documents relating to
                                    uncustomed or prohibited goods;
                         (b) for purposes of paragraph (a), use all reasonable
                              force and require the assistance of, and take with
                              him, other Customs officers or Police officers.
                         (8) A Customs officer acting under this section who
                   is unable to obtain free access to any part of the premises
                   he proposes to enter or to any container therein —
                         (a) may, if necessary, enter such part by force;
                         (b) may break open doors, chests, trunks, or open
                              such container and other packages, for the
                              purpose of seizing and taking away any
                              uncustomed or prohibited goods or any books or
                              documents relating to such goods; and
                         (c) shall keep securely in a Customs warehouse any
                              goods, books or documents seized.
Magistrates’             54. (1) Without prejudice to any other power under
search warrants.   this Act, where a Customs officer declares on oath before a
                   Magistrate that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
                   there is in any premises —
                         (a) uncustomed goods;
                         (b) goods relating to uncustomed goods;
                         (c) documents relating to uncustomed goods;
                         (d) anything that may be evidence of the
                               commission of an offence under this Act or
                               other Customs legislation; or
                         (e) anything that there are reasonable grounds to
                               believe is intended to be used for the purpose
                               of —
                               (i) committing any offence under this Act or
                                    other Customs legislation;



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 75



            (ii) unlawfully importing or exporting goods; or
       (f) anything that is liable to forfeiture under this Act
            or other Customs legislation,
the Magistrate may by warrant authorise the Customs
officer to enter upon and search, with such force as may be
necessary and at any time, the premises and to seize and
carry away any goods, books, documents or any other thing
relating thereto that may be found in the premises.
       (2) A Customs officer in possession of a
Magistrate’s search warrant may require a Police officer to
assist him in the execution of the warrant and a Police
officer so required shall render assistance accordingly.
       (3) A Magistrate’s search warrant shall be —
       (a) directed to and executed by a designated
            Customs officer; or
       (b) directed to Customs officers generally and be
            executed by a Customs officer or Customs
            officers.
       (4) A warrant may be issued subject to such
reasonable conditions as the Magistrate specifies in the
warrant.
       55. (1) A Customs officer may, where he enters             Entry and search
upon any premises acting under a search warrant issued            under search
                                                                  warrant.
pursuant to sections 53 and 54 —
       (a) require the owner or the occupier of the
            premises to produce, either forthwith or at a time
            and place to be fixed by the Customs officer,
            any book, document, or thing, which the owner
            or the occupier is required to keep pursuant to
            this Act or other Customs legislation;
       (b) examine and take copies of any such book or
            document;
       (c) require the owner or the occupier to answer any
            questions relating to any such book, document,
            or thing, or to any entry in any such book or
            document;
       (d) seize and detain any such book, document, or
            thing, if, in his opinion, it may afford evidence
            of the commission of any offence under this Act
            or other Customs legislation; or



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 76]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          (e) seize and carry away any uncustomed goods, or
                               any books or documents relating to any such
                               goods found in the premises.
                          (2) A Customs officer executing a search warrant
                    may —
                          (a) detain, and if the officer reasonably believes that
                               the thing may be on the person’s body, search a
                               person who is at the place when the officer
                               arrives at that place; or
                          (b) detain and search any person who arrives at that
                               place when the officer is executing the warrant,
                               until the officer is satisfied that the person is not
                               connected with the search warrant.
                          (3) A person detained under subsection (2) shall
                    only be detained for the period of the search or for a period
                    not exceeding twenty four hours.
                          (4) For purposes of greater certainty, the powers
                    granted in this section are in addition to powers granted to
                    Customs officers pursuant to section 35.
                          (5) A Customs officer, or a Police officer, may
                    seize any thing found in carrying out the search of the
                    person and reasonable force may be used to seize the thing.
Search warrant to         56. (1) A Customs officer acting under a Customs
be produced.        warrant or a Magistrate’s warrant shall show his warrant on
                    demand to the occupier of the premises that the Customs
                    officer enters or proposes to enter.
                          (2) Subject to subsection (3), the Customs officer
                    executing a search warrant shall, if the owner or occupier
                    of the place being searched or the owner of the thing being
                    searched, as the case may be, is not present at the time of
                    the search, leave in a prominent position at the place being
                    searched or attached to the thing searched a written
                    notice —
                          (a) stating the date and time of the execution of the
                               warrant; and
                          (b) the name of the officer in charge of the search.
                          (3) An officer executing a warrant may, if he
                    believes that a notice under subsection (2) would unduly
                    prejudice subsequent investigations, refrain from leaving
                    such notice and, in such event, shall apply to the
                    Comptroller in case of the execution of a Customs search
                    warrant or to a Magistrate in case of the execution of a


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                              LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 77


Magistrate’s search warrant for confirmation of his
decision not to leave such notice.
      (4) The officer who executed the warrant shall,
where the Comptroller or the Magistrate refuses to confirm
his decision not to leave a notice, notify forthwith or cause
to be notified the owner or occupier of the place searched
or the owner of the thing searched of the particulars
referred to in subsection (2).
      57. (1) Subject to section 56(3), the person               Obligation to
executing a search warrant shall inform the owner or             inform owner or
                                                                 occupier when
occupier of the place searched or the owner of the thing         thing seized.
searched of the fact that any thing has been seized and of
the place from where it was seized.
      (2) The person executing the search warrant shall
inform the owner or occupier by —
      (a) delivering to them a written notice containing
            such information;
      (b) leaving such notice in a prominent position at
            the place searched or attached to the thing
            searched, as the case may be;
      (c) sending such notice to the owner or occupier by
            registered mail; or
      (d) such other method as a Magistrate may direct in
            any particular case.
      (3) A person affected by the execution of a search
warrant may apply to a Magistrate for an order for the
disclosure of the application for a search warrant, and any
documents submitted in support of such application, and
the Magistrate may, if satisfied that the disclosure of the
information will not prejudice the prevention,
investigation, or detection of offences, or endanger the
safety of any person, order the disclosure in whole or in
part of the application and supporting documents.
      58. (1) A Magistrate may orally or in writing grant        Emergency
an emergency warrant to a Customs officer making an              warrants.
application for an emergency warrant to search for and
seize a thing that is believed to be in or on a particular
premises in any case where the Magistrate is satisfied —
      (a) that circumstances exist that would justify the
            granting of a search warrant under a provision of
            this Act; and



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 78]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (b) the urgency of the situation requires that the
                            search should begin before a warrant under such
                            provision could with all practicable diligence be
                            obtained.
                        (2) An application for an emergency warrant may
                  be made orally but otherwise shall comply with the
                  requirements of section 54.
                        (3) A Customs officer making an application under
                  this section shall, at the time of making the application,
                  make a note in writing of the particulars of the application.
                        (4) A Customs officer executing an emergency
                  warrant shall —
                        (a) produce the note made in accordance with
                             subsection (3) —
                             (i) for inspection upon initial entry;
                             (ii) in response to any reasonable request made
                                  after initial entry; and
                        (b) when requested, provide a copy of the note no
                             later than seven working days after the making
                             of the request.
                        (5) The provisions of sections 55, 56 and 57, insofar
                  as applicable and with the necessary modifications, shall
                  apply to emergency warrants in the same manner as they
                  apply to search warrants.
                        (6) An emergency warrant shall remain valid for
                  twenty four hours from the time when the authorisation is
                  given and shall thereafter expire.
                        (7) The applicant Customs officer or, if that officer
                  is not able to do so, another Customs officer shall as soon
                  as practicable after an emergency warrant has expired
                  provide a written report in the prescribed form to the
                  Magistrate who granted the warrant advising —
                        (a) that the warrant has been executed; and
                        (b) of the results obtained through execution of the
                             warrant.
Use of approved         59. (1) A Customs officer or any member of the
aids by Customs
officer.
                  Bahamas Police Force may, in exercising any power of
                  boarding, entry, or search conferred by this Act or other
                  Customs legislation, have with them and use for the
                  purposes of searching —
                        (a) an approved —


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 79


          (i) animal;
          (ii) chemical substance;
          (iii) x-ray or imaging equipment; or
      (b) any other approved mechanical, electrical, or
          electronic device.
      (2) Nothing in this section applies to a search
carried out on residential premises except pursuant to a
search warrant issued under sections 53, 54 or 58.
      60. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, every            Conditions
provision of this Act or other Customs legislation that          applying to entry
                                                                 of building.
confers on a Customs officer the power to enter any
building, whether under the authority of a search warrant
or otherwise, shall be subject to the following
conditions —
      (a) reasonable notice of the intention to enter shall
          be given except where it would frustrate the
          purpose of the entry;
      (b) entry shall be made at a time that is reasonable
          in the particular circumstances except where it
          would frustrate the purpose of the entry;
      (c) identification shall be produced on initial entry
          and, if requested, at any subsequent time; and
      (d) the authority for the entry and the purpose of the
          entry shall be clearly stated to the owner or
          occupier of the building if they are present.
      61. (1) A Customs officer or member of the                 Arrest of
Bahamas Police Force who on reasonable grounds suspects          offenders.
that a person has committed an offence under this Act,
other Customs legislation or the Penal Code may, at any           Ch. 84.
time within fourteen working days after the date on which
such reasonable suspicion arises, arrest that person without
warrant where such offence comprises —
      (a) threatening or resisting a Customs officer;
      (b) failing to remain in a designated location as so
          directed by a Customs officer; or
      (c) being involved in the importation, exportation or
          transit of prohibited and restricted goods.
      (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a Customs
officer may arrest without warrant any person found on or
in a means of transport if the officer believes on reasonable
grounds that —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 80]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    (a) the person has committed, is committing, is
                        attempting to commit, or is otherwise concerned
                        in the commission of, an offence under this Act
                        or other Customs legislation being an offence
                        that is punishable by a term of imprisonment; or
                    (b) the person carried into the Customs territory
                        some other person who is on or in the means of
                        transport and the carriage of such other person
                        into the Customs territory on or in the means of
                        transport constituted an offence under this Act
                        or other Customs legislation.
                      (3) Reasonable force may be used if necessary to
               arrest a person including the use of—
                      (a) approved technical aids to subdue persons when
                          used in accordance with approved procedures
                          and guidelines issued by the Customs authority;
                          and
                      (b) approved technical aids including but not limited
                          to the use of—
                          (i) an animal;
                          (ii) immobilizing sprays such as pepper spray;
                          (iii) batons;
                          (iv) hand-cuffs; and
                          (v) as a means of last resort, the deployment of
                                official fire arms.
                      (4) A Customs officer shall prior to arresting a
               person advise the person about to be arrested of their legal
               rights in accordance with the provisions of the appropriate
               legislation or procedures as the case may be.
                      (5) A Customs officer shall, where he arrests a
               person under a power conferred by this section and unless
               the person is sooner released, call as soon as practicable a
               member of the Bahamas Police Force to assist and deliver
               the arrested person into the custody of such member of the
               Bahamas Police Force.
                      (6) The duties relating to the laying and filing of
               information shall, where a person delivered into custody is
               released by a member of the Bahamas Police Force without
               bail, be the duties of a Customs officer and not of a
               member of the Bahamas Police Force.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 81


      62. Where a person subject to arrest under section         Arrest of
61 or any other Customs legislation escapes from a proper        offenders after
                                                                 escape from
officer attempting to arrest him or if a proper officer is for   officer.
any reason unable or fails to arrest him, such person
may —
      (a) afterwards be arrested and detained by a
            Customs officer at any place in The Bahamas
            within ten years from the time the offence was
            committed; and
      (b) be dealt with as if he had been arrested at the
            time of committing the offence.
     62A. (1) In this section and in sections 62B, 62C and       Export of scrap
62D and 62E of this Part —                                       metal and
                                                                 copper.
      “authorised dealer” means an exporter, shipper or          43 of 2011, s. 2.
             vendor of scrap metal in possession of a valid
             business licence issued pursuant to the Business    Ch. 329.
             Licence Act;
      “authorised officer” means a —
      (a) customs officer;
      (b) police officer; or
      (c) Department of Environmental Health Officer of
            Assistant Director or above,
      assigned to the special investigation unit within the
      Customs Department;
      “certified shipment” means a shipment or container
             of scrap metal presented for export or
             transshipment which has been inspected and
             certified by an authorised officer to contain
             permitted scrap;
      “documented chain of custody” means the
             documentary evidence referred to in section
             62B certifying the origin and history of scrap
             metal;
      “permitted scrap” means metal generated from —
      (a) contracted demolition;
      (b) authorised removal of derelict vehicles;
      (c) authorised scrapping of industrial equipment; or
      (d) a verified dump site;




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 82]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         “restricted metals” means copper, aluminium, brass
                               and catalytic converters which comprise
                               permitted scrap;
                         “special investigation unit” means the unit within the
                               Customs Department established pursuant to
                               section 62C.
                         (2) No person shall —
                         (a) export scrap metal from The Bahamas to any
                             place outside The Bahamas; or
                         (b) transship scrap metal from a Family Island to
                             New Providence or to any other Family Island,
                             unless —
                               (i) such person is an authorised dealer;
                              (ii) records showing a documented chain of
                                   custody have been submitted with the
                                   shipment or container;
                             (iii) the shipment or container is a certified
                                   shipment;
                             (iv) in the case of copper, the exporter, shipper or
                                   vendor has held the copper in his possession
                                   for a period of 30 days prior to its
                                   presentation for export or transshipment; and
                             (v) permission for export or transshipment has
                                   been granted by a customs officer of the
                                   special investigation unit.
                          (3) A person who contravenes any provision of
                    subsection (2) commits an offence and shall be liable on
                    summary conviction to —
                          (a) a fine not exceeding fifty thousand dollars or
                               three times the value of the shipment or
                               container of scrap metal, whichever is the
                               greater sum;
                          (b) imprisonment for a term not exceeding twelve
                               months; or
                          (c) both fine and imprisonment as described in
                               paragraphs (a) and (b).
Requirement to          62B. (1) An authorised dealer shall keep records of
keep records to
document chain
                    each customer from whom he receives scrap metal and
of custody.         such records shall include, for each customer —
43 of 2011, s. 2.         (a) a valid photo identification;



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 83


      (b) a receipt signed by the customer for each transfer
          of scrap metal to the dealer;
      (c) a certification by the customer —
           (i) that the scrap metal was legitimately
                obtained by him;
           (ii) outlining the origin and history of the scrap
                metal prior to its possession by the customer;
                and
      (d) in the case of copper, the customer’s seal on the
           container.
      (2) The records referred to in subsection (1) shall
provide a documented chain of custody when submitted in
respect of a shipment or container of scrap metal presented
for export or transshipment.
     62C. (1) The Comptroller shall establish a special          Special
investigation unit within the Customs Department —               investigation
                                                                 unit.
      (a) to investigate and inspect shipments or containers     43 of 2011, s. 2.
          of scrap metal presented for export or
          transshipment;
      (b) after due investigation and inspection —
           (i) to certify that a shipment or container
                contains permitted scrap; or
           (ii) to refer the matter to the Royal Bahamas
                Police Force where a shipment or container
                does not contain permitted scrap;
      (c) to conduct a comprehensive chain of custody
           investigation and inspection where a shipment or
           container of permitted scrap comprises copper or
           other restricted metals.
      (2) The special investigation unit may comprise, in
addition to customs officers, officers assigned to it from
the Royal Bahamas Police Force and the Department of
Environmental Health Services.
      (3) The special investigation unit shall carry out its
inspection and sealing of scrap metal containers laden for
export —
      (a) either at the point of demolition and during
          loading into a container for export; or
      (b) at the exporter’s place of business, if different
           from (a).


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 84]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (4) Officers of the special investigation unit only
                    shall be authorised to certify that a shipment or container
                    of scrap metal presented for export or transshipment
                    contains permitted scrap.
                           (5) A customs officer of the special investigation
                    unit only shall be authorised to grant permission to export
                    or transship permitted scrap.
Grant of                 62D. (1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), a
permission to
export.
                    Customs officer of the special investigation unit shall grant
                    permission to export or transship permitted scrap where —
43 of 2011, s. 2.          (a) the shipment is a certified shipment;
                           (b) the exporter or shipper is an authorised dealer;
                                and
                           (c) a documented chain of custody has been
                                submitted with the shipment or container.
                           (2) A Customs officer of the special investigation
                    unit shall not, where a certified shipment comprises
                    restricted metals excluding copper, grant permission to
                    export or transship until after a period of 15 days has
                    elapsed since presentation for export or transshipment, as
                    the case may be, to ensure and facilitate a comprehensive
                    chain of custody investigation and inspection by the special
                    investigations unit.
                           (3) A Customs officer of the special investigation
                    unit shall not, where a certified shipment comprises
                    copper, grant permission to export or transship unless —
                           (a) the exporter, shipper or vendor has held the
                               copper in his possession for a period of 30 days
                               prior to its presentation for export or
                               transshipment;
                           (b) the special investigations unit has completed a
                               comprehensive chain of custody investigation
                               and inspection and verified the legitimacy of the
                               origin and history of the copper; and
                           (c) where the copper comes from equipment or
                               appliances, such equipment or appliance has been
                               presented for export in its assembled state.
43 of 2011, s. 2.        62E. Repeals.
Power to require          63. Where under this Act or other Customs
attendance.         legislation the master, commander or driver of a
                    conveyance is required to answer any question put to him



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 85


by the Comptroller or a proper officer, the Comptroller or
the officer may at any time while the conveyance is within
the Customs territory of The Bahamas require —
       (a) the master, commander, driver or agent; or
       (b) with the consent of the Comptroller or the
           officer, a senior officer of the means of
           transport, to appear in the office of the
           Comptroller or the officer.
       64. (1) A Customs officer may, at any time within         Power to require
three years of the importation, exportation or carriage          information and
                                                                 the production of
coastwise of any goods, require any person to furnish to         evidence.
him in such form and manner as the officer may require
any information relating to the goods, and to produce and
permit the officer to inspect, take extracts from, make
copies of or remove for a reasonable period, any invoice,
bill of lading or other book or document relating to the
goods in that person’s control or possession if that person
is concerned —
       (a) in such importation, exportation or carriage
           coastwise; or
       (b) in the carriage, unloading, landing or loading of
           the goods.
       (2) The Comptroller may require evidence to be
produced to his satisfaction in support of any information
provided in respect of goods imported, exported or carried
coastwise, or in respect of which drawback, allowance,
rebate, remission or repayment of duty is claimed.
       65. (1) A Customs officer may detain goods he             Detention of
finds in the course of exercising any power of search or         dangerous goods.
examination under this Act or other Customs legislation if
he believes on reasonable grounds that the goods are —
       (a) dangerous goods that may not be lawfully
           carried on public transport; and
       (b) proposed to be carried by an operator of a public
           means of transport.
       (2) A Customs officer shall, if he detains goods
under subsection (1), as soon as practicable deliver such
goods into the custody of the appropriate authority or of
the transport operator.
       (3) Responsibility for goods which have been
delivered pursuant to subsection (2) shall pass upon such


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 86]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   delivery from the Customs authority to the appropriate
                   authority or to the transport operator, as the case may be.
Use of                   66. (1) For the purpose of this section, reasonable
reasonable force
and firearms.
                   force may include the use of physical force, approved
                   technical aids and, as a means of last resort, the
                   deployment and use of approved official firearms.
                         (2) Customs officers duly authorised by the
                   Comptroller may apply reasonable force when
                   necessary —
                         (a) to ensure lawful execution of their
                              responsibilities;
                         (b) to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
                              Act and other Customs legislation; and
                         (c) to prevent interference with or hindrance of
                              Customs officers in the lawful execution of their
                              responsibilities under this Act and other
                              Customs legislation.
                         (3) Customs officers may apply reasonable force,
                   approved technical aids and approved firearms in —
                         (a) self defence;
                         (b) the protection or the safety of other persons;
                         (c) the defence, protection and recovery of Crown
                              property; or
                         (d) the defence, protection and recovery of goods
                              and means of transportation which are
                              temporarily under Customs control.
                         (4) Authority conferred under subsections (1), (2)
                   and (3) shall only be executed in accordance with approved
                   guidelines and procedures issued by the Comptroller in
                   accordance with subsection (10).
                         (5) A Customs officer who authorizes the firing of
                   any fire arm shall immediately notify the Comptroller and
                   thereafter provide the Comptroller with a written report,
                   within twenty-four hours unless prevented from doing so
                   by circumstances beyond his control, covering the —
                         (a) use of such fire arms;
                         (b) extent of casualties or damage if any incurred;
                              and
                         (c) circumstances in which such fire arms were
                              used.
                         (6) The Comptroller shall —


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 87


       (a) within twelve hours after receipt of a
            notification under subsection (5)notify         the
            Commissioner of Police of the firing of official
            weapons; and
       (b) within six hours after receipt of a written report
            under subsection (5), notify the Commissioner
            of Police of the relevant details pertaining to the
            incident.
       (7) A Customs officer shall, within forty-eight
hours of using reasonable force other than the use of
official fire arms under any provision of this Act or other
Customs legislation, give the Comptroller a written report
covering the —
       (a) use of such reasonable force; and
       (b) circumstances under which it was used.
       (8) Unlawful or inappropriate use of force,
approved technical aids, or deployment and use of official
fire arms, by a Customs officer shall result in appropriate
disciplinary action and may deprive such officer of the
protections granted under section 10.
       (9) It shall be a defence in any prosecution of a
Customs officer charged with unlawful use of force under
this Act to show that such officer had reasonable cause to
fear for his personal safety or for the safety of others and
accordingly acted in self defence or in the defence of
others or the perpetrator.
       (10) The Comptroller shall issue guidelines, rules of
engagement and procedures covering the use by Customs
personnel of reasonable force, approved technical aids, and
the deployment and use of official fire arms.

                      PART V
                 CUSTOMS CONTROLS
     67. Goods shall be subject to the control of the             Goods subject to
Customs authority —                                               Customs
                                                                  controls.
     (a) where the goods have been imported including
         goods imported through the Post Office, from
         the time of importation until the time —
         (i) the goods are lawfully removed from a
               Customs controlled area;
         (ii) the goods are exported to a point outside
               the Customs territory; or

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 88]                  CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (iii) where the goods are removed under a
                              conditional permit granted pursuant to
                              section 111(1)(c), the Customs authority is
                              satisfied that the conditions of the permit
                              have been met;
                  (b)   where the goods are to be exported otherwise
                        than under drawback, from the time when the
                        goods are brought to a Customs controlled area
                        until their exportation to a point outside the
                        Customs territory;
                  (c)   where the goods are to be exported whether
                        under drawback or not under a Customs-
                        approved secure exports scheme whether or not
                        any other provision of this section applies to the
                        goods, from the time when the goods are first
                        secured in a Customs-approved secure package
                        or in a package to which a Customs seal has
                        been applied until the exportation of the goods
                        to a point outside the Customs territory;
                  (d)   where the goods are to be exported under
                        drawback, from the time of the claim for
                        drawback until the exportation of the goods to a
                        point outside the Customs territory;
                  (e)   where the goods are in or on board any means of
                        transport, at all times during which the means of
                        transport is within the Customs territory;
                  (f)   where the goods are manufactured in a Customs
                        controlled area, from the time of manufacture
                        until the first to occur of the following —
                        (i) the goods are lawfully removed for home
                              consumption from a Customs controlled
                              area; or
                        (ii) the goods are exported to a point outside
                              the Customs territory;
                  (g)   where the goods are owned by or in the
                        possession of an internationally ticketed
                        passenger, or a domestic passenger, who is using
                        air, road, rail or sea travel for a domestic sector,
                        from the time when at the commencement of the
                        domestic sector the goods are —
                        (i) brought into a Customs controlled area
                              licensed      for     the      disembarkation,
                              embarkation, or processing of persons



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 89


               arriving in or departing from the Customs
               territory; or
          (ii) accepted for carriage by an airline, coach
               operator, railroad operator or shipping
               company,
          until the time when at the end of the domestic
          sector the goods are lawfully removed from a
          Customs controlled area licensed for the
          disembarkation, embarkation, or processing of
          persons arriving in or departing from the
          Customs territory; or
      (h) in the case of domestic cargo not being goods to
          which paragraph (f) applies, from the time when
          the goods are brought within a Customs
          controlled area that is in a Customs place until
          the time when the goods are lawfully removed
          from that or any other Customs controlled area.
      (2) For the purposes of subsection (1), goods that
are removed from a Customs controlled area to another
Customs controlled area are not removed for home
consumption.
      (3) No person shall, except in accordance with this
Act, interfere in any way with goods subject to Customs
control.
      (4) The Minister may, by Order published in the
Gazette, prescribe other circumstances where goods shall
be deemed to be subject to the control of the Customs
authority.
      68. (1) The Customs authority may carry out all the        Principles of
controls it deems necessary to ensure the correct                Customs
                                                                 controls.
application of this Act and other Customs legislation
governing the entry, exit, transit, transfer and end-use of
goods moved between the Customs territory and other
countries or territories outside the Customs territory.
      (2) Customs controls under subsection (1) may
consist of —
      (a) examining goods;
      (b) verifying declaration data;
      (c) verifying the existence and authenticity of
           electronic or written documents;
      (d) examining the accounts of undertakings and
           other records;

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 90]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (e) inspecting means of transport, luggage and other
                             goods carried by or on persons.
                        (3) Customs controls, other than random checks,
                  shall be based on —
                        (a) sound risk management practices and risk
                             analysis which may be supported by electronic
                             data processing techniques for identifying and
                             evaluating risks and developing the necessary
                             measures to counter such risks; and
                        (b) criteria developed at national and, where
                             available, international levels.
Post-release            69. (1) The Customs authority may, after releasing
verification or
audit.
                  the goods and in order to satisfy itself as to the accuracy of
                  the particulars associated with the importation, exportation,
                  warehousing, manufacture, or processing of such goods,
                  inspect or audit commercial documents and data relating
                  to —
                        (a) the operations of the importer, exporter,
                             consignee, declarant, or their representatives, in
                             respect of such goods; or
                        (b) other commercial operations involving all
                             international trade transactions.
                       (2) Inspections or audits pursuant to subsection (1)
                  may be carried out by Customs officers designated by the
                  Comptroller by rule at the premises of —
                       (a) the importer, exporter, consignee, declarant, or
                           their representatives;
                       (b) any other person directly or indirectly involved
                           in the operations in a business capacity; or
                       (c) any other person in possession of documents or
                           information for business purposes associated
                           with, or relating to, the goods.
                        (3) The Customs authority may, where a
                  Memorandum of Understanding satisfactory to the
                  Customs authority has been concluded with an economic
                  operator, exchange information, initiate or participate in
                  combined revenue audits of the economic operator’s
                  operations relating to trade in goods.
                       (4) The Customs authority may examine or re-
                  examine international goods where it remains possible for
                  them to be presented for examination.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 91


      70. (1) Records, of such nature, in such manner and        Keeping of
                                                                 records.
for such period of time as may be prescribed by the
Comptroller under this Act and other Customs legislation,
shall be kept, or cause to be kept, in the Customs territory
by economic operators including —
      (a) licensees, importers, exporters;
      (b) representatives or agents of licensees, importers,
           exporters;
      (c) persons involved in the carriage, handling, or
           transportation of goods imported to, or exported
           from, the Customs territory; and
      (d) other persons or organizations reasonably
           expected to be in possession of any information
           relating to goods subject to the control of the
           Customs authority.
      (2) A person referred to in subsection (1) shall, on
the request of a Customs officer —
      (a) make the records available to the Customs
           authority;
      (b) provide copies of the records as required; and
      (c) answer any questions asked by any Customs
           officer in respect of such records.
      (3) A person referred to in subsection (1) shall,
where for the purposes of complying with subsection (2)
information is recorded or stored by means of an electronic
or other device, at the request of a Customs officer operate
the device, or cause it to be operated, to make such
information available to the Customs officer.
      (4) Subject to subsection (5) and (6), economic
operators involved in the importation and exportation of
goods shall retain Customs documentation for a minimum
period of three years.
      (5) Documentation shall be retained for three years
beyond the minimum period provided for in subsection (4)
where —
      (a) Customs controls carried out by the Customs
           authority in respect of a Customs debt shows
           that the relevant entry in the accounts has to be
           corrected; and
      (b) the person concerned has been notified of this.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 92]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (6) Documents or information shall, where an
                    appeal has been lodged, be kept until the appeal procedure
                    is terminated.
Access to                  71. (1) Economic operators pursuant to section 70
business records.   shall, where the Customs authority requests access to
                    records required to be kept, provide such access at a date to
                    be specified by notice in writing from the Customs
                    authority.
                           (2) Access to records pursuant to subsection (1)
                    shall be provided in the form and manner prescribed, either
                    electronically or otherwise, and the economic operator
                    shall ensure that the Customs authority has such access at
                    all reasonable times.
                           (3) The Customs authority may, by notice in
                    writing, exempt a person to whom this section applies from
                    complying with some or all of the obligations under this
                    section in all or any specified circumstances.
                          (4) For the avoidance of doubt, nothing in this
                    section affects any obligation under section 70 to keep or
                    cause to be kept, make available, provide copies of, or
                    answer questions in respect of, records.

                                      PART VI
                      ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE OF GOODS, PERSONS
                              AND MEANS OF TRANSPORT
                    DIVISION ONE - ARRIVAL OF MEANS OF TRANSPORT
                                  IN THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY
Notification of           72. (1) The person in charge of a means of transport
arrival.            en route to the Customs territory from a point outside that
                    Customs territory shall, unless otherwise approved by the
                    Customs authority —
                          (a) give to the Customs authority, in such form and
                               manner, either electronically or otherwise, as
                               may be approved in writing by the Comptroller,
                               either generally or for a particular case or class
                               of case, such advance notice as may be
                               prescribed in respect of any or all of the
                               following —
                               (i) impending arrival of the means of transport;
                               (ii) route followed;
                               (iii) crew;
                               (iv) passengers,


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 93


           (v) cargo for discharge within the Customs
                 territory, whether commercial or non-
                 commercial;
           (vi) commercial cargo not intended for
                 discharge within the Customs territory, if
                 any;
          (vii) the Customs place at which the means of
                 transport will arrive; and
      (b) on arrival in the Customs territory, proceed
           directly to such Customs place, unless directed
           elsewhere by a Customs officer.
      (2) The owner or operator of the means of transport
referred to in sub-section (1), or an agent or duly
authorised representative of the owner or operator, may
provide the information referred to in paragraph (a) of
subsection (1) to the Customs authority on behalf of the
person in charge of the means of transport.
      73. (1) The person in charge of, the owner of, any         Requirement to
member of the crew of, and any passenger on or in, a             answer questions.
means of transport shall —
      (a) answer any question asked by a Customs officer
           under this Act relating to the means of transport,
           its voyage or journey and any persons or goods
           that are or have been carried by the means of
           transport; and
      (b) forthwith at the request of any Customs officer
           produce any documents within that person’s
           possession or control relating to any of the
           matters described in paragraph (a).
      (2) The obligations in subsection (1) shall apply in
respect of—
      (a) a means of transport that is within the Customs
           territory and is carrying international cargo or
           international crew or any international
           passenger, whether or not the means of transport
           is also carrying domestic cargo; and
      (b) any other means of transport that is within the
           Customs territory that a Customs officer has
           reasonable cause to suspect has been, or is about
           to be, involved in the commission of an offence
           under this Act or the importation or exportation
           of any dutiable, uncustomed, prohibited,
           restricted or forfeited goods.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 94]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Bringing-to a              74. (1) The master of a ship arriving within the
ship.               Customs territory shall, on being directed by a Customs
                    officer to do so —
                           (a) stop and bring the ship to for boarding; and
                           (b) ensure that the ship remains stopped until a
                                Customs officer directs that the ship may
                                proceed.
                           (2) The means of transport carrying the Customs
                    officer or officers or other authorised persons shall identify
                    itself as being a means of transport in the service of the
                    Crown.
                           (3) The master of the ship shall by all reasonable
                    means facilitate the boarding of the ship by Customs
                    officers or authorised persons.
                           (4) The master of a ship within the Customs
                    territory shall, if so directed by a Customs officer, cause
                    that ship to leave the Customs territory forthwith.
                           (5) A Customs officer who proposes to give a
                    direction under sub-section (4) shall consult with the
                    Comptroller or a person authorised by the Comptroller and
                    obtain his approval before issuing a direction to leave the
                    Customs territory.
Means of                   75. (1) Subject to sections 72 and 76, the person in
transportation to
arrive at
                    charge of a means of transport —
designated                 (a) that arrives within the Customs territory on a
Customs place
only.
                                journey from a point outside the Customs
                                territory; or
                           (b) that is carrying —
                                (i) persons; or
                                (ii) goods subject to the control of the Customs
                                      Authority brought in that means of
                                      transport or any other means of transport
                                      from a point outside the Customs territory,
                    shall ensure that the means of transport, lands, anchors,
                    berths or otherwise arrives only at the Customs place
                    which, in the case of a means of transport to which section
                    72 applies, shall be the Customs place nominated by that
                    person in accordance with that section.
                           (2) No person shall, on arrival at the nominated
                    Customs place or Customs controlled area within that place
                    and until an inward report in accordance with section 78



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 95


has been made, leave or board the means of transport
unless authorised to do so by a Customs officer.
      76. (1) Nothing in section 75 applies to a means of        Means of
transport that is required or compelled to berth, land,          transportation
                                                                 arriving at place
anchor, or otherwise arrive at a place other than the            other than
Customs place designated in accordance with section              designated
72(l)(b), if the arrival —                                       Customs place.

      (a) is required by any statutory or other requirement
            relating to navigation; or
      (b) is compelled by accident, stress of weather, or
            other necessity; or
      (c) is otherwise authorized by the Customs
            authority.
      (2) The person in charge of the means of
transport —
      (a) shall forthwith report to a Customs officer, to a
           Police officer or to any other person designated
           for this purpose pursuant to this Act;
      (b) shall not, without the consent of a Customs
           officer, permit any goods carried in or on the
           means of transport to be unloaded from it or any
           of the crew or passengers to depart from its
           vicinity; and
      (c) shall comply with any directions given by a
           Customs officer in respect of any goods, crew,
           or passengers carried in or on the means of
           transport.
      (3) Subject to section 83, no member of the crew
and no passenger on or in the means of transport shall
without the consent of a Customs officer —
      (a) unload goods from the means of transport; or
      (b) depart from the vicinity of the means of
           transport,
and all such persons shall comply with any directions given
by a Customs officer.
      (4) No person shall, where a means of transport is
directed by a Customs officer pursuant to section 72(l)(b)
to arrive at a place other than the Customs place so
designated, depart from or board the means of transport
unless authorised to do so by a Customs officer.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 96]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Control of             77. (1) The Comptroller may make rules with
pleasure and
small craft.
                 respect to the arrival, report and departure of pleasure and
                 small craft.
                       (2) In this section, “pleasure craft” means —
                       (a) a vessel that at the time of its arrival at a place in
                            The Bahamas is being used for private
                            recreational purposes only; or
                       (b) a vessel that the proper officer, after application
                            made to him in writing, permits to be treated as
                            a pleasure craft.
                       (3) The Comptroller may make rules concerning
                 small craft in respect of vessels not exceeding fifty tons
                 burden by prescribing, with reference to the tonnage, build
                 or general description of such vessels —
                       (a) the limits and manner within which the vessel
                            may be used or employed;
                       (b) the mode of navigation;
                       (c) the number and description of arms and the
                            quantity of ammunition that such vessels may
                            carry; and
                       (d) such other terms, particulars, conditions and
                            restrictions as the Comptroller may think fit.
                       (4) A vessel that is used or employed contrary to
                 rules made under subsections (1) and (3) shall be forfeited
                 unless it was specially licensed by the Comptroller to be so
                 used or employed in accordance with subsection (5).
                       (5) Notwithstanding any rules made under
                 subsections (1) and (3), the Comptroller may grant, upon
                 such terms and conditions and subject to such restrictions
                 and stipulations as he thinks fit, licences in respect of any
                 vessel not exceeding fifty tons burden.
Inward report.         78. (1) This section applies, unless otherwise
                 approved by the Customs authority, to a means of transport
                 that —
                       (a) arrives within the Customs territory on a journey
                           from a point outside the Customs territory; or
                       (b) is carrying persons or goods subject to the
                           control of the Customs authority brought in or
                           on that means of transport or any other means of
                           transport from a point outside the Customs
                           territory.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 97


      (2) The person in charge, or the owner, of a means
of transport to which this section applies shall, on the
arrival at a Customs place of the means of transport —
      (a) deliver to the Customs authority, within such
            time or times as may be prescribed, an inward
            report, in such form and manner and containing
            such particulars verified by declaration as may
            be prescribed, accompanied by such supporting
            documents as the Customs authority may
            require; and
      (b) comply with any Customs direction as to the
            movement of the means of transport within the
            Customs place and as to the unloading of goods
            or the disembarkation of crew or passengers
            from the means of transport.
      (3) The maker of a report may, when a report made
under this section is inaccurate, amend such report within
forty-eight hours of its making or such longer period as the
Comptroller may permit.
      (4) The person in charge, or the owner, of a means
of transport shall, unless the report is amended under sub-
section (3), pay the applicable duty on goods which —
      (a) appear on any clearance or manifest required to
            be produced; and
      (b) do not appear in the report filed under this
            section.
      (5) Notwithstanding any provision of any Customs
enactment, when a report made under this section is
inaccurate and the maker of such inaccurate report satisfies
the Comptroller that the error was not made knowingly or
recklessly —
      (a) the maker of such report shall not be guilty of an
            offence; and
      (b) where the error consisted of the omission or
            incorrect reporting of any goods, such goods
            shall not be liable to forfeiture.
      (6) A person making a report under this section
shall —
      (a) answer all questions relating to the vessel or
            aircraft, its cargo, stores, baggage, crew,
            passengers, voyage or flight as may be put to
            him by the proper officer; and


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 98]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (b) produce all books and documents in his custody
                               or control relating to the vessel or aircraft, its
                               cargo, stores, baggage, crew, passengers, voyage
                               or flight as the proper officer may require.
                           (7) The Comptroller may require goods reported as
                     stores on board any vessel or aircraft, or any portion of
                     such goods, to be entered for warehousing and, for the
                     purposes of this subsection, the person in charge or the
                     owner of the means of transport, as the case may be, shall
                     be deemed to be the importer of those goods.
Vessel or aircraft         79. (1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
commissioned by
the Crown.
                     Act, the master of a vessel or his agent or the commander
                     of an aircraft or his agent —
                           (a) where such vessel or aircraft —
                                (i) has a commission from the Crown or from
                                      any foreign state;
                                (ii) has on board any goods other than stores;
                                      and
                                (iii) was laden at any port or place outside the
                                      Customs territory;
                           (b) shall, on arrival in the Customs territory, or
                                when called upon to do so by a Customs officer,
                                and before any of the goods are unloaded —
                                (i) provide to the best of his knowledge and to
                                      the satisfaction of the Customs officer a
                                      written account of the goods including an
                                      account of the quality and quantity of every
                                      package or parcel, of the marks and
                                      numbers thereon, and of the names of the
                                      respective consignors and consignees;
                                (ii) make a declaration at the foot of the
                                      account that the information provided is
                                      accurate to the best of his knowledge; and
                                (iii) truthfully answer questions concerning the
                                      goods asked by the Customs officer.
                           (2) Vessels and aircraft referred to in subsection (1)
                     are subject to search in the same manner as non-
                     commissioned vessels and aircraft.
                           (3) For the avoidance of doubt, proper officers may
                     freely enter and go on board vessels and aircraft and bring
                     from them into a warehouse any goods found on board.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 99


      (4) Sub-sections (2) and (3) are subject to such
regulations in respect of vessels or aircraft of war
belonging to the Crown as may be prescribed by the
Minister.
     (5) Subsections (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7) of section
78 apply to this section.

       DIVISION TWO - ARRIVAL OF PERSONS IN
                THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY
      80. (1) A person arriving in the Customs territory         Persons arriving
shall on arrival, unless otherwise required under any            in the Customs
                                                                 territory to report
provision of this Act, report to a Customs officer or other      to a Customs
authorised person.                                               officer.

      (2) A person who reports to a Customs officer or
other authorised person in accordance with subsection (1)
shall remain at the place where the person reported for
such reasonable time as the Customs authority may require
for the purposes of enabling any Customs officer or other
authorised person to exercise in relation to such person any
power conferred on him under this Act.
      81. (1) Subject to such exemptions as may be               Disembarkation.
prescribed, a person who is on board or in a means of
transport that has arrived in the Customs territory from a
point outside the Customs territory shall comply with any
Customs direction concerning disembarkation.
      (2) For the purposes of this section, a Customs
direction includes a direction given by the person in charge
of the means of transport or by a crew member at the
direction of a Customs officer.
      (3) Subject to such exemptions as may be
prescribed, every person who has disembarked from a
means of transport to which this section applies shall,
unless otherwise directed by the Customs authority —
      (a) go to a Customs controlled area; and
      (b) remain there for such reasonable time as the
           Customs authority may require for the purposes
           of enabling any Customs officer to exercise in
           relation to that person any power conferred on
           him under this Act.
      82. (1) Subject to such exemptions as may be               Baggage to be
prescribed, every person who disembarks from a means of          presented.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 100]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   transport that has arrived in the Customs territory from a
                   point outside the Customs territory or a means of transport
                   that is at the end of a domestic sector shall —
                          (a) make their accompanying baggage available for
                                examination by a Customs officer; and
                          (b) comply with any Customs direction relating to
                                the movement of the baggage within the
                                Customs place or Customs controlled area or
                                from any means of transport to a Customs
                                controlled area.
                         (2) Any person who is moving or handling the
                   baggage referred to in subsection (1) shall comply with any
                   Customs direction relating to the movement of the baggage
                   within the Customs place or Customs controlled area or
                   from any means of transport to a Customs controlled area.

                      DIVISION THREE - UNLOADING OF GOODS AND
                       TEMPORARY HOLDING OF IMPORTED GOODS
Unloading of             83. (1) Goods shall only be unloaded from aircraft
goods from
aircraft or
                   or vessels at a Customs place or at a sufferance wharf.
vessels.                 (2) No person shall unload goods that are subject to
                   the control of the Customs authority from a means of
                   transport except —
                         (a) pursuant to a permit or other authorisation
                              granted by the Customs authority, which permit
                              or other authorisation shall be subject to such
                              conditions as the Customs authority may
                              determine; or
                         (b) where the safety of the means of transport, or the
                              goods or persons in or on the means of transport,
                              is threatened by collision, fire, the stress of
                              weather, or similar circumstances, or such other
                              circumstances as may be prescribed.
Approved transit         84. (1) Goods arriving in the Customs territory and
sheds.             unloaded from the means of transport pursuant to a permit
                   or other authorisation granted by the Customs authority
                   may be deposited in an approved transit shed pending
                   clearance.
                         (2) Pursuant to section 14(2), the Comptroller may,
                   subject to such terms and conditions as the Comptroller
                   thinks fit, approve a transit shed at any place in any
                   Customs controlled area.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 101


      (3) Subject to section 17, the Comptroller may at
any time, in such manner as the Comptroller thinks fit, and
for reasonable cause, revoke or vary the terms of any
approval given under this section.
      (4) Goods shall, where the proper officer considers
them to be unsuitable for storage in a transit shed, be
conveyed into such other place as the proper officer may
direct which place shall, for the purpose of such deposit, be
deemed to be an approved transit shed.
      85. (1) The licensee of an approved transit shed may       Conditions for
take and enter into a book a particular account of the goods     entering and
                                                                 keeping goods in
deposited into the transit shed.                                 approved transit
                                                                 shed.
      (2) Goods deposited in an approved transit shed are
placed under the custody of the licensee.
      (3) Save as otherwise prescribed, the goods
deposited in an approved transit shed shall be entered
within five working days after the goods have been taken
into account.
      (4) Goods deposited in an approved transit shed
which have not been entered in accordance with subsection
(3) —
      (a) may be caused to be taken to a Customs
           warehouse; and
      (b) when taken to a Customs warehouse, shall be            23 of 2013, s. 9.
           dealt with in accordance with the provisions of
           Part XV.

     DIVISION FOUR - DEPARTURE OF PERSONS
      86. Subject to such exemptions as may be                   Persons
                                                                 departing from
prescribed, or unless otherwise authorised by the Customs        the Customs
authority, a person or persons shall not depart from the         territory to depart
Customs territory unless they depart from a Customs place.       from Customs
                                                                 place.
      87. A person preparing to board a means of                 Embarkation.
transport for departure from the Customs territory shall
comply with any Customs direction given to him
concerning embarkation.
      88. (1) Subject to such exemptions as may be               Outgoing
prescribed, every person who arrives at a Customs place or       baggage to be
                                                                 presented.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 102]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                 a Customs controlled area for embarkation on to a means
                 of transport that has, as its destination, a point outside the
                 Customs territory shall —
                       (a) make his accompanying baggage available for
                           examination by a Customs officer; and
                       (b) comply with any Customs direction relating to
                           the movement of such baggage within the
                           Customs place or Customs controlled area or
                           from a Customs controlled area to any means of
                           transport.
                       (2) Any person who is moving or handling the
                 baggage referred to in subsection (1) shall comply with any
                 Customs direction relating to the movement of the baggage
                 within the Customs place or Customs controlled area or
                 from a Customs controlled area to any means of transport.

                              DIVISION FIVE - DEPARTURE OF
                                   MEANS OF TRANSPORT
Clearance of            89. (1) Unless otherwise approved by the Customs
means of
transport.
                 authority, no person in charge of a means of transport that
                 has, as its destination, a point outside the Customs territory
                 shall cause that means of transport to depart from any
                 Customs place unless that person has received a certificate
                 of clearance in the prescribed form.
                        (2) Subject to such exemptions as may be
                 prescribed, no person in charge of a means of transport that
                 has arrived in the Customs territory from a point outside
                 the Customs territory shall cause that means of transport to
                 depart from the place in the Customs territory that it first
                 arrived at, or from any subsequent place of call within the
                 Customs territory, without —
                        (a) the permission of the Customs authority;
                        (b) the production to the Customs authority of any
                             documents that the Customs authority may
                             require; and
                        (c) the fulfillment of any conditions imposed by the
                             Customs authority.
Certificate of          90. (1) Unless otherwise approved by the Customs
clearance.       authority, the person in charge of a means of transport to
                 which section 89 applies shall prior to the grant to him of a
                 certificate of clearance —



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 103


      (a) deliver to the Customs authority within such
            time or times as may be prescribed an outward
            report, in such form and manner and containing
            such particulars verified by declaration as may
            be prescribed, together with such supporting
            documents as the Customs authority may
            require;
      (b) answer any question asked by a Customs officer
            relating to the means of transport and its
            passengers, crew, cargo, stores, and intended
            voyage or journey;
      (c) produce such other documents as may be
            required by a Customs officer relating to the
            means of transport and its passengers, crew,
            cargo, stores, and intended voyage or journey;
            and
      (d) comply with all requirements in this or any other
            law concerning the means of transport and its
            passengers, crew, cargo, stores, and intended
            voyage or journey.
      (2) A Customs officer, for the purpose of securing
the detention of a conveyance in pursuance of any power
or duty conferred or imposed by this or any other Customs
enactment, or for the purpose of securing compliance with
any provision of a Customs enactment, may —
      (a) at any time refuse clearance of any conveyance;
            or
      (b) revoke any clearance previously granted at any
            time while —
            (i) the vessel is within the waters of The
                  Bahamas;
            (ii) the aircraft is at a Customs airport; or
            (iii) the vehicle is within the borders of the
                  Customs territory.
      (3) Revocation of a clearance may be made either
orally or in writing to the person in charge of any means of
transport and, if made in writing, may be served —
      (a) by delivering it to the person in charge or
            command personally;
      (b) by leaving it at the last known place of abode or
            business in the Customs territory of the person



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 104]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                              in charge or command of the means of transport;
                              or
                         (c) by leaving it on board the conveyance with the
                              person appearing to be in charge or command of
                              it.
                         (4) A clearance shall upon revocation under
                    subsection (3) become void.
Boarding of                91. The person in charge of a means of transport
outward means
of transport by
                    departing from a Custom place, whether or not the
Customs officers.   immediate destination of the means of transport is a point
                    outside the Customs territory, shall, if required to do so by
                    any Customs officer, facilitate by all reasonable means
                    boarding by Customs officers.
Production of              92. The person in charge of a means of transport to
certificate of
clearance.
                    whom a certificate of clearance has been granted shall, on
                    demand by a Customs officer, produce the certificate of
                    clearance for examination by the Customs officer and
                    answer any question that the officer may put to him
                    concerning the means of transport and its passengers, crew,
                    cargo, stores, and intended voyage or journey.
Departure to be            93. (1) Subject to such exemptions as may be
from Customs
place only.
                    prescribed and to subsection (2), no person in charge of
                    any means of transport shall, except with the prior
                    permission of the Customs authority —
                           (a) cause that means of transport to depart for a
                                point outside the Customs territory from a place
                                within the Customs territory other than a
                                Customs place; or
                           (b) having obtained a certificate of clearance from a
                                Customs place within the Customs territory to
                                depart for any point outside the Customs
                                territory, cause that means of transport —
                                (i) to not depart immediately from that place;
                                      or
                                (ii) to go to any other place within the Customs
                                      territory.
                           (2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a means of
                    transport that is compelled by accident, stress of weather,
                    or other necessity to return to a place within the Customs
                    territory and, in any such case, the provisions of section 76
                    shall apply subject to such modifications as may be
                    necessary.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 105



      94. The Minister may, without limiting the power to        Regulations
                                                                 relating to stores
make regulations conferred by section 354, make                  of means of
regulations from time to time prescribing —                      transport.
      (a) the classes of goods that are, or are not deemed
                                                                 23 of 2013, s. 10.
           to be stores for the use of passengers and crew
           or the service of means of transports about to
           depart from any Customs place;
      (b) the conditions under which any such stores may
           be shipped free of duty or under drawback of
           duty; and
      (c) the conditions under which any such stores are
           subject to duty, and the form and manner in
           which those stores shall be entered.

                    PART VII
        ENTRY AND ACCOUNTING FOR GOODS
         DIVISION ONE - GENERAL PROVISIONS
       95. (1) Subject to any regulations made under             Obligation to
sections 104 and 105, goods that are imported or that are to     clear goods from
                                                                 Customs.
be imported in the Customs territory shall be entered by the
importer.
       (2) Subject to any regulations made under sections
113 and 114, goods that are exported from the Customs
territory shall be entered by the exporter.
       (3) Goods that are imported or exported in
exemption of the payment of duties and taxes under this
Act shall be entered in the same manner as goods not so
exempted.
       (4) Goods shall be entered at Customs places.
       (5) Goods shall be entered within such time as may
be prescribed or such further time as the Comptroller may
allow.
       (6) An entry made by electronic means into a
computer or other device shall be considered as entered at
the time the entry is received by the Customs authority.
       (7) Where the Comptroller reasonably believes that        19 of 2015, s.3.
any person is importing goods for a commercial purpose,
the Comptroller may require that person to produce a tax
identification number issued under the Value Added Tax
Act.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 106]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Pre-arrival              96. (1) The Comptroller may, in his discretion,
declaration.
                   permit goods to be entered before the arrival of the means
                   of transport.
                         (2) Delays and conditions for presenting goods to
                   Customs are subject to such conditions and restrictions as
                   the Comptroller thinks fit.
Fees and charges         97. (1) Pursuant to section 354, the Minister may
relating to
importation and
                   make regulations prescribing fees or charges, or both, that
exportation of     are payable to the Customs authority to meet or assist in
goods.             meeting costs and expenses incurred by the Customs
                   authority in exercising functions or powers, or performing
                   duties, or providing services, under this Act that relate to
                   the importation or exportation of goods.
                         (2) The provisions of Part XI that relate to the
                   collection and recovery of duty shall apply to fees and
                   charges imposed pursuant to subsection (1) as if those fees
                   and charges were a duty.
                         (3) The Minister shall, before making any
                   regulations under subsection (1), be satisfied that the
                   persons that the Minister considers are representative of
                   interests likely to be substantially affected by the proposed
                   regulations have been consulted to the extent that is
                   reasonably practicable having regard to the circumstances
                   of the case.
                         (4) The Minister may, for the purposes of
                   subsection (3), take into account any relevant consultation
                   undertaken by or on behalf of the Minister before this
                   section comes into force.
                         (5) A failure to comply with subsection (3) shall not
                   affect the validity of any regulations made pursuant to
                   subsection (1).

                          DIVISION TWO - PERSONS AUTHORISED
                                    TO MAKE ENTRIES
Owners of goods.          98. The owner of goods imported into the Customs
                   territory or exported from the Customs territory shall have
                   authority to make entries.
Customs                   99. (1) Any person may appoint an authorised
representation.    agent.
                          (2) Customs representation by an authorised agent
                   may be either —


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 107


      (a) direct, in which case the authorised agent shall
           act in the name of and on behalf of another
           person; or
      (b) indirect, in which case the authorised agent shall
           act in his own name but on behalf of another
           person.
      (3) No natural or legal person may act on behalf of
another natural or legal person in the clearance of goods
under Customs procedures unless such person is an
authorised agent with a clear legal mandate to act on behalf
of such person.
      (4) Subject to subsection (12), authorised agents
shall be established within the Customs territory.
     (5) No natural or legal person may act as a Customs
broker unless such person has been granted a licence.
      (6) A licence shall be granted to a Customs broker
by the Comptroller.
      (7) A licence granted under subsection (6) may at
any time be revoked or suspended by the Comptroller
where —
      (a) a term, condition, or restriction specified in the
           licence has been contravened;
      (b) the licensee ceases to act as a Customs broker;
           or
      (c) the Comptroller considers that the licensee is no
           longer a fit and proper person to hold a licence
           and to operate as a Customs broker.
      (8) The Comptroller shall, where the Comptroller
revokes or suspends a licence under subsection (7), notify
the Customs broker in writing of the revocation or the
suspension.
      (9) A Customs broker who is dissatisfied with the
decision of the Comptroller under subsection (7) may,
within fifteen working days after the date on which notice
of the decision is given, appeal to the Customs Appeal
Commission under Division Three of Part XXIV.
      (10) The Comptroller may make rules laying down
the conditions under which a Customs broker must operate.
      (11) A person may, where he acts as a Customs
broker on a regular and commercial basis, in addition be


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 108]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    granted the status of authorised economic operator in
                    accordance with section 101.
                          (12) The Customs authority may adopt measures
                    laying down the conditions under which the requirement
                    referred to in subsection (4) may be waived.
                          (13) The Customs authority may adopt measures
                    laying down conditions under which they may decline to
                    recognise a Customs representative or to transact business
                    with a third party and, in cases where the Customs
                    authority declines to transact business with a third party,
                    the Customs authority shall give written notification to the
                    third party of a decision not to transact business.
                          (14) An authorised agent who performs any act on
                    behalf of the owner of any goods shall for the purposes of
                    this Act —
                          (a) be deemed to be the owner of the goods; and
                          (b) assume full responsibility and liability, jointly
                               and severally, with the person or persons on
                               whose behalf he is acting for —
                               (i) the payment of any duties to which the
                                     goods are liable; and
                               (ii) the performance of all acts in respect of the
                                     goods which the owner is required to
                                     perform.
                          (15) For the purposes of this Act, an authorised agent
                    is a representative or a Customs broker appointed by a
                    person to act on his behalf in dealing with the Customs
                    authority and performing the acts and formalities laid down
                    in Customs legislation.
19 of 2016, s.3.          (16) For the purpose of this section, “customs
                    broker” shall include an authorised courier.
Empowerment of             100. (1) When dealing with the Customs authority,
authorised agent.   authorised agents shall state that they are acting on behalf
                    of the person represented and specify whether the Customs
                    representation is direct or indirect.
                           (2) A person who fails to state that they are acting
                    in the name of or on behalf of another person, or who states
                    that they are acting in the name of or on behalf of another
                    person without being empowered to do so, shall be deemed
                    to be acting in their own name and on their own behalf.
                           (3) The Customs authority may require any person
                    stating that they are acting in the name of or on behalf of

STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 109


another person to produce evidence of their powers to act
as an authorised agent except where a person belongs to a
category of persons entitled to act on behalf of another
person.
       (4) The Customs authority may make rules
identifying the categories of persons referred to in
subsection (3).
       101. (1) A person who is established in the Customs       Authorised
territory and who meets the conditions set out in sections       economic
                                                                 operator.
102 and 103 may request the status of authorised economic
operator and the Customs authority shall, if necessary
following consultation with other competent authorities,
grant such status subject to periodic review.
       (2) An authorised economic operator may benefit
from facilitation with regard to Customs controls relating
to security and safety or from simplifications provided for
in accordance with this Act and other Customs legislation.
       (3) The status of an authorised economic operator
granted by Customs authorities of other countries or
territories outside the Customs territory of The Bahamas,
may, subject to sections 102 and 103, be recognised by the
Customs authority, without prejudice to Customs controls.
       (4) The Customs authority shall, on the basis of the
recognition of the status of authorised economic operator
and provided that the requirements relating to a specific
type of simplification provided for under this Act and other
Customs legislation are fulfilled, authorize the operator to
benefit from such simplification.
       (5) The status of authorised economic operator may
be suspended or withdrawn in accordance with conditions
laid down pursuant to subsection (1)(h) of section 103.
       (6) An authorised economic operator shall notify
the Customs authority of all factors arising after that status
is granted which may influence its continuation or content.
       102. The minimum criteria for granting the status of      Granting of
authorised economic operator shall be —                          status of
                                                                 authorised
       (a) an appropriate record of compliance with              economic
            Customs requirements;                                operator.

       (b) a satisfactory system of managing commercial
            and, where appropriate, transport records, which
            allows appropriate Customs control;
       (c) where appropriate, proven financial solvency;

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 110]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (d) where appropriate, practical standards of
                             competence or professional qualifications
                             directly related to the activity carried out; and
                        (e) where applicable, appropriate security and safety
                             standards.
Implementing            103. Pursuant to section 354, the Minister shall make
provisions for
establishing
                  regulations to govern —
authorised              (a) granting of the status of authorised economic
economic
operators.
                             operator;
                        (b) frequency of review of the status of authorised
                             economic operator;
                        (c) granting of authorisations for use of
                             simplifications;
                        (d) identification of Customs officers competent for
                             the granting of such status and authorisations;
                        (e) type and extent of facilitations that may be
                             granted in respect of Customs controls relating
                             to security and safety, taking into account rules
                             adopted by the Customs authority relating to
                             Customs controls to be undertaken outside the
                             Customs territory where an international
                             agreement provides for this;
                        (f) consultation with and provision of information
                             to Customs authorities of other countries and
                             territories outside the Customs territory of the
                             Bahamas;
                        (g) conditions under which a request made by the
                             applicant for an authorisation may be limited to
                             one or more countries;
                        (h) conditions under which the status of authorised
                             economic operator may be suspended or
                             revoked; and
                        (i) conditions under which the requirement of being
                             established in the Customs territory may be
                             waived for specific categories of authorised
                             economic operators, taking into account, in
                             particular, international agreements to which
                             The Bahamas is party.

                      DIVISION THREE - IMPORTATION OF GOODS
Entry of               104. (1) All imported goods shall be entered either
imported goods.   for —


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 111


       (a) home consumption;
       (b) warehousing in a bonded warehouse;
       (c) temporary       admission,  including    inward
            processing; or
       (d) transshipment.
       (2) Subject to any regulations made under section         19 of 2016, s.4.
105, goods that are imported or that are to be imported
shall be entered by the owners of the goods or an
authorised agent —
       (a) by electronic means into a computer or other
            device, as may be prescribed or in such manner
            as the Comptroller may allow; and
       (b) within five days, exclusive of Sundays and
            public holidays, after the commencement of
            discharge, or within such further time as the
            Comptroller may allow.
       (3) The owner of the goods or the authorised agent
shall provide the Customs authority with full particulars
supported by documentary evidence of the goods referred
to in the entry.
      (4) All entries shall be signed either by the owner of
the goods or an authorised agent and the use of electronic
signature is authorised for the purpose of making an entry
under this Act.
      (5) For the purpose of this section, any reference in
an entry that is not worded in accordance with this Act and
that is in contradiction with a reference worded in
accordance with this Act shall be void.
      (6) A person entering goods under this section
shall—
      (a) answer any question asked by a Customs officer
           with respect to the goods; and
      (b) on the request of a Customs officer, present the
           goods to the officer, remove any covering from
           the goods, unload any conveyance or open any
           part of it, or open and unpack any package or
           container that the officer wishes to examine.
      (7) A person entering goods under this section may,
in accordance with any conditions the Customs authority
may impose —
      (a) inspect the goods; or
      (b) draw samples from the goods.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 112]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      (8) The importer shall, where for lack of sufficient
                documentary evidence or information he is unable to
                furnish full particulars of the imported goods to make a
                perfect entry, submit an entry by bill of sight and make and
                subscribe a declaration to that effect on the prescribed bill
                of sight entry and —
                      (a) where the information required to make perfect
                           entry is obtainable by examination of the
                           goods —
                           (i) the bill of sight shall be delivered to the
                                proper Customs officer and upon being
                                signed by him shall be the warrant for the
                                examination of the goods by the importer in
                                the presence of the proper Customs officer;
                           (ii) the importer shall endorse upon the bill of
                                sight the details of his examination and
                                shall, within three working days after the
                                unloading of the goods from the means of
                                transport or within such further period as
                                the proper officer my permit, deliver to the
                                proper officer a perfect entry of the goods
                                together with the bill of sight and the goods
                                shall be dealt with according to such perfect
                                entry and may be delivered or warehoused
                                as the case may be;
                      (b) where the information required to make perfect
                           entry is not obtainable by examination of the
                           goods or any document necessary to make
                           perfect entry is not immediately available,
                           then —
                           (i) the importer shall deliver the bill of sight to
                                the proper Customs officer who may, in the
                                case of goods entered for home




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 113



                consumption, require the owner to deposit,
                in addition to the amount estimated as the
                duty on such goods, such further sum as the
                proper officer may think fit and such
                estimated duty and further sum shall be
                held as a deposit;
          (ii) the bill of sight shall be deemed to be a
                provisional entry and the goods relating
                thereto shall be dealt with according to such
                provisional entry and may be delivered or
                warehoused as the case may be;
          (iii) where the goods are provisionally entered
                for home consumption, the deposit made in
                accordance with subparagraph (i) shall be
                forfeited unless the importer within 90 days
                of the date of the provisional entry, or
                within such further period as the
                Comptroller may allow, produces to the
                proper officer the information or the
                documents required to make a perfect entry
                in respect of the goods and makes such
                perfect entry;
          (iv) where the importer makes perfect entry in
                accordance with the provisions of
                subparagraph (iii) —
                 (aa) if the amount of the deposit is more
                       than the full amount of the duty, the
                       difference shall be refunded to the
                       importer and the balance brought to
                       account as duty;
                 (bb) if the amount of the deposit is equal
                       to or less than the full amount of the
                       duty, the deposit shall be brought to
                       account as duty and the difference, if
                       any, shall thereupon be paid by the
                       importer to the proper officer.
      (9) Notwithstanding subsection (2) —
      (a) goods which are the bona fide personal baggage
          of the passengers or the members of the crew of
          any aircraft or vessel may, subject to any
          regulations, be delivered to such person without
          entry;
      (b) the Customs authority may permit the delivery
          to the importer of any bullion, currency, notes,

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 114]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                              coins or perishable or other goods imported
                              without entry subject to such importer furnishing
                              the necessary entry to the Customs authority
                              within ten working days of the delivery;
                         (c) and subject to section 338, mail bags containing
                              postal articles and goods contained in postal
                              articles in the course of transmission by post
                              may be delivered to an officer of the Post Office
                              without entry.
                         (10) The surplus stores of any aircraft or vessel may,
                   with the permission of the proper officer, be entered for
                   home consumption or for warehousing provided that—
                         (a) if such stores are prohibited or restricted goods,
                              they may only be entered for warehousing; and
                         (b) such stores shall not be further entered or
                              removed from the warehouse otherwise than for
                              exportation.
                         (11) Duty shall become due and payable on goods
                   and goods may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the
                   Customs authority if—
                         (a) default is made in the entry of the goods
                              pursuant to this section; or
                         (b) the goods are not claimed within such period as
                              may be prescribed.
Regulations              105. Pursuant to section 354, the Minister shall, for
relating to the
entry of goods
                   the purposes of this section make regulations —
for importation.         (a) prescribing the conditions under which an entry
                              is deemed to have been made;
                         (b) prescribing the conditions under which an entry
                              is deemed to have been passed;
                         (c) exempting specified goods or goods of a
                              specified class from the requirements of section
                              104(2), subject to such conditions as may be
                              prescribed; and
                         (d) prescribing goods or classes of goods that shall
                              be deemed to have been entered under section
                              104(2) and the circumstances in which and the
                              conditions subject to which those goods shall be
                              so deemed.
Imported goods          106. Goods in respect of which entry has been made
to be dealt with
according to
                   and passed shall forthwith be dealt with in accordance with
entry.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 115


the entry and with the provisions of this Act in respect of
the goods so entered.
       107. (1) The Customs authority may allow the              Cancellation and
amendment of an entry received by the Customs authority          amendments of
                                                                 goods
for the purpose of correcting any entry or any part of an        declarations.
entry, as the case may be, unless —
       (a) the proper officer has informed the owner of the
            goods or its authorised agent of the decision of
            the Customs authority to examine the goods;
       (b) a discrepancy existing in the terms of the
            declaration has been stated by the proper officer;
            or
       (c) the delivery has been authorised by the proper
            officer.
       (2) The Customs authority may accept the
cancellation of an entry for the purpose of preventing
duplication of entries or if it is proven that the goods have
been entered by mistake.
       (3) No cancellation or amendment of an entry by
the Customs authority in accordance with subsections (1)
and (2) shall affect any penalty, liability to seizure, or
criminal liability, already accrued or incurred in respect of
such entry by the person making it.
       (4) Subject to section 182, the Customs authority
may make a refund of duty in accordance with any
cancellation or amendment of an entry under this section.
       (5) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
the Customs authority under subsection (4) may, within
fifteen working days after the date on which notice of the
decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under Division
Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision
made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days
after the date on which notice of the decision is given
appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under Division
Three of Part XXIV.
                                                                 Means of
       108. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, such       transportation
entries shall be made in respect of a means of transport         imported
                                                                 otherwise than as
imported into the Customs territory otherwise than as cargo      cargo.
as the Customs authority may from time to time determine
in relation to any means of transport, or class of means of
transport, by notice published in the Gazette.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 116]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (2) A means of transport imported into the Customs
                    territory otherwise than as cargo shall, for the purpose of
                    making entries in respect of such import, be deemed to
                    have been imported as cargo and unloaded as such on its
                    arrival.
Samples and                109. (1) The importer of goods shall furnish free of
illustrations.      charge such samples, illustrations, drawings, documents, or
                    plans relating to the goods as may be required by a
                    Customs officer for the purposes of analysis, classification,
                    determination of origin, valuation or record.
                           (2) Any sample required to be furnished in
                    accordance with subsection (1) shall normally be as small
                    as possible for the purpose for which it is taken.


                        DIVISION FOUR - TRANSPORTATION WITHIN
                                THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY
Transportation of         110. (1) Except as otherwise permitted by the
imported goods.     Customs authority, no goods subject to the control of the
                    Customs authority shall be placed on or in a means of
                    transport for transportation within the Customs territory
                    until entry has been made in accordance with section 104
                    (2) and release has been granted by a proper officer.
                          (2) The Comptroller may, pursuant to section 8,
                    impose conditions and restrictions with respect to the
                    movement of imported goods between the place of
                    importation and a place, such as an inland clearance depot,
                    designated by the Comptroller for the entry and clearance
                    of such goods.
                          (3) Any condition or restriction imposed under
                    subsection (2) may —
                          (a) require the goods to be moved within such
                               period and by such route as may be specified;
                          (b) require the goods to be carried in a vehicle or a
                               container complying with regulations and
                               secured in such a manner as may be specified;
                               and
                          (c) prohibit, except in such circumstances as may be
                               so specified, the unloading of the vehicle or the
                               container or any interference with its security.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 117


       111. (1) Goods that are subject to the control of the     Removal of
                                                                 goods from
Customs authority shall not be delivered or removed from         Customs
a Customs controlled area except —                               controlled area.
       (a) subject to subsection (3), with the permission of
            a Customs officer after entry has been made and
            passed in the prescribed form and manner;
       (b) pursuant to a permit or other authorisation
            granted by the Customs authority in respect of
            those goods, subject to such conditions as the
            Customs authority may determine; or
       (c) by a Customs officer in the performance of his
            duties under this Act.
       (2) The Customs authority may, in respect of a
permit or other authorisation granted by the Customs
authority under subsection (l)(b), by notice in writing —
       (a) vary or revoke any conditions to which such
            permit is subject;
       (b) revoke imposed conditions and impose new
            conditions; or
       (c) revoke the permit completely.
       (3) Notwithstanding subsection (l)(b), the Customs
authority may revoke any notice of delivery given in
respect of goods while such goods remain subject to the
control of the Customs authority.
       (4) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
the Customs authority under subsection (2) may, within
fifteen working days after the date on which notice of the
decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under Division
Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision
made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days
after the date on which notice of the decision is given
appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under Division
Three of Part XXIV.
       112. (1) Subject to this Act, the Customs authority       Temporary
may permit goods to be temporarily removed from a                removal of goods
                                                                 from Customs
Customs controlled area without payment of duty for such         controlled area.
time and in such quantities as it may approve.
       (2) Goods removed pursuant to subsection (1) shall
remain subject to the control of the Customs authority and
shall be deemed to be within the Customs controlled area
from which they were so removed and the provisions of
this Act shall continue to apply to them accordingly.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 118]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         DIVISION FIVE - EXPORTATION OF GOODS
Entry of goods           113. (1) Subject to any regulations made under
for exportation.   section 114, goods that are exported or that are to be
                   exported from the Customs territory shall be entered in
                   writing by the owner of the goods or an authorised
                   agent —
                         (a) in such form and manner including by electronic
                              means into a computer or other device as may be
                              prescribed; and
                         (b) within such time, as may be prescribed, or
                              within such further time as the Comptroller may
                              allow.
                         (2) A person entering goods under this section
                   shall—
                         (a) answer any question asked by a Customs officer
                              with respect to the goods; and
                         (b) at the request of a Customs officer, present the
                              goods to the officer, remove any covering from
                              the goods, unload any conveyance or open any
                              part of it, or open and unpack any package that
                              the officer wishes to examine.
                         (3) The making of an entry under this section, in the
                   case of goods to be exported under drawback, shall be
                   deemed to be the making of a claim for drawback.
                         (4) No right to drawback shall exist, unless the
                   Customs authority in any particular case otherwise
                   determines, in the case of goods placed on or in a means of
                   transport before entry has been made and passed.
                         (5) Notwithstanding subsection (1), goods which
                   are the bona fide personal baggage of the passengers or the
                   members of the crew of an aircraft or vessel to be put on
                   board the aircraft or the vessel may, subject to any
                   regulations, be exported without entry.
                         (6) Notwithstanding subsection (1) and subject to
                   section 338, mail bags containing postal articles and goods
                   contained in postal articles in the course of transmission by
                   post may be put on board an aircraft or a vessel and
                   exported without entry.
                         (7) The Customs authority may allow the
                   amendment of an entry it receives for the purpose of
                   correcting any entry or any part of an entry, as the case
                   may be, unless —


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 119


      (a) the proper officer has informed the owner of the
           goods or its authorised agent of the decision of
           the Customs authority to examine the goods;
      (b) a discrepancy existing in the terms of the
           declaration has been noted by the proper officer;
           or
      (c) the goods have left the country.
      (8) The Customs authority may accept the
cancellation of an entry for the purpose of preventing
duplication of entries or if it is proven that the goods have
been entered by mistake.
      (9) No cancellation or amendment of an entry by
the Customs authority in accordance with subsections (7)
and (8) shall affect any penalty, liability to seizure, or
criminal liability, already accrued or incurred in respect of
such entry by the person making it.
      (10) Subsections (3), (4) and (5) of section 104 shall
apply to this section.
      114. Pursuant to section 354, the Minister shall, for      Regulations
the purposes of this section, make regulations —                 relating to the
                                                                 entry of goods
      (a) prescribing the conditions under which an entry        for exportation.
           is deemed to have been made;
      (b) prescribing the conditions under which an entry
           is deemed to have been passed;
      (c) exempting specified goods or goods of a
           specified class from the requirements of section
           113(1), subject to such conditions as may be
           prescribed;
      (d) prescribing goods or classes of goods that shall
           be deemed to have been entered under section
           113(1) and the circumstances in which, and the
           conditions subject to which, those goods shall be
           so deemed.
      115. (1) The person making the entry in the case of        Goods for
goods that have been entered for export shall forthwith          exportation to be
                                                                 dealt with
export the goods to a point outside the Customs territory in     according to
accordance with the entry and the provisions of this Act.        entry.

     (2) Where goods entered for export are not exported
according to the entry, the person making the entry shall




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 120]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      immediately give notice to the Customs authority of the
                      failure to export and the reasons for it and, in any such
                      case, the Customs authority may —
                             (a) cancel or amend the entry; or
                             (b) allow the goods to be released from the control
                                  of the Customs authority.
                             (3) Notwithstanding subsection (1), where the
                      licence conditions of a Customs controlled area allow, an
                      export entry may be made in the case of goods removed
                      from that area for sales made for delivery to persons on
                      their arrival in the Customs territory from a point outside
                      the Customs territory.
Loading of goods             116. (1) Goods shall only be loaded on an aircraft or
for export.           a vessel at a Customs place.
                             (2) Except as otherwise permitted by the Customs
                      authority, goods shall not be loaded for export until entry
                      has been made and passed in the prescribed form and
                      manner.
                             (3) Subject to sections 89 and 90, no goods shall be
                      put on board any vessel departing to a point outside of the
                      Customs territory before entry outwards of such vessel.
Keeping goods in             117. (1) Goods that are to be exported may be
temporary
storage facilities.
                      deposited in an approved transit shed pending clearance.
                            (2) Where goods deposited in an approved transit
                      shed have not been entered within such time as may be
                      prescribed, or within such further time as the Comptroller
                      may allow, the goods may be taken to a Customs
                      warehouse and shall be dealt with in accordance with
                      section 200.
Goods for export            118. No goods loaded for export shall, without the
not to be landed.     permission of a Customs officer, be landed except at a
                      point outside the Customs territory.
Time of                     119. For the purposes of this Act, the time of
exportation.          exportation shall be the time when the exporting means of
                      transport leaves the last Customs place at which that means
                      of transport calls immediately before proceeding to a point
                      outside the Customs territory.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 121


           DIVISION SIX - EXAMINATION AND
                 VERIFICATION OF GOODS
                                                                 Rules and
      120. (1) The Customs authority may, for the purposes       conditions
of this Act and any other legislation that it may apply,         applying to the
require, after goods have been entered, the examination of       examination of
                                                                 goods.
such goods or of any part of them.
      (2) An examination pursuant to subsection (1) shall
take place at a Customs place during the working hours of
the Customs Department or within such further time as
may be allowed by the Comptroller.
      (3) The examination of goods may, in certain cases
and subject to such conditions and restrictions as the proper
officer may determine, take place at the premises of the
importer or exporter, or at any other place the proper
officer thinks fit.
      (4) The owner of the goods or his authorised agent
shall be responsible for —
      (a) the transportation of the goods to the place
            designated by the proper officer for the
            examination;
      (b) the removal of any covering from the goods;
      (c) the unloading of any conveyance or the opening
            of any part of it; and
      (d) the opening and unpacking of any package that
            the officer wishes to examine.
      (5) All expenses and charges incurred for the
operation of the examination shall be borne by the importer
or the exporter, or the authorised agent, if any.
      (6) Goods shall be examined in the presence of the
owner of the goods or the authorised agent, if any.
      (7) The Customs authority shall, where the owner
of the goods or the authorised agent is not present to attend
the examination of the goods, give notice in writing of the
intention of the Customs authority to commence the
examination of the goods to the owner of the goods or the
authorised agent.
      (8) The Customs authority may, where no response
to a notice under subsection (7) is given to the Customs
authority within seven hours, ask a Magistrate to designate
a person to represent the defaulting owner of the goods and
attend the examination.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 122]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Settlement of               121. (1) The owner or authorised agent may, within
disputes arising
from the
                     fifteen working days after the proper officer’s
examination of       determination, refer the matter to the Comptroller for a
goods and            redetermination under Division Two of Part XXIV
concerning
classification,
                     where —
origin and                  (a) the proper officer, at the time of the examination
valuation.
                                 of the goods, revises the terms of the entry
                                 relating to the tariff classification, origin or
                                 valuation of the goods; and
                            (b) the owner of the goods or his authorised agent,
                                 as the case may be, disagrees with the proper
                                 officer’s determination.
                            (2) The Comptroller shall in the case of a referral
                     under subsection (1) promptly review the matter and issue
                     a redetermination.
                            (3) The owner or his authorised agent may, if
                     dissatisfied with the Comptroller’s redetermination under
                     subsection (2), appeal within fifteen working days of the
                     redetermination to the Customs Appeal Commission under
                     Division Three of Part XXIV.
                            (4) No application for redetermination may be made
                     to the Comptroller in respect of an advance binding ruling
                     made pursuant to section 221.
Application of              122. (1) Duties, taxes, or other Customs measures
the results of the
examination of
                     imposed under this Act or other Customs legislation shall
goods.               be applied on the basis of—
                            (a) a determination of the proper officer following
                                 examination of goods; and
                            (b) any revision or other modification pursuant to an
                                 appeal of such determination by —
                                 (i) the Comptroller;
                                 (ii) the Customs Appeal Commission; or
                                 (iii) the Court.
                            (2) Customs measures under this Act shall, where
                     the Customs authority does not require or waives its right
                     to the examination of the goods entered, be applied to the
                     goods on the basis of the terms of the entry as declared by
                     the owner or its authorised representative.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 123


           DIVISION SEVEN - CUSTOMS SEALS
                                                                 Appointment of
    122A. (1) The Minister shall for the purposes of this        Customs Seal.
Act appoint, by notice published in the Gazette, a Customs       23 of 2013, s.11.
seal approved by the Customs Authority.
      (2) The Customs seal appointed by the Minister
shall be officially and judicially noticed.
      123. (1) A Customs officer may, pursuant to this           Customs seals to
section, apply or reapply Customs seals to packages of           be applied to
                                                                 goods for
goods to be exported.                                            exportation.
      (2) The Customs seal shall be applied incidental to,
and immediately after, the exercise by any officer of a
power under this Act to examine or search for goods of any
kind.
      124. (1) Sealed goods are, from the time when a            Conditions
Customs seal is applied to the package until the exportation     applying to
                                                                 sealed goods.
of the goods to a point outside the Customs territory,
subject to the control of the Customs authority.
      (2) No person, with the exception of a Customs
officer, may alter, remove, damage, dispose of, or
otherwise interfere with a Customs seal applied to a
package of goods.

        DIVISION EIGHT - CUSTOMS-APPROVED
               SECURE EXPORTS SCHEMES
      125. (1) The Comptroller may, on an application in         Comptroller may
writing to the Comptroller by a person responsible for the       approve secure
                                                                 exports scheme.
carriage, handling, transportation, or exportation of goods
for export, approve such person as a secure exporter under
a Customs-approved secure exports scheme that conforms
to section 127.
      (2) The Comptroller shall notify an applicant
promptly in writing of his decision relative to an
application made under subsection (1).
      (3) The Comptroller may grant an approval under
subsection (1) subject to such conditions as the
Comptroller may specify and such approval shall take
effect either on the day after the date on which it is granted
or on a later date specified in the approval.
      (4) The Comptroller may revoke or amend an
approval granted under this section by notice in writing to
the relevant exporter and such notice shall specify the date
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 124]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    on or after which the revocation takes effect or any
                    conditions to which the amendment of the approval is
                    subject.
                          (5) Subsections (1) to (4) shall apply, mutatis
                    mutandis, to an application for an amendment to a secure
                    exports scheme.
                          (6) A secure exporter may apply to the Comptroller
                    for revocation of an approval of a secure exports scheme
                    provided that all goods already subject to the scheme shall
                    have been exported before the revocation takes effect.
                          (7) An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision
                    of the Comptroller under this section may, within fourteen
                    working days after the date on which notice of the decision
                    is given, appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under
                    Division Three of Part XXIV.
Purpose of secure         126. The purpose of a secure exports scheme shall be
exports scheme.     to help to ensure that goods to be exported under the
                    scheme are —
                          (a) packaged securely and with no other goods; and
                          (b) conveyed securely and without interference to
                               the place of shipment and shipped.
Matters to be             127. (1) A secure exports scheme shall specify how
specified in
secure exports
                    the goods to be exported under the scheme are to be
scheme.             packed, including —
                          (a) the secure package to be used;
                          (b) the seal or markings to be applied to the package
                               as soon as it is secured to —
                               (i) show that, when it was secured, the package
                                    solely contained such goods secured in an
                                    approved way; and
                               (ii) help identify tampering or interference with
                                    the package after it is secured.
                          (2) A secure exports scheme shall specify any
                    conditions required by the Comptroller as to —
                          (a) the persons who are to pack the goods and the
                               security checks to be applied to such persons;
                          (b) the conditions in which packing is to occur,
                               including the area or areas in which packing is
                               to occur, and the controls on the entry and exit
                               of persons and goods to such area or areas;



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 125


      (c) any other requirements relating to how the
           goods are to be packed.
      (3) A secure exports scheme shall further specify
how, on completion of the packing of the goods, the goods
are to be conveyed to the place of shipment and shipped,
including any conditions required by the Customs authority
as to —
      (a) persons who are to convey the goods and the
           security checks to be applied to those persons;
      (b) the manner in which the goods are to be
           conveyed; or
      (c) any place or places of security en route to the
           place of shipment in which the goods are to be
           stored in the course of being conveyed to the
           place of shipment and shipped.
      128. A secure exports scheme shall include express         Acknowledge-
acknowledgements by the secure exporter concerned                ments required in
                                                                 secure exports
that —                                                           scheme.
      (a) the goods to be exported under the scheme are,
           from the time when first secured in a Customs-
           approved secure package until exportation of the
           goods to a point outside the Customs territory,
           subject to the control of the Customs authority;
      (b) the powers of detention and search under section
           29(4) may be exercised in respect of a means of
           transport in the Customs territory if there are
           suspected to be, in or on the means of transport,
           secure goods subject to this Division;
      (c) a Customs officer may, under section 32(2),
           question about any cargo destined to be exported
           from the Customs territory any or all of the
           following persons —
           (i) a person who is the owner or operator of a
                means of transport that a Customs officer
                has reasonable cause to suspect has in or on
                it, or has within the previous 72 hours had
                in or on it, secure goods subject to this
                Division in a Customs-approved secure
                package;
           (ii) a person who is the owner or occupier of
                premises that a Customs officer has
                reasonable cause to suspect have in or on
                them, or have within the previous 72 hours

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 126]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                                  had in or on them, secure goods subject to
                                  this Division in a Customs-approved secure
                                  package; or
                            (iii) a person employed by a person described in
                                  sub-paragraph (i) or (ii) of paragraph (c);
                                  and
                        (d) the powers in section 38(7) may be exercised in
                            respect of goods that are, or are suspected to be,
                            secure goods subject to this Division in a
                            Customs-approved secure package.
Goods to be               129. (1) Goods to be exported under a secure exports
exported under
secure exports
                   scheme may be exported under drawback.
scheme may be
exported under
                          (2) All conditions as may be prescribed for allowing
drawback.          drawback of duty shall, where goods to be exported under
                   a secure exports scheme are exported under drawback, be
                   satisfied even though satisfying such conditions may
                   involve conveying or handling or storing the goods in a
                   way not specified in the scheme.
Application of            130. (1) Nothing in this Act prevents a Customs seal
Customs seals to
goods to be
                   from being applied to a Customs-approved secure package
exported under     after an approved seal or markings of the kind referred to
secure exports     in section 127(l)(b) have been applied to the package in
scheme.            accordance with the relevant secure exports scheme.
                          (2) The application of a Customs seal to a Customs-
                   approved secure package shall not affect in any way the
                   validity of obligations applying to goods to be exported
                   under a secure exports scheme.
Review of secure          131. The Customs authority may, at any time, review
exports scheme.    the operation of any Customs- approved secure exports
                   scheme.


                      DIVISION NINE - GOODS FOR TRANSSHIPMENT
Transshipment.           132. (1) Subject to this Act, and to the furnishing of
                   such security as the proper officer may require, goods may
                   be transshipped from the means of transport in which they
                   are imported, either —
                         (a) directly to the aircraft or vessel in which they
                              are to be exported; or
                         (b) with the permission of the proper officer and
                              subject to such conditions as he may impose, to
                              another aircraft or vessel and thereafter to the


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 127


           means of transport in which such goods are to be
           exported.
      (2) No security shall be required in respect of the
transshipment of any goods from the Freeport Container
Port, appointed as a port under section 6 of the Old Act,
and situated on the island of Grand Bahama.

                      PART VIII
                   COASTING TRADE

       133. (1) Subject to this Part —                           Definition of
                                                                 coasting trade.
       (a) the carriage of goods by sea or by air from one
            part of the Customs territory to another part of
            the Customs territory shall be deemed to be
            coasting trade;
       (b) any vessel or aircraft whilst employed in
            coasting trade shall be deemed to be a coasting
            vessel or coasting aircraft;
       (c) any voyage by a vessel or an aircraft, whether
            laden or in ballast, from one part of the Customs
            territory to another part of the Customs territory
            shall be deemed to be a coastwise voyage; and
       (d) Goods carried in the coasting trade shall be          23 of 2013, s. 12.
            deemed to be coastwise cargo.
       (2) The Comptroller may, if any doubt arises as to
what constitutes a carriage by sea, prescribe in what cases
the trade by water from one place in the Customs territory
to another in the Customs territory shall be deemed a
carriage by sea within the meaning of any Customs
enactment.
       (3) Goods shall not be carried in a coasting vessel
or aircraft except such as shall be loaded to be carried
coastwise at some port or place in the Customs territory.
       134. (1) Notwithstanding any provision in any             Provisions
Customs enactment to the contrary, the proper officer may        relating to
                                                                 vessels and
permit a vessel or aircraft to convey goods from any             aircraft from
Customs place at which the vessel or aircraft partially          places outside the
discharges its cargo, or loads cargo for a foreign place, to     Customs
                                                                 territory.
its place or places of destination within the Customs
territory without being deemed a coasting vessel or aircraft
where —
       (a) the vessel or aircraft arrives in the Customs
            territory from a place outside the Customs
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 128]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                              territory having on board cargo intended to be
                              delivered at more than one Customs place in the
                              Customs territory; or
                        (b) the vessel or aircraft arrives in the Customs
                              territory from a place outside the Customs
                              territory intending to load cargo for a foreign
                              place at more than one Customs place in
                              Customs territory.
                        (2) Goods referred to in subsection (1) shall be
                  completely separated from the inward cargo still on board,
                  to the satisfaction of the proper officer.
                        (3) A vessel or an aircraft engaged in conveying
                  goods only from one Customs controlled area within the
                  Customs territory to another Customs controlled area
                  within the Customs territory shall not, by reason thereof, be
                  deemed a coasting vessel or coasting aircraft within the
                  meaning of section 133.
Limits on               135. (1) Subject to subsection (2), goods not yet
coasting trade.   entered for importation, and goods for exportation, shall
                  not be carried by way of coasting trade in any vessel or
                  aircraft used for that purpose.
                        (2) The Comptroller may, subject to such conditions
                  and restrictions as he thinks fit, permit —
                        (a) a coasting vessel or aircraft to carry goods by
                              way of coasting trade notwithstanding that the
                              vessel or aircraft is also carrying goods brought
                              in it from a place outside the Customs territory
                              and not yet entered in the Customs territory
                              without being treated as a coasting vessel or a
                              coasting aircraft;
                        (b) goods brought by another vessel or aircraft to a
                              place in the Customs territory from a place
                              outside the Customs territory that are consigned
                              to and intended to be delivered to another place
                              in the Customs territory to be transferred before
                              entry of the goods has been made to a coasting
                              vessel or a coasting aircraft for carriage by way
                              of coasting trade to that other place; or
                        (c) a vessel or aircraft that has begun to load goods
                              for exportation or for use as stores on a voyage
                              to a destination outside the Customs territory to
                              carry goods by way of coasting trade until that
                              loading has been completed.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 129


       136. (1) Subject to this section and unless the           Clearance of
Comptroller otherwise permits, the person in charge or the       coasting vessels
                                                                 and aircraft.
owner of the means of transport, as the case may be, shall
not cause a coasting vessel or coasting aircraft to depart
from a Customs place in the Customs territory before the
person in charge or the owner of the means of transport, as
the case may be, has submitted to the proper officer a
declaration giving an account of the goods carried in that
vessel or aircraft.
       (2) The declaration under subsection (1) shall be in
such form and manner and containing such particulars as
the Comptroller may direct and, when signed by the proper
officer, shall serve as the clearance of that vessel or
aircraft.
       (3) The master or commander of a vessel or aircraft
shall, where no Customs officer is stationed at the place
where a declaration is required to be produced under sub-
section (1), consult a Police officer stationed at that place.
       (4) The Comptroller may, on the application of the
person in charge or the owner of the means of transport, as
the case may be, and subject to such conditions and
restrictions as he thinks fit to impose, grant a general
clearance for a coasting vessel or aircraft and any goods
carried in it.
       (5) The Comptroller may, by notice in writing
delivered to the person in charge or the owner of the means
of transport, as the case may be, or to any member of the
crew on board the vessel or aircraft, revoke at any time a
general clearance granted under subsection (4).
       137. The carriage of passengers, officers, and crew
coastwise, whether or not in a coasting vessel or aircraft,
shall be subject to the prescribed regulations.
       138. (1) The master of a coasting vessel, and the         Cargo book.
commander of a coasting aircraft, shall keep a cargo book
in such form and manner and containing such particulars as
may be prescribed.
       (2) The master of a coasting vessel, or the
commander of a coasting aircraft, shall upon a demand
made by the proper officer produce the cargo book of that
vessel or aircraft for inspection.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 130]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          (3) Subject to subsection (4), the person in charge
                    or the owner of the means of transport, as the case may be,
                    shall —
                          (a) where goods have been loaded onto or unloaded
                              from a coasting vessel or a coasting aircraft at a
                              place in the Customs territory, produce to the
                              proper officer, before such vessel or aircraft
                              departs from that place, the cargo book of such
                              vessel or aircraft;
                          (b) where a coasting vessel or a coasting aircraft
                              arrives at a place in the Customs territory where
                              goods are to be unloaded, produce to the proper
                              officer, before any goods are unloaded, the
                              cargo book of such vessel or aircraft.
                           (4) A vessel or aircraft may, where no Customs
                    officer is stationed at a place referred to in subsection (3),
                    depart from that place, or unload, and the cargo book shall
                    be produced to a proper officer at the first place the vessel
                    or aircraft arrives at where a Customs officer is stationed.
Examination of             139. (1) The proper officer may examine goods
goods in coasting
vessels.
                    carried or to be carried in a coasting vessel —
                           (a) at any time while they are on board the vessel;
                                or
                           (b) at any place in the Customs territory where the
                                goods have been brought for shipment in a
                                coasting vessel or unloaded from a coasting
                                vessel.
                           (2) For purposes of subsection (1), a proper officer
                    may require any container to be opened or unpacked by or
                    at the expense of the owner of the goods.
                           (3) The proper officer may —
                           (a) board and search a coasting vessel at any time
                                during its voyage; and
                           (b) at any time require any document that should
                                properly be on board a coasting vessel to be
                                produced or brought to the proper officer for
                                examination.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 131



                     PART IX
             GOODS FOR PERSONAL USE

      140. (1) Goods may, subject to any regulations, be         Exemption from
imported in the Customs territory exempt of duties and           Customs duties
                                                                 of goods
taxes where —                                                    imported for
      (a) they are contained in the personal baggage of the      personal use.
           passengers, or members of the crew, of any
           aircraft or vessel arriving from a point outside of
           the Customs territory;
      (b) they are of a non-commercial nature within the
           limits of the duty-free allowance; and
      (c) there are no material indications to suggest the
           goods are part of commercial traffic.
       (2) Goods which are the bona fide belongings of the
passengers, or members of the crew, of any aircraft or
vessel arriving from a point outside of the Customs
territory may, subject to any regulations, be imported in the
Customs territory exempt of duties and taxes.
       (3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to any
goods the importation of which is prohibited under the
provision of any law for the time being in force in The
Bahamas.
       141. (1) Goods may, subject to any regulations, be        Exemption from
exported from the Customs territory exempt of duties and         duties and taxes
                                                                 of goods
taxes where —                                                    exported for
       (a) they are contained in the personal baggage of the     personal use.
            passengers, or members of the crew, of any
            aircraft or vessel departing from the Customs
            territory to a point outside of the Customs
            territory;
       (b) they are of a non-commercial nature within the
            limits of the duty-free allowance; and
       (c) there are no material indications to suggest the
            goods are part of commercial traffic.
       (2) Goods which are the bona fide belongings of the
passengers, or members of the crew, of any aircraft or
vessel departing from the Customs territory to a point
outside of the Customs territory may, subject to any
regulations, be exported from the Customs territory exempt
of duties and taxes.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 132]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to any
                     goods the exportation of which is prohibited under the
                     provision of any law for the time being in force in The
                     Bahamas.

                                        PART X
                                  CONDITIONS FOR THE
                             APPLICATION OF THE TARIFF ACT
                              DIVISION ONE - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Application of              142. (1) The Tariff Act shall apply to goods imported
Tariff Act.          in the Customs territory or exported from the Customs
Ch. 295.             territory.
19 of 2016, s. 5.           (2) Where the Minister determines that imported
                     goods, are being imported in such increased quantities and
                     under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause —
                            (a) serious injury to the industry of The Bahamas
                                 producing like or directly competitive products
                                 in the territory of The Bahamas;
                            (b) disturbances in a sector of the economy,
                                 particularly where these disturbances produce
                                 major social problems, or difficulties which
                                 could bring about serious deterioration in the
                                 economic situation of The Bahamas; or
                            (c) disturbances in the markets of like or directly
                                 competitive agricultural products,
                     he may, by Order published in the Gazette and pursuant to
                     any legislation for the time being in force in relation to
                     safeguard measures, impose safeguard measures of limited
                     duration, solely to counteract the effects of the injurious
                     imports, in the form of increased tariff rates or tariff rate
                     quotas on those imports which in his determination has
                     resulted in an injury referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (c).
23 of 2013, s. 13.          (3) For the purposes of this section, the Minister
                     shall make regulations pursuant to section 354 to determine
                     the necessary factors that shall be present in order for an
                     injury determination to be made together with other
                     considerations consistent with the international trade
                     obligations of The Bahamas that may be taken into account
                     in arriving at such determination and the procedures to be
                     followed in arriving at such determinations.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                              LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 133



      143. Imported or exported goods shall be subject to        Application of
                                                                 Tariff Act to
the Tariff Act as they are presented at the time of their        goods as
importation in the Customs territory or their exportation        presented.
from the Customs territory.                                      Ch. 295.



      DIVISION TWO - TARIFF CLASSIFICATION
                        OF GOODS
      144. The tariff classification of goods, or classes of     Use of the
goods, shall be effected on the basis of the descriptions and    Harmonised
                                                                 System.
coding elements given in by the Harmonised System.
      145. Disputes concerning tariff classification of          Appeals of
goods may, within fifteen working days after the date on         classification
                                                                 decisions.
which notice of the decision is given, be appealed to the
Comptroller under Division Two of Part XXIV and, if the
appellant is dissatisfied with the decision made by the
Comptroller, may within fifteen working days after the
date on which notice of the decision is given be appealed to
the Customs Appeal Commission under Division Three of
Part XXIV.

      DIVISION THREE - VALUATION OF GOODS
       146. (1) Every person who makes an entry of goods         Declarant to
shall, on making the entry, specify in the prescribed form       specify Customs
                                                                 value on goods
and manner the customs value of the goods, determined in         declaration.
accordance with the Third Schedule.
       (2) Every importer or exporter, or authorised agent
of an importer or exporter, who makes a determination of
customs value of goods pursuant to subsection (1) shall —
       (a) keep the documents, records, and information in
            respect of that entry in such manner and for such
            period as is required by section 70 and any
            regulations made for the purposes of that
            section; and
       (b) when required by the Customs authority,
            produce those documents, records, and
            information for the purpose of establishing the
            accuracy of the customs value.
       147. (1) The Customs authority may amend a                Amendment of
customs value, and such amended customs value shall be           customs value.
the Customs value for the purposes of this Act, if the
Customs authority is satisfied, whether as the result of an
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 134]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    investigation or an audit or examination carried out by the
                    Customs authority or for any other reason, that a
                    determination of customs value made under section 146(1)
                    in respect of goods is —
                          (a) inconsistent with the Third Schedule; or
                          (b) for any other reason, incorrect.
                          (2) Notice in writing shall be given to the declarant
                    of —
                          (a) an amended customs value made pursuant to
                               clause (1); and
                          (b) the basis for the amended customs value and,
                               where applicable, the provisions of the Third
                               Schedule that are relevant to the amended
                               customs value.
                          (3) Subsection (1) applies whether or not the goods
                    have been released from the control of the Customs
                    authority or whether or not any duty assessed has been
                    paid.
                          (4) An importer or exporter who is dissatisfied with
                    a decision of the Customs authority under this section may,
                    within fifteen working days after the date on which notice
                    of the decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under
                    Division Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the
                    decision made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen
                    working days after the date on which notice of the decision
                    is given appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under
                    Division Three of Part XXIV.
Implementing              148. The Customs authority may adopt measures
provisions.         laying down the rules for the determination of the Customs
                    value in specific cases and with regard to goods for which
                    a Customs debt is incurred after the use of a special
                    procedure.
Foreign currency.         149. (1) Where an amount that is required under this
                    Act to be taken into account for the purpose of assessing
                    duty or for any other purpose is not an amount in
                    Bahamian currency, the amount to be so taken into account
                    shall be the equivalent amount in Bahamian currency in
                    accordance with a fair rate of exchange determined and
                    notified by the Customs authority by such method as may
                    be prescribed.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 135



     (2) Where an amount is required to be converted
into Bahamian currency pursuant to subsection (1), that
amount shall be converted —
     (a) in the case of goods in respect of which a goods
         declaration has been made, at the rate applying
         as at the date of the making of the first goods
         declaration, not being a goods declaration for
         removal, for those goods;
     (b) in the case of other goods, at the rate applying as
         at the date of the first determination of customs
         value of Customs duty of those goods.

    DIVISION FOUR – ORIGIN AND PREFERENTIAL
                    TARIFF PROVISIONS
       150. (1) For the purpose of determining the origin of     Rules for the
goods and unless otherwise stated, the following criteria        determination of
                                                                 Origin.
shall apply —
       (a) goods originating in a country shall be those
            wholly obtained or produced in that country;
       (b) goods whose production involved more than one
            country shall be deemed to originate in the
            country where they underwent their last,
            substantial, economically justified, processing or
            working in an undertaking equipped for that
            purpose and resulting in the manufacture of a
            new product or representing an important stage
            of manufacture.
       (2) The Minister shall, pursuant to section 354,
make regulations for the uniform interpretation, application
and administration of rules to govern the determination of
whether goods originate in non-preferential Customs
territories, and of other countries entitled to most-favoured
nation status in The Bahamas, for the purposes of
applying —
       (a) the Tariff Act, with the exception of—                  Ch. 295.
            (i) preferential tariff measures contained in
                 agreements which The Bahamas has
                 concluded with certain countries or
                 territories or groups of such countries or
                 territories; and
            (ii) preferential tariff measures adopted
                 unilaterally by The Bahamas in respect of

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 136]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                                 certain countries or territories or groups of
                                 such countries or territories;
                       (b) measures, other than tariff measures, established
                            by The Bahamas and governing specific fields
                            relating to trade in goods; and
                       (c) other legislation in force in The Bahamas
                            relating to the origin of goods.
                       (3) The Minister shall, in the case of goods eligible
                to benefit from preferential measures adopted unilaterally
                by The Bahamas in respect of certain countries or
                territories or groups of such countries or territories, make
                regulations pursuant to section 354 setting out the rules on
                preferential origin applying to these countries or territories
                or groups of countries or territories.
                       (4) Regulations under subsection (3) respecting the
                determination of the origin of goods shall provide for a
                determination subject to such conditions as may be
                specified of whether goods, the whole or a portion of
                which are produced outside a country or a territory,
                originate or do not originate, as the case may be, in that
                country or territory for the purposes of this Act and any
                regulations.
                       (5) The rules governing the determination of origin
                shall, in the case of goods eligible to benefit from
                preferential tariff measures contained in international trade
                agreements which The Bahamas has concluded with
                countries or territories, or groups of such countries or
                territories, pursuant to Article XXIV of the GATT 1994, be
                those set out in the Fourth Schedule.
                       (6) The Customs authority may, where a place of
                origin has been indicated in the entry pursuant to the rules
                in subsections (3) or (5), require the importer to provide
                proof of origin for the imported goods.
                      (7) The Customs authority may, where proof of
                origin of goods is provided pursuant to this Act or other
                Customs legislation, require in the event of reasonable
                doubt such additional evidence as it determines is
                necessary in order to ensure that the determination of
                origin complies with the rules laid down in this Act and
                other Customs legislation.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 137



      151. (1) Goods shall, in order to benefit from the          Conditions
                                                                  precedent to
preferential duty measures referred to in section 150(3),         entry of goods at
comply with the rules laid down in the regulations                preferential rates
prescribed by the Minister pursuant to section 354.               of duty.
                                                                  23 of 2013, s. 14.
      (2) Goods shall, in order to benefit from the
preferential tariff measures referred to in section 150(5),
comply with the rules on preferential origin as laid down in
the Fourth Schedule.
       (3) The Customs authority may, where it is claimed
in respect of any goods that they are entitled under this Act
or any other legislation or international trade agreement to
be entered at a preferential rate of duty, require the claim to
be verified at the time of entry or at any subsequent time,
including any time after the goods have ceased to be
subject to the control of the Customs authority.
       (4) Goods in respect of which a claim for
preferential treatment has been made shall not be entered
for such treatment where —
       (a) the Customs authority requires the claim for
            preferential treatment to be verified at the time
            of entry of the goods; and
       (b) the claim is not verified to the satisfaction of the
            Customs authority at such time.
       152. (1) If the Customs authority determines,              Unsubstantiated
whether as the results of an investigation pursuant to            and incorrect
                                                                  preference
section 42 or an audit or examination pursuant to section         claims.
46, or for any other reason, that the country of which the
goods are the produce or the manufacture cannot be
ascertained because no evidence can be provided by the
importer, or the available evidence is inconclusive as to
that country, the goods shall be deemed, for the purpose of
this Act or any other law, to be subject to the normal rates
of duty set out in the Tariff Act.                                 Ch. 295.

       (2) The Customs authority shall, if a claim for
preferential treatment is denied, issue a written decision to
this effect to the importer.
       (3) An importer who is dissatisfied with a decision
of the Customs authority under this section may, within
fifteen working days after the date on which notice of the
decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under Division
Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision
made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 138]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   after the date on which notice of the decision is given
                   appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under Division
                   Three of Part XXIV.
Cooperation in           153. (1) The Customs authority shall, for the purpose
Customs
authorities
                   of the proper application of the rules of origin provisions
(international     set out in the Fourth Schedule, assist the Customs
administrative     authorities of other Economic Partnership Agreement
assistance).
Fourth Schedule.
                   signatories in verifying the authenticity and accuracy of
                   information in movement certificates, invoice declarations
                   or supplier’s declarations filed by economic operators.
                         (2) The assistance to be provided pursuant to
                   subsection (1) shall be provided by the Customs authority
Fourth Schedule.   in conformity with the Fourth Schedule and the Customs
                   authority may enter into such agreements with foreign
                   Customs authorities as may be necessary in the areas of
                   administrative cooperation and mutual assistance.
                         (3) The Customs authority shall, upon request of a
                   foreign Customs authority, furnish to the foreign Customs
                   authority such relevant information as it is able to obtain
                   concerning the conditions under which goods that are the
                   object of the request have been produced or manufactured
                   and the observance of applicable rules of origin within the
                   Customs territory.
                         (4) The Customs authority shall, when assisting a
                   foreign Customs authority under this section, have the
                   power to request any evidence and carry out any
                   examination of the exporter’s records or other documents
                   or records it considers appropriate and necessary.

                                           PART XI
                                           DUTIES
                              DIVISION ONE - ASSESSMENT AND
                                     RECOVERY OF DUTY
Duty on imported         154. (1) The duty on all goods imported or exported
goods a Crown
debt.
                   constitutes, immediately on importation or exportation of
                   the goods, a Customs debt which is a debt due to the
                   Crown.
                        (2) Duty under subsection (1) shall be owed by the
                   importer or exporter of the goods and, if more than one,
                   whether at or at any time after the time of importation or
                   exportation, then jointly and severally by all of them.
                        (3) Subject to this Act, a Customs debt becomes due
                   and payable when —

STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 139


      (a) goods have been entered in accordance with
            section 104 and the entry has been passed for
            home consumption;
      (b) goods have been entered in accordance with
            section 113 and the entry has been passed;
      (c) goods have been wrongfully landed or otherwise
            dealt with without having been entered pursuant
            to section 104 or section 113; or
      (d) an offence has been committed against this Act
            and regulations in respect of such goods.
      (4) A Customs debt is recoverable by action at the
suit of the Customs authority on behalf of the Crown.
      (5) The right to recover duty as a debt due to the
Crown is not affected by the fact that —
      (a) the goods have ceased to be subject to the
            control of the Customs authority;
      (b) a bond or other security has been given for the
            payment of duty; or
      (c) no proper assessment of duty has been made
            under this Act or that a deficient assessment of
            duty has been made.
      (6) The Customs authority may, subject to such
terms and conditions as it may impose, approve the
deferral by any person, organization, class of persons, or
class of organizations, of the payment of duty due under
this section and, for that purpose, may determine a duty
accounting period, and may suspend or withdraw that
approval, or vary any term or condition under which the
approval is given, or vary the duty accounting period.
      (7) Where the Customs authority makes a decision
under subsection (6), the persons or class of persons
affected shall be advised of the decision by notice in
writing.
      (8) All goods specified in the inward report of any
means of transport shall be presumed to have been
imported, unless the contrary is proven.
       (9) All goods specified in the outward report of any
means of transport shall be presumed to have been
exported, unless the contrary is proven.
       (10) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
the Customs authority under subsection (6) may, within
fifteen working days after the date on which notice of the
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 140]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT




                  decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under Division
                  Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision
                  made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days
                  after the date on which notice of the decision is given
                  appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under Division
                  Three of Part XXIV.
                         (11) The minimum amount of duty payable on goods
                  shall be five Bahamian Dollars and any duty below the
                  prescribed amount shall not be collected.
                         (12) Goods liable to import duty —
                         (a) which have been imported or taken out of bond
                              free of import duty, or at a reduced rate of
                              import duty, in accordance with any Customs
                              law; and
                         (b) which have been subsequently disposed of or
                              treated in any manner inconsistent with the
                              conditions on or purposes for which they were
                              granted relief from import duty,
                  shall, unless the Minister otherwise directs, be liable upon
                  such disposal or treatment as described in paragraph (b) to
                  import duty at the full rate applicable to goods of that class
                  or description at the time of such disposal or treatment.
                         (13) The person responsible for their disposal shall,
                  where it is proposed to dispose of goods to which
                  subsection (12) applies, furnish the Comptroller with the
                  particulars of the proposed disposal and, unless the
                  Minister otherwise directs, cause the import duty on the
                  goods to be paid.
                         (14) Goods to which subsection (12) applies shall,
                  where such goods are disposed of or dealt with without
                  payment of import duty to which they are liable, be liable
                  to forfeiture.
                       (15) A person who knowingly disposes of or acquires
                  any goods to which subsection (12) applies without
                  payment of the import duty to which such goods are liable
                  commits an offence.
Additional duty        155. (1) Where any duty, the payment of which has
imposed.          been deferred in accordance with section 154(6), remains
                  unpaid by the due date for payment, there shall be imposed
                  an additional duty of Prime Rate of the amount of duty
                  unpaid by the due date.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 141


     (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Customs
authority may, in its sole discretion, remit or refund the
whole or any part of any additional duty imposed by that
subsection.
       (3) Where, for any reason, the amount of duty in
respect of which additional duty has been imposed under
subsection (1) is amended, the additional duty shall, where
necessary, be adjusted accordingly.
       (4) A person liable for the payment of duty who is
dissatisfied with a decision of the Customs authority under
subsection (2) may, within fifteen working days after
notice of the decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller
under Division Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with
the decision made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen
working days after notice of the decision is given appeal to
the Customs Appeal Commission under Division Three of
Part XXIV.
       156. (1) Import duty shall, unless otherwise provided     Rate of duty.
under this Act, be payable on goods at the rate specified in
the Tariff Act and in any other law enacted in respect of         Ch. 295.
import duties and with respect to goods of that class or
description.
       (2) Subject to the Customs laws, export duty shall
be paid on goods at the rate specified in any law enacted in
respect of export duties and with respect to goods of that
class or description.
       (3) The person making an entry of goods shall,
upon making the entry, specify the rate of duty applicable
to the goods.
       (4) The import duty applicable to imported goods
shall, where in accordance with section 96 such goods are
entered before the arrival at the place of discharge in the
Customs territory of the means of transport in which such
goods are imported, be paid at the rate in force at the time
of the arrival of the means of transport at the place of
discharge.
       157. (1) An entry for goods made under this Act shall     Assessment of
be deemed to be an assessment by the importer, exporter,         duty.
or licensee, as the case may be, of the duty payable in
respect of such goods.
       (2) The Customs authority may, if it has reasonable
cause to suspect that duty is payable on goods by a person

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 142]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   who has not made an entry in respect of such goods, assess
                   the duty at such amount as the Customs authority thinks
                   proper.
                          (3) The person liable for the payment of the duty
                   shall be advised of an assessment pursuant to subsection
                   (2) by notice in writing.
                          (4) A person liable for the payment of the duty who
                   is dissatisfied with a decision of the Customs authority
                   under section (2) may, within fifteen working days after
                   notice of the decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller
                   under Division Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with
                   the decision made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen
                   working days after notice of the decision is given appeal to
                   the Customs Appeal Commission under Division Three of
                   Part XXIV.
Amendment of              158. (1) Subject to section 164, the Customs
assessment.        authority may from time to time make such amendments to
                   an assessment of duty as it thinks necessary in order to
                   ensure the correctness of the assessment even though the
                   goods to which the duty relates are no longer subject to the
                   control of the Customs authority or the duty originally
                   assessed has been paid.
                          (2) The Customs authority shall, where an
                   amendment under subsection (1) has the effect of imposing
                   a fresh liability or altering an existing liability, give notice
                   of the amendment to the person liable for the duty.
                          (3) A person liable for the duty who is dissatisfied
                   with a decision of the Customs authority under this section
                   may within fifteen working days after notice of the
                   decision is given appeal to the Comptroller under Division
                   Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision
                   made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days
                   after notice of the decision is given appeal to the Customs
                   Appeal Commission under Division Three of Part XXIV.
Due date for              159. (1) Unless otherwise specified in this Act, the
payment of duty.   due date for the payment of duty assessed under section
                   157(2), or reassessed under section 158, or demanded
                   under section 170 or section 171, shall be the date that is
                   thirty working days after the date on which, written notice
                   of the assessment or amended assessment or demand, as
                   the case may be, is given by the Customs authority.
                          (2) Where all or part of any duty remains unpaid by
                   the dm date, the amount outstanding shall be deemed to


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                              LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 143


have been increased by an amount calculated in accordance
with section 155(1).
       160. (1) Every assessment made by the Customs             Assessment
authority under this Act, including an assessment made by        presumed to be
                                                                 correct.
way of amendment, shall be taken to be correct and duty
shall be payable accordingly unless on an appeal a different
amount is determined to be the duty payable on the goods
or it is determined that no duty is payable.
       (2) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the
Customs authority may, where an appeal has been lodged
under Parts X or XI, and subject to receiving such security
as it thinks sufficient to cover the full amount of duty,
release the goods from the control of the Customs
authority.
       161. Duties may be paid by such means of payment          Payment of duty.
as the Minister shall prescribe by Order.
       162. Subject to this Act and any other Customs laws,      Goods remaining
goods remaining on board and exported in the aircraft or         on board and
                                                                 exported.
vessel in which they were imported, whether as stores or
otherwise, shall be exempt from liability to import or
export duties.
      163. Subject to this Act and any other Customs laws,       Goods entered in
goods shall be exempt from liability to import duties where      bond for
                                                                 transshipment,
such goods —                                                     export or stores.
      (a) are goods entered under bond for transshipment
            or warehoused goods entered for exportation or
            for use as stores for any aircraft or vessel; and
      (b) have been proved, to the satisfaction of the
            Comptroller, to have been shipped, exported or
            taken into use as stores, as the case may be.
      164. Goods brought or coming into The Bahamas,             Goods arriving
otherwise than as cargo, stores or baggage carried in an         otherwise than
                                                                 cargo, stores or
aircraft or vessel, shall —                                      baggage.
      (a) be liable to duty and to the Customs laws as if
            they were goods imported in the normal manner;
            and
      (b) if the country of origin of the goods is in
            question, be deemed to originate from such
            country as the Comptroller may on investigation
            determine.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 144]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



Obligation to pay          165. (1) Subject to subsection (3), the obligation to
duty not             pay and the right to receive and recover duty under this Act
suspended by
appeal.              are not suspended by any appeal or legal proceedings.
                           (2) Subject to subsection (3), if the appellant is
                     successful in the appeal or the proceedings, the amount, if
                     any, of the duty or any security received by the Customs
                     authority in excess of the amount that, in accordance with
                     the decision on the appeal or the proceedings, was properly
                     payable shall forthwith be refunded to the appellant by the
                     Customs authority, or as the case may be, the appellant
                     shall be released from the conditions of the security
                     imposed under section 339.
                           (3) Any obligation on the Customs authority under
                     subsection (2) shall be suspended pending the outcome of
                     any appeal filed by the Customs authority under this Act or
                     any other Act against the decision requiring the duty to be
                     refunded.
Customs                    166. (1) Subject to subsection (5), the Customs
authority to pay
interest on duty
                     authority shall, where duty is required to be refunded in
refunded on          accordance with section 165(2), pay interest calculated in
appeal.              accordance with subsection (2).
23 of 2013, s. 15.
                           (2) Interest payable in accordance with this section
                     shall be calculated by reference to qualifying periods
                     consisting of twelve consecutive months from the 1st day
                     of month in any year until the 31st day of month in the
                     following year and shall be the sum of the amounts of
                     interest payable in respect of each applicable qualifying
                     period, the amount of interest in respect of an applicable
                     qualifying period being determined in accordance with the
                     formula (X) x (Y) x (Z) where —
                                    365
                           (a) X is the number of days in the period that
                                commences on the later of the day on which the
                                relevant duty is lodged to the credit of the
                                Customs authority and ends on the earlier of the
                                day on which the relevant duty is refunded by
                                the Customs authority in accordance with this
                                article;
                           (b) Y is the amount of any duty being the relevant
                                duty, which, having been paid in accordance
                                with section 160(1), is caused to be refunded in
                                accordance with the outcome of a successful
                                appeal; and


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 145


       (c) Z is the specified rate of interest as determined
            in accordance with subsection (3).
       (3) The Prime Rate per annum that is to apply for
the purposes of this section shall be the rate fixed by the
Minister by Order published in the Gazette.
       (4) The Customs authority may, if satisfied that the
amount of any interest paid to an appellant in accordance
with subsection (2) is in excess of the proper amount,
recover the amount of the excess in accordance with the
provisions of section 182 as if that amount was money
refunded by the Customs authority in error.
       (5) Any obligation on the Customs authority under
this section shall be suspended pending any appeal by the
Customs authority under this Act or any other Act in
respect of the decision requiring duty to be refunded.
       167. The Customs authority shall not, where an            Limitation of
assessment of duty has been made under this Act, alter that      time for
                                                                 amendment of
assessment so as to increase the amount of the assessment        assessments.
after the expiration of three years from the date on which
the original assessment was made.
       168. (1) Subject to subsection (3), the duty on any       Duty constitutes
goods shall constitute a charge on such goods until fully        a charge on
                                                                 goods.
paid.
       (2) Subject to the provisions of this section, the        23 of 2013, s. 17.
Customs authority may, where any duty charged on any
goods under this section is due and unpaid and whether or
not the property in the goods has passed to a third party,
take possession of the goods and sell them or any part of
them in satisfaction or part satisfaction of the charge.
       (3) Subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply as
against a purchaser of the goods for valuable consideration
and without knowledge that the duty was due but had not
been paid.
       (4) For the purposes of this section, “purchaser"
means —
       (a) a person, other than a person liable to pay the
            duty, who acquired the goods from a person
            liable to pay the duty; or
       (b) a subsequent purchaser of the goods.
       (5) The Customs authority may, in any case where a
person claims at or before the taking of possession of the

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 146]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                goods by the Customs authority that he or she is a
                purchaser to whom subsection (3) applies and there is a
                dispute as to whether that subsection applies —
                      (a) where the goods are in the possession or control
                           of the importer, exporter or licensee, or agent or
                           representative thereof, take possession of the
                           goods and, subject to subsections (7) and (9),
                           retain possession of them pending the resolution
                           of the dispute; or
                      (b) where the goods are in the possession or control
                           of the purchaser, by notice in writing direct the
                           purchaser, subject to subsections (7) and (9), to
                           retain the possession or control of the goods
                           pending the resolution of the dispute.
                     (6) The Customs authority shall, subject to
                subsections (7) and (9), retain possession of the goods
                pending the resolution of the dispute in any case where —
                     (a) possession of the goods has been taken, by the
                          Customs authority but the goods have not been
                          sold;
                     (b) a person notifies the Customs authority that he
                          or she claims that he or she is a purchaser to
                          whom clause (3) applies; and
                     (c) there is a dispute as to whether that subsection
                          applies.
                      (7) The Customs authority, or the purchaser in
                possession or control of the goods with the prior consent of
                the Customs authority, may sell the goods and the net
                proceeds of such sale shall be deemed to be substituted for
                the thing so sold in any case where goods that the Customs
                authority has taken possession of or has directed a
                purchaser to retain under this section consist wholly or
                partly of—
                      (a) any living creature; or
                      (b) any thing which, in the opinion of the Customs
                           authority —
                           (i) is of a perishable nature; or
                           (ii) may otherwise lose its value if not sold as
                                soon as possible.
                      (8) The Customs authority or the purchaser of the
                goods may apply to the court for a declaration as to
                whether the goods were acquired by the purchaser for



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                 [CH.293– 147


valuable consideration and without knowledge that the
duty was owing and unpaid.
      (9) In any proceeding under subsection (8), the onus
of proving that the goods were acquired by the purchaser
for valuable consideration and without knowledge that the
duty was owing but unpaid shall, where the purchaser and
a person liable to pay the duty are related, be on the
purchaser.
      169. For the purposes of section 168(9), one person is       Meaning of
related to another person —                                        “related”.

      (a) where that person is connected to the other
                                                                   23 of 2013, s. 16, 17.
            person by blood relationship, marriage or
            adoption, or where the person is a trustee for the
            other person, and for the purposes of this
            paragraph —
            (i) persons are connected by blood relationship
                  if within the fourth degree of relationships;
            (ii) persons are connected by marriage if one is
                  married to the other or to a person who is
                  connected by blood relationship to the
                  other, or if one has a relationship in the
                  nature of marriage with the other or with a
                  person who is connected by blood
                  relationship to the other; and
            (iii) persons are connected by adoption if one
                  has been adopted as the child of the other or
                  as a child of a person who is within the
                  third degree of relationship to the other.
      (b) if the other person is a company, where the
            person is a director or officer of the other
            person, or is related within the meaning of
            paragraph (a) to a director or officer of the other
            person, or is directly or indirectly able to
            exercise control over the affairs of the other
            person;
      (c) if the person is a company, where the other
            person is a director or officer of the person, or is
            related within the meaning of paragraph (a), to a
            director or officer of the person, or is directly or
            indirectly able to exercise control over the
            affairs of the person; or
      (d) if the person and the other person are
            companies —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 148]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                                (i) where the person is a holding company or a
                                      subsidiary, as the case may be, of the other
                                      person within the meaning of the
Ch. 308.                              Companies Act
                                (ii) where the person owns or controls shares
                                      that in aggregate carry the right to exercise
                                      or control the exercise of twenty percent or
                                      more of the voting power at meetings of the
                                      other person, or, the other person owns or
                                      controls shares that in aggregate carry the
                                      right to exercise or control the exercise of
                                      twenty percent or more of the voting power
                                      at meetings of the person; or
                                (iii) where the person and the other person have
                                      the same holding company within the
Ch. 308.                              meaning of the Companies Act or a third
                                      person owns or controls shares in each of
                                      them that carry the right to exercise or
                                      control the exercise of twenty percent or
                                      more of the voting power at meetings of
                                      each of them.
Application of             170. (1) Section 171 shall apply to the recovery of
section 171.         unpaid duty, where the unpaid duty is a charge on the
                     goods, that is due in relation to goods by —
                           (a) an individual who is bankrupt;
                           (b) a company that is in liquidation;
                           (c) a company in respect of the property of which a
                                receiver has been appointed;
                           (d) an unincorporated body of persons including a
                                partnership, or a joint venture, or the trustees of
                                a trust, that is put into liquidation; or
                           (e) an unincorporated body of persons including a
                                partnership, or a joint venture, or the trustees of
                                a trust, in respect of the property of which a
                                receiver is appointed by the Supreme Court.
23 of 2013, s. 18.         (2) Unpaid duty to which this section and section
                     171 apply shall be paid in accordance with the
Ch. 69.              requirements of the Bankruptcy Act.
                           (3) Nothing in subsection (2) or in section 171 shall
                     derogate from section 172.
Rights and duties
of Customs                 171. (1) The Customs authority shall, in any case to
authority in         which this section applies, notify the official assignee or
recovery of duty.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                              LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 149




the liquidator or the receiver, as the case may be, that the
unpaid duty constitutes a charge on the goods in
accordance with section 169.
      (2) A notice under subsection (1) shall be given —
      (a) within one year after —
           (i) in the case of an individual, the date of the
                 notice in the Gazette that the individual has
                 been adjudicated bankrupt;
           (ii) in the case of a company, the date of the
                 notice in the Gazette of the date of the
                 commencement of the liquidation or of the
                 appointment of a receiver, as the case may
                 be;
           (iii) in the case of an unincorporated body of
                 persons described in subsection (l)(d) of
                 section 170 of this Act, the date of the
                 notice in the Gazette of the commencement
                 of the liquidation;
           (iv) in the case of an unincorporated body of
                 persons under subsection (l)(e) of section
                 170, the date of the notice in the Gazette of
                 the appointment of a receiver; or
      (b) where there is a dispute as to whether section
           168(5) applies, within one year after the dispute
           is resolved or determined.
     (3) The Customs authority may, if any duty to
which this section applies is due and unpaid —
     (a) realise the property subject to the charge;
     (b) value the property subject to the charge and
          make a claim for the balance of the unpaid duty,
          if any, in the bankruptcy, liquidation, or
          receivership proceedings, as the case may be, in
          accordance with section 170(2);
     (c) realise the property subject to the charge and
          make a claim for any balance of the unpaid duty
          remaining after deducting the amount realised in
          the bankruptcy, liquidation, or receivership
          proceedings, as the case may be, in accordance
          with section 170(2); or
     (d) surrender the charge to the official assignee or
          the liquidator or the receiver, as the case may be,
          for the general benefit of creditors and make a
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 150]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           claim for the whole debt in the bankruptcy,
                           liquidation, or receivership proceedings, as the
                           case may be, in accordance with section 170(2).
                       (4) Where the Customs authority, in accordance
                with subsection (3)(b), values the property subject to the
                charge and claims for the balance of unpaid duty, the
                valuation and claim shall —
                       (a) contain full particulars of the valuation and
                           claim;
                       (b) contain full particulars of the charge; and
                       (c) identify any documents that substantiate the
                           claim and the charge.
                       (5) The official assignee, the liquidator or the
                receiver may require production of any document referred
                to in subsection (4).
                       (6) Where the Customs authority makes a claim
                under subsection (4), the official assignee, liquidator, or
                receiver, as the case may be, shall —
                       (a) accept the valuation and claim; or
                       (b) reject the valuation and claim in whole or in
                           part, but —
                           (i) where a valuation and claim is rejected in
                                 whole or in part, the Customs authority may
                                 make a revised valuation and claim within
                                 twenty eight working days of receiving
                                 notice of the rejection; and
                           (ii) the official assignee, the liquidator or the
                                 receiver, as the case may be, may, if he
                                 subsequently considers that a valuation and
                                 claim was wrongly rejected in whole or in
                                 part, revoke or amend that decision.
                       (7) The official assignee, the liquidator, or the
                receiver may, at any time, unless the Customs authority has
                realised the property, redeem the charge on payment of the
                assessed value where he —
                       (a) accepts a valuation and claim under subsection
                           (6)(a);
                       (b) accepts a revised valuation and claim under
                           subsection (6)(b)(i); or
                       (c) accepts a valuation and claim on revoking or
                           amending a decision to reject a claim under
                           subsection (6)(b)(ii).


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 151


      (8) The official assignee, the liquidator or the
receiver may, at any time, by notice in writing require the
Customs authority, within thirty days after receipt of the
notice, to —
      (a) elect which of the rights referred to in subsection
            (3) the Customs authority wishes to exercise;
            and
      (b) if the Customs authority elects to exercise a right
            under paragraphs (b), (c) or (d) of subsection
            (3), exercise such right within that period.
      (9) The Customs authority shall be deemed to have
surrendered the charge under subsection (3)(d) to the
official assignee, the liquidator or the receiver, as the case
may be, and may make a claim in the bankruptcy,
liquidation, or receivership proceedings in accordance with
section 170 in any case where —
      (a) the Customs authority fails to give notice in
            accordance with subsection (1) to the official
            assignee, the liquidator or the receiver, as the
            case may be, within the time specified in
            subsection (2); or
      (b) having been required to make an election in
            accordance with subsection (9), the Customs
            authority fails to do so within the time specified
            in that subsection.
      (10) The Customs authority, where it has surrendered
a charge under subsection (3)(d) or is deemed to have
surrendered a charge under subsection (9), may —
      (a) with the leave of the Court, the official assignee,
            the liquidator or the receiver, as the case may be,
            and subject to such terms and conditions as they
            may determine; and
      (b) at any time before the official assignee, the
            liquidator or receiver has realised the property
            charged,
either withdraw the surrender and rely on the charge or
submit a new claim under this section.
      172. (1) No person is entitled, except as otherwise         Release of goods
provided in this Act or in such cases as may be approved          subject to duty.
by the Customs authority, and subject to such security as
the Customs authority may require, to obtain release of
goods from the control of the Customs authority until the
sum payable by way of duty on the goods is paid in full.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 152]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (2) No action or other proceeding shall be instituted
                     against the Crown or the Customs authority or any
                     Customs officer in respect of the detention of any goods
                     during the period before the payment of the full sum by
                     way of duty on the goods so payable.
                           (3) The Customs authority, in any case where the
                     Customs authority considers that undue hardship would
                     result from the payment of duty as required by this section
                     and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit to impose,
                     may —
                           (a) direct the release of the goods from the control
                                of the Customs authority; and
                           (b) accept payment of duty by instalment over a
                                specified period of time.
Liability for duty         173. (1) The licensee of a Customs controlled area
on goods
wrongly removed
                     shall be liable for duty payable on goods that, in the
or missing.          opinion of the Customs authority, have been wrongfully
                     removed or are missing from such Customs controlled area
                     as if the goods had been imported, exported, or
                     manufactured by the licensee and entered pursuant to
                     section 104.
                           (2) A licensee shall not be released from liability
                     under this section by virtue of any other provision of this
                     Act or any other Act.
                           (3) Duty shall become due and payable on dutiable
                     goods as if entry for home consumption has been made and
                     passed where —
                           (a) dutiable goods are removed from a Customs
                                controlled area without the authority of the
                                Customs authority; or
                           (b) dutiable goods are not produced by the licensee
                                to the Customs authority and are not accounted
                                for as having been lawfully delivered from the
                                Customs controlled area.
                           (4) The Customs authority may, by notice in
                     writing, demand from the owner, importer or exporter of
                     the goods, or the licensee of a Customs controlled area,
                     payment of any sum that the Customs authority has
                     reasonable cause to believe is owing under this section.
                           (5) Where duty is payable under this section by two
                     or more persons in respect of goods, they shall be jointly
                     and severally liable for the payment of such duty.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 153


       (6) A person liable for the payment of the duty who
is dissatisfied with a decision of the Customs authority
under this section may, within fifteen working days after
the date on which notice of the decision is given, appeal to
the Comptroller under Division Two of Part XXIV and, if
dissatisfied with the decision made by the Comptroller,
may within fifteen working days after the date on which
notice of the decision is given appeal to the Customs
Appeal Commission under Division Three of Part XXIV.
       174. (1) The owner of the goods and the person in         Liability of
charge of the means of transport without prejudice to the        owners of means
                                                                 of transport for
liability of any other person shall, where cargo, stores or      duty on goods
other goods are unlawfully landed in the Customs territory       unlawfully
in or from a means of transport that is within the Customs       landed.
territory, be jointly and severally liable for the payment of
the duty on the goods as if the goods had been imported by
them and entry had been made and passed for home
consumption pursuant to section 104.
       (2) The Customs authority may by notice in writing
demand from the owner or the person in charge of any
means of transport payment of any sum that the Customs
authority has reasonable cause to suspect is owing under
this section.
       (3) The sum demanded by the Customs authority
shall, in any proceedings for the recovery of duty or for a
refund of duty paid under this section, be presumed to be
due and payable unless the contrary is proved.
       (4) A person liable for the payment of duty who is
dissatisfied with a decision of the Customs authority under
this section may, within fifteen working days after the date
on which notice of the decision is given, appeal to the
Comptroller under Division Two of Part XXIV and, if
dissatisfied with the decision made by the Comptroller,
may within fifteen working days after the date on which
notice of the decision is given appeal to the Customs
Appeal Commission under Division Three of Part XXIV.
       175. Liability under this Act for the payment of duty     Effect of
on goods shall be extinguished by the payment of the duty        payment of duty
                                                                 by one person on
by any other person who may be liable for such payment           liability of other
under this Act unless the duty is subsequently refunded or       person.
remitted.
       176. (1) The liability of goods to duty or the rate of    Incidence of
duty to which goods are liable shall, in the case of any         altered duties.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 154]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   legislative amendment relating thereto, be determined
                   except where otherwise expressly provided —
                         (a) in the case of goods held in an export warehouse
                              or produced in a manufacturing area, by the law
                              in force at the time the goods are removed from
                              the export warehouse or manufacturing area; or
                         (b) in the case of goods other than those referred to
                              in paragraph (a), by the law in force at the time
                              the goods are imported into the Customs
                              territory.
                         (2) In this section, the term “legislative
                   amendment” includes a variation that takes place at any
                   time or periodically in the liability of goods to duty or in
                   the rate of duty to which they are liable.
Reimportation of         177. (1) Subject to subsection (2), goods exported
goods exported.    from the Customs territory may, in such cases and under
                   such conditions as may from time to time be approved by
                   the Comptroller, be admitted free of duty or at such rate of
                   duty, not exceeding the duty that would be payable on the
                   goods if imported for the first time, as may be determined
                   by the Customs authority.
                         (2) This section applies to goods which, when
                   reimported, are in substantially the same condition as when
                   exported.
                        (3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) —
                        (a) any reimported goods —
                            (i) which are of a kind liable to duty ad
                                  valorem; and
                            (ii) which were, after exportation, subject to
                                  any process including repair,
                            shall on reimportation be chargeable with import
                            duty on the amount of increase of value
                            attributable to such process; and
                        (b) the increase of value of such reimported goods
                            as referred to in paragraph (a) shall be taken to
                            be the cost and other charges of the process
                            including repair together with the freight,
                            insurance and all other charges involved in
                            delivering the goods to the processor and in
                            returning the goods to the importer.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 155



       178. (1) The Customs authority may, if the Customs        Economic
authority has reasonable cause to believe that an importer,      operators leaving
                                                                 The Bahamas.
exporter, or licensee is about to leave the Customs territory
before duty owing by the importer, exporter, or licensee
becomes payable under this Act, require the importer,
exporter, or licensee to pay such duty on a date, earlier than
the date on which the duty becomes payable, that the
Customs authority fixes and notifies to the importer,
exporter, or licensee in writing.
       (2) A notice issued under subsection (1) shall
constitute a demand for payment and the duty shall become
due and payable on the date fixed by the Customs
authority.
       (3) Duty demanded by the Customs authority under
this section shall be presumed to be due and payable unless
the contrary is proven.


     DIVISION TWO - REFUNDS, REMISSIONS AND
                  DRAWBACKS OF DUTY
      179. (1) Any duty, charge or drawback imposed or           Application of
allowed under the Customs laws according to any specified        duties.
weight or measure shall, unless specific provision is made       23 of 2013, s. 19.
to the contrary, be calculated according to the imperial
weights and measures.
      (2) Any duty, charge or drawback imposed or                23 of 2013, s. 19.
allowed under the Customs laws according to any specified
weight, measure, strength, or value shall, unless specific
provision is made to the contrary in any Customs law, be
deemed to apply in the same proportion to any greater or
lesser weight, measure, strength, or value, as the case may
be.
      180. A package shall, subject to any provision to the      Goods exported
contrary in the Customs laws, be liable to duty as if it were    in other than
                                                                 normal package.
a separate article and, for all purposes of the Customs laws,
be deemed to be a separate article where —
      (a) goods are imported or exported in the package;
           and
      (b) the package, in the opinion of the Comptroller—
           (i) is not the normal or proper package for the
                goods; or


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 156]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                               (ii) is designed for use, subsequent to
                                    importation or exportation, other than as a
                                    package for goods of the same or a similar
                                    nature.
Goods subject to          181. The value of goods which on importation are
ad valorem duty.   liable to ad valorem duty shall be determined in
                   accordance with the Third Schedule and any regulations
                   made in relation thereto.
Customs may               182. (1) The Customs authority shall, unless there is
refund duty paid
in error.
                   good reason not to, refund any duty which the Customs
                   authority is satisfied has been paid in error, whether by
                   mistake of law or of fact.
                          (2) This section shall apply in respect of any duty
                   paid in error before the commencement of this Act.
                          (3) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
                   the Customs authority under this section may, within
                   fifteen working days after the date on which notice of the
                   decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under Division
                   Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision
                   made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days
                   after the date on which notice of the decision is given
                   appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under Division
                   Three of Part XXIV.
Refunds and               183. (1) Subject to any prescribed exceptions,
remission of
duty.
                   restrictions or conditions, the Customs authority may
                   refund or remit any duty where the Customs authority is
                   satisfied that imported goods, or goods manufactured in the
                   Customs territory, as the case may be —
                          (a) have been damaged, destroyed, pillaged or lost,
                               or have diminished in value or deteriorated in
                               condition, prior to their release from the control
                               of the Customs authority;
                          (b) are of faulty manufacture; or
                          (c) have been abandoned to the Crown for
                               destruction or other form of disposal prior to
                               their release from the control of the Customs
                               authority.
                          (2) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
                   the Customs authority under this section may, within
                   fifteen working days after the date on which notice of the
                   decision is given, appeal to the Comptroller under Division
                   Two of Part XXIV and, if dissatisfied with the decision



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 157


made by the Comptroller, may within fifteen working days
after the date on which notice of the decision is given
appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under Division
Three of Part XXIV.
      (3) Sample goods of such nature or value as may be
prescribed and samples of bulk goods subject to the control
of the Customs authority shall, by rule issued by the
Comptroller, subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, be delivered free of duty.
      (4) Pursuant to section 354, the Minister may make
regulations prescribing the minimum amount of duty
refundable on goods and the circumstances in which duty
below the prescribed amount shall not be refunded.
      184. The Customs authority may, where under this           Power to apply
Act duty is or becomes refundable to a person, in its sole       refunds towards
                                                                 payment of other
discretion —                                                     Customs debt.
      (a) apply the whole or any part of the sum so
            refundable towards the payment of any other
            Customs debt that is payable by such person; or
      (b) refund the whole sum to such person.
      185. Money refunded by the Customs authority               Recovery of duty
through error of fact or law shall be recoverable by action      refunded in error.
at the suit of the Customs authority on behalf of the Crown
at any time within three years after the date of its payment.
      186. (1) Subject to this section, where the Customs        Goods
authority is satisfied that goods have been temporarily          temporarily
                                                                 imported.
imported, a sum equal to the amount of the duty payable on
the goods may pursuant to sections 43 and 339 be secured
in such cases as may be approved by the Customs authority
and, on receipt of such security, the Customs authority may
release the goods from its control without payment of duty.
      (2) Subject to subsection (4) and to such conditions
as may be prescribed, the person giving a security shall be
released from the conditions of the security or his security
may be returned if, within three months from the date of
their importation or within such longer period as the
Customs authority may determine in any particular case,
the Customs authority is satisfied that the goods have
been —
      (a) exported;
      (b) shipped for export;


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 158]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (c) packed for export into a bulk cargo container in
                            a Customs controlled area and the container
                            secured to the satisfaction of the Customs
                            authority;
                        (d) destroyed; or
                        (e) dealt with in such manner as the Customs
                            authority may allow.
                         (3) Duty shall, where goods temporarily imported
                  are used for industrial or commercial purposes or such
                  other purposes as the Customs authority may consider
                  relevant, be payable in respect of the goods in the amount
                  by which their value for duty, as determined by the
                  Customs authority at the time it is satisfied pursuant to
                  subsection (2) that the goods have been dealt with under
                  any of paragraphs (a) to (e), is less than their value for duty
                  as ascertained in accordance with this Act at the time of
                  their importation.
                         (4) An amount of duty which is payable in
                  accordance with subsection (3) may be deducted from any
                  deposit of money given as security under subsection (1).
                         (5) Where, at the expiry of the period prescribed by
                  subsection (2), goods have not been dealt with in
                  accordance with that subsection —
                         (a) any sum secured by way of deposit of money
                              shall be retained by the Crown; or
                         (b) any sum secured otherwise than as described in
                              paragraph (a) shall be paid to the Crown by the
                              importer within fourteen working days after the
                              expiry of that period or such longer period as the
                              Comptroller may allow and, on such payment,
                              the security shall be released.
                         (6) This section shall not apply to any goods that
Ch. 295.          are, by regulations made under the Tariff Act, declared to
                  be goods to which this section does not apply.
Drawbacks of             187. (1) Subject to this section, drawbacks of duty
duty on certain
goods.
                  may be allowed, in such amounts and subject to such
                  conditions as may be prescribed on —
                         (a) goods imported into the Customs territory that
                              are later exported from the Customs territory;
                         (b) goods that are produced in a manufacturing area
                              and exported from the Customs territory;



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 159


       (c) imported parts and materials used in, worked
           into, or attached to, goods manufactured or
           produced in the Customs territory and exported
           from the Customs territory; or
       (d) imported materials, with the exception of fuel,
           consumed in the manufacture or production of
           goods produced in the Customs territory and
           exported from the Customs territory.
       (2) The Customs authority may, for the purposes of
this section, treat goods as having been exported where —
       (a) the Customs authority is satisfied that such
           goods have been shipped for export;
       (b) such goods have been packed for export into a
           bulk cargo container in a Customs place or
           Customs controlled area and the container has
           been secured to the satisfaction of the Customs
           authority; or
       (c) such goods have been entered into an export
           warehouse and the Customs authority is satisfied
           that they will be exported.
       (3) Where drawback has been allowed on any goods
treated as exported pursuant to subsection (2) or on goods
consumed in the manufacture of such goods, the goods
shall not, without the permission of the Customs authority,
be unshipped or re-landed or unpacked before export.
       (4) Where drawback has been allowed on goods
treated as exported pursuant to subsection (2) or on goods
consumed in the manufacture of such goods and has been
paid in respect of any goods that are unshipped or re-
landed or unpacked before export —
       (a) the amount of drawback allowed in respect of
           those goods or on goods consumed in the
           manufacture of those goods shall, immediately
           on their unshipment, re-landing or unpacking,
           constitute a debt due to the Crown; and
       (b) the debt due to the Crown shall immediately be
           payable by the owner of the goods at the time of
           their unshipment, re-landing or unpacking.
      (5) A debt due to the Crown under subsection (4)
shall be recoverable by action at the suit of the Customs
authority on behalf of the Crown.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 160]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (6) The right to recover drawback as a debt due to
                 the Crown under this section shall not be affected by the
                 fact that a bond or other security has been given in respect
                 of the unshipment, re-landing or unpacking of the goods
                 before export.
                        (7) The Customs authority may, where under this
                 section drawback is granted to any person, apply in its sole
                 discretion the whole or any part of the sum allowed
                 towards the payment of any duty that is payable by such
                 person.
                       (8) This section does not apply to any goods that
Ch. 295.         are, by regulations made under the Tariff Act declared to
                 be goods to which this section does not apply.
                       (9) Pursuant to section 354, the Minister may make
                 regulations prescribing the minimum amount of drawback
                 of duty on goods and the circumstances in which drawback
                 below the prescribed amount shall not be allowed.
Drawbacks do           188. Drawbacks shall not, except as the Minister may
not apply to
safeguard
                 otherwise specifically permit by Order published in the
measures.        Gazette, apply in respect of duties imposed under any
                 safeguard measures adopted by the Government.

                                   PART XII
                            BONDED WAREHOUSES AND
                            WAREHOUSING PROCEDURE
Categories of          189. (1) Customs bonded warehouses shall be
warehouses and
effects of
                 either—
warehousing.           (a) general bonded warehouses, or public Customs
                            warehouses, for the warehousing of goods
                            generally, regardless of the owner of goods; or
                       (b) private Customs bonded warehouses, for the
                            warehousing only of goods which are the
                            property of the licensee.
                       (2) Dutiable imported or exported goods may be
                 warehoused in premises subject to Customs control for a
                 maximum period of two years.
                       (3) Pursuant to section 354, the Minister may make
                 regulations to extend or reduce the period set out in
                 subsection (2) depending on the nature of goods or the type
                 of warehouse concerned.
                       (4) Unless otherwise prescribed in this Act, the
                 warehousing of goods in a bonded warehouse shall have

STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 161


the effect of suspending the payment of duties on imported
or exported goods for the period set out in subsection (2) or
as otherwise prescribed by the Minister pursuant to
subsection (3).
      190. (1) Pursuant to section 354, the Minister may         Authorised
make regulations to prohibit, or restrict permanently or         goods, prohibited
                                                                 goods and other
temporarily, the warehousing of goods of the following           restrictions.
categories—
      (a) publications, including electronic publications,
           that are restricted or prohibited under Bahamian
           law and all other indecent or obscene articles;
      (b) goods infringing intellectual property rights;
      (c) endangered species of the fauna and flora;
      (d) any goods of a class or description whose
           importation is prohibited or restricted by virtue
           of the First Schedule;
      (e) any goods of a class or description whose
           exportation is prohibited or restricted by virtue
           of the Second Schedule; or
      (f) any other goods the importation or exportation
           of which is prohibited by the Government of
           The Bahamas in the public interest.
      (2) Subject to subsection (1), goods that are
permitted for warehousing shall be —
      (a) any imported goods chargeable with Customs
           duties or excisable taxes and which are entitled
           to repayment of duty when exported;
      (b) national goods for exportation from the Customs
           territory; or
      (c) goods to be used as stores for aircraft or vessels.
      191. (1) The Comptroller may, on application by the        Licensing of
owner of any building or any other secured place or the          bonded
                                                                 warehouses.
occupier of any building or any other secured place with
the consent of the owner, license such a building or secured
place as a bonded warehouse for storage under bond.
      (2) The Comptroller may also license any building
or any other secured place to be a Government bonded
warehouse for the warehousing of goods generally.
      (3) The Customs authority shall lay down the
requirements for the construction and layout of Customs
warehouses and the arrangements for Customs control and


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 162]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                shall specify the person or persons held responsible for the
                payment of any duty chargeable on goods placed under the
                Customs bonded warehouse procedure that are not
                accounted for to the satisfaction of the Customs authority.
                       (4) The provisions of this Act relating to licensed
                bonded warehouses apply, except for the requirements of
                licensing and the furnishing of security, to Government
                bonded warehouses.
                       (5) All buildings or secured places licensed as
                bonded warehouses at the commencement of this Act shall
                be deemed, according to the terms of such appointments, to
                have been duly licensed under this Act.
                       (6) The application for a building or any other
                secured place to be licensed as a bonded warehouse shall
                be made in such form and contain such particulars as may
                be prescribed by the Customs authority.
                       (7) The Comptroller may refuse to license any
                building or any other place as a bonded warehouse and, in
                this case, the applicant shall be advised by notice in writing
                of the decision of the Comptroller.
                       (8) The Comptroller may, at any time, revoke a
                licence that has been granted and the Comptroller shall,
                where he intends to revoke or not to renew any licence of a
                bonded warehouse granted under this section, not later than
                three months before the date when the revocation is due to
                take effect or the licence is due to expire, give notice of his
                intention in writing to the licensee.
                       (9) An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision
                of the Comptroller under this section may, within fifteen
                working days after the date on which notice of the decision
                is given, appeal to the Customs Appeal Commission under
                Division Three of Part XXIV.
                       (10) The licensee of a bonded warehouse shall post a
                bond, as prescribed by the Comptroller, as security for the
                liability imposed on duties and the Comptroller may, at any
                time, require a licensee to furnish a new security in a
                different amount or in different terms.
                       (11) The Comptroller may, at any time, require a
                licensee to make such alterations or additions to the bonded
                warehouse as the Customs authority may consider
                necessary to ensure the proper security of warehousing of
                any goods.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 163


       (12) No warehousing business shall be carried on in
a licensed bonded warehouse except by a licensee licensed
under this section by the Customs authority.
       (13) The licensee of a bonded warehouse shall be
strictly liable for contravention of any condition or
restriction under this section.
       (14) Every licence shall be subject to the payment of
the prescribed fee and shall expire on the 31st December of
each year or may be for such other periods as the
Comptroller thinks fit.
       (15) A licensee shall, where he proposes not to renew
his license in relation to any bonded warehouse, cause
notice of his intention to be given to the owners of all
goods warehoused therein.
       (16) All goods warehoused in a bonded warehouse
shall, after the date of termination of the licence of such
bonded warehouse or such later date as the Comptroller
may permit, within such time as the Comptroller may
direct be entered and delivered for home consumption, or
removal to another bonded warehouse, or for exportation
as the case may be.
      192. (1) Subject to this Act, goods that are to be         Entry of goods in
deposited and stored in a bonded warehouse shall be              bonded
                                                                 warehouses.
entered in such form and manner, including by electronic
means, and within the time as prescribed under sections
104(1)(b) or 113(1)(b).
       (2) The licensee of a bonded warehouse shall,
where goods are entered under the bonded warehouse
Customs procedure and delivered into his custody, take
particular account of the goods.
       (3) Goods shall, where entered in a Government
bonded warehouse, be subject to such rent or other charges
as may be prescribed by the Minister by regulation
pursuant to section 354.
       (4) All liabilities in respect of warehoused goods
shall, in case of a transfer of ownership of such goods to a
new owner, be transferred to the new owner.
     (5) Customs authority may, where goods have not
been entered and delivered in accordance with section
191(16), cause such goods to be taken to a Customs



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 164]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT




                   warehouse and dealt with in accordance with sections 200
                   and 201.
Maintenance of           193. (1) No person other than the proper officer, or
goods.             the licensee, or any employee of the licensee duly
                   authorised in that regard, shall open any bonded warehouse
                   or gain access to any goods therein.
                         (2) The Customs authority shall, at any time, have
                   access to any part of a bonded warehouse and may conduct
                   inventories of warehoused goods and examine any goods
                   therein to ensure compliance with this Act and other
                   Customs legislation.
                         (3) Goods deposited in a bonded warehouse shall be
                   arranged, stowed and maintained in a manner that permits
                   easy access to the goods by the Customs authority and the
                   Comptroller may give such directions respecting the
                   arrangement and stowage or maintenance of goods as he
                   thinks fit.
                         (4) The Customs authority may, subject to such
                   conditions as it may impose —
                         (a) permit goods to be inspected;
                         (b) permit goods to be bulked, sorted, lotted, packed
                               or repacked within a bonded warehouse;
                         (c) permit samples of goods to be taken by the
                               owner; or
                         (d) regauge, remeasure or reweigh any warehoused
                               goods.
Loss or                  194. (1) The licensee of a bonded warehouse shall, if
deterioration of
goods.
                   the Customs authority finds at the time of an inspection in
                   or at the time goods are lawfully removed from the
                   warehouse any part of such goods to be missing, pay to the
                   Customs authority, notwithstanding any other liability or
                   penalty incurred under this Act, the duty that such goods
                   would have borne if they had been entered for home
                   consumption on the date of the discovery of the deficiency.
                         (2) No duty shall be payable by the licensee of a
                   bonded warehouse, notwithstanding any other provision of
                   any Customs enactment, on warehoused goods that are
                   damaged or destroyed.
Removal of               195. (1) Goods which have been deposited and stored
goods from
bonded
                   in a bonded warehouse may be entered for —
warehouses.              (a) home consumption;


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 165


       (b) exportation or re-exportation;
       (c) temporary admission including temporary
           admission for inward processing;
       (d) use as stores for aircraft or vessels; or
       (e) removal to another bonded warehouse.
       (2) The Customs authority may, where goods
entered to be warehoused under the Customs bonded
warehouse procedure are not duly warehoused by the
licensee, cause the goods to be removed from the bonded
warehouse for which they were entered.
       (3) The licensee shall, where goods are removed in
accordance with subsection (2), pay the duty chargeable on
such goods.
       (4) The Customs authority shall, where warehoused
goods have to be removed to another bonded warehouse,
require the owner of goods to deliver any entry of such
goods in such form and manner as the Customs authority
may direct.
       (5) Warehoused goods entered for exportation or
for use as stores for an aircraft or a vessel proceeding to a
place outside the Customs territory may be delivered for
that purpose but no warehoused goods shall be entered or
delivered —
       (a) for exportation in a light aircraft or a vessel of
           less than ten tons register; or
       (b) for use as stores for a light aircraft or a vessel
           less than five hundred tons register.
       (6) Warehoused goods delivered for exportation or
for the purposes of use as stores for an aircraft or a vessel
shall forthwith be put on board the aircraft or the vessel for
which those goods are entered.
       (7) The licensee of a bonded warehouse shall,
where goods are unlawfully removed from the bonded
warehouse, pay to the Customs authority the duty at the
rate applicable at the date of the removal.
      (8) Goods not removed from a bonded warehouse at
the expiry of the period referred to in section 189(2), or of
such period as prescribed by the Minister pursuant to
section 183(3), shall be removed to a Customs warehouse
by or at the expense of the licensee of the bonded
warehouse.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 166]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



Payment of duty.           196. (1) Unless otherwise permitted under this Act,
                     goods may not be removed from a bonded warehouse until
                     entry of those goods has been made and all duty chargeable
                     on those goods and any charges in respect of the removal
                     of the goods from the bonded warehouse have been paid.
                           (2) The amount of duty chargeable on goods shall
                     be calculated in accordance with the value of those goods
                     determined at the time they were first warehoused.
                           (3) The rates of duty chargeable on warehoused
                     goods shall be those in force with respect to the goods of
                     that class or description at the time of the removal of the
                     goods from the bonded warehouse for home consumption,
                     export or use as stores for an aircraft or a vessel.

                                       PART XIII
                                  TEMPORARY ADMISSION
Prior                       197. (1) Pursuant to section 354, the Minister may
authorisation and
conditions of use
                     make regulations for granting temporary admission to the
of the regime.       Customs territory of goods of a specified class or
                     description imported for a specific purpose and intended
                     for re-exportation in the same state or following
                     manufacturing, processing or repair in the Customs
                     territory.
23 of 2013, s. 20.          (2) The Minister may make regulations pursuant to
                     section 354 to specify the conditions under which prior
                     authorisation is required for temporary admission of goods
                     to the Customs territory.
                            (3) Temporary admission shall be authorised for —
                            (a) goods imported directly from outside the
                                 Customs territory;
                            (b) goods in transit;
                            (c) goods entered under the bonded warehouse
                                 Customs procedures; or
                            (d) goods imported from a free zone.
                            (4) All prohibitions and restrictions specified in
                     section 208 shall apply to temporarily admitted goods.
                           (5) The Comptroller shall prescribe by rule
                     conditions under which goods intended for temporary
                     admission shall be produced to the Customs authority and
                     an entry made.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 167


       (6) The Customs authority, where goods are
temporarily admitted to undergo manufacturing or
processing in the Customs territory, shall —
       (a) fix the rate of yield of the operation to be
            undergone by reference to the actual conditions
            under which the operation is effected; and
       (b) specify, upon fixing the rate of yield in
            paragraph (a), the description, quality and
            quantity of the compensating products obtained
            during or as the result of the manufacturing or
            processing of the goods temporarily admitted.
       (7) Temporary admission shall be authorised for a
maximum period of one year.
       (8) Pursuant to sections 186(1) and (2), the owner
of goods shall provide security on temporarily admitted
goods in the Customs territory in the form prescribed by
the Customs authority and such security shall not exceed
the amount of duties from which the goods are
conditionally relieved.
       (9) The Customs authority may, for the purpose of
identifying goods temporarily admitted and subject to re-
exportation in the same state, have recourse to the affixing
of Customs marks where the temporarily admitted goods
cannot be readily identified by means of foreign seals, by
marks, numbers or other indications permanently affixed to
them.
       (10) Goods shall be re-exported upon expiry of the
period for temporary admission.
       (11) Goods temporarily admitted to the Customs
territory shall be deemed to be re-exported in the same
state despite —
       (a) normal depreciation due to the use made of such
            goods during their stay in the Customs territory;
            or
       (b) undergoing operations necessary for the
            preservation of temporarily admitted goods.
       (12) The Customs authority may under certain
circumstances authorise —
       (a) entry for home consumption of a certain
            quantity of compensating products obtained
            during or as the result of the manufacturing or
            processing of the goods temporarily admitted; or

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 168]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            (b) destruction of temporarily admitted goods.
Payment of duty.            198. (1) Repealed.
23 of 2013, s. 21.          (2) Goods imported in accordance with this section
                     for a temporary use or purpose may be wholly or partially
                     exempted from liability to import duties.
                            (3) For the purposes of this section, the Minister
                     may by regulations —
                            (a) specify goods, or any class of goods, either
                                 generally or in any particular manner, which
                                 may be imported in accordance with this
                                 section;
                            (b) impose conditions to be fulfilled in respect of
                                 the importation or use of such goods;
                            (c) determine the period of time during which
                                 temporary importation shall be permitted and
                                 after which such goods shall be exported;
                            (d) specify, in cases of partial exemption from the
                                 liability to import duty, the proportion of the
                                 import duty to which such goods are liable.
                            (4) Subject to the prescribed regulations, no goods
                     shall be exempt from liability to import duty under this
                     section unless the owner of the goods has deposited or
                     given security for the amount of the import duty to which
                     the goods would otherwise be liable.
                            (5) Goods shall, where any condition of their
                     importation has been contravened, be liable to import duty
                     as from the date of their importation and any deposit given
                     under subsection (4) shall be brought to account as duty or,
                     if security was given, the owner shall be required to pay
                     duty.
                            (6) The owner of goods shall, where no condition of
                     their importation has been contravened, be entitled on the
                     exportation of the goods to have any deposit paid under
                     subsection (4) refunded or any security given discharged.
                            (7) The Customs authority may assess import duties
                     on waste deriving from the processing or manufacturing of
                     goods temporarily admitted for inward processing that is
                     not re-exported or treated in such a way as to render it
                     unusable or commercially valueless.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 169



                  PART XIV
            TEMPORARY EXPORTATION
                                                                 Prior
       199. (1) Pursuant to section 354, the Minister may        authorisation and
make regulations to authorise goods of a specified class or      conditions of use
                                                                 of the regime.
description which are in free circulation in the Customs
territory to be temporarily exported for manufacturing,
processing or repair outside of the Customs territory and
thereafter to be re-imported in the Customs territory with
total or partial exemption from import duties.
      (2) Temporary exportation for outward processing
may also be authorised in the case of goods which, while
being under an inward processing procedure in the
Customs territory, must be sent temporarily outside of the
Customs territory for supplementary processing.
      (3) Pursuant to section 354, the Minister may make
regulations to specify the conditions under which prior
authorisation is required for temporary exportation of
goods outside the Customs territory.
      (4) The Customs authority shall prescribe the
conditions under which goods for temporary exportation
shall be produced to the Customs authority and an entry
made.
      (5) The Customs authority may, for the purpose of
identifying goods temporarily exported for outward
processing, affix marks or rely on marks, numbers or other
indications permanently affixed to the goods.

                     PART XV
               CUSTOMS WAREHOUSES
     200. (1) Goods may be deposited in a Customs                Depositing goods
warehouse where —                                                in Customs
                                                                 warehouses.
     (a) goods remain unentered at the expiration of the
          period permitted under section 104(2)(b) or
          within such further period as the Comptroller
          may allow;
     (b) goods are not removed from a bonded
          warehouse at the expiry of the period indicated
          in section 189(2) or of such period as prescribed
          by the Minister pursuant to section 189(3); or
     (c) goods are abandoned by the owner of goods
          after unloading or temporary deposit in a
          Customs-approved transit shed.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 170]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         (2) The Customs authority shall take particular
                   account of the goods deposited in a Customs warehouse
                   pursuant to subsection (1).
                         (3) The Customs authority may, where under this
                   Act goods are required to be deposited in a Customs
                   warehouse, decide in its discretion that it is undesirable or
                   inconvenient to deposit such goods in the Customs
                   warehouse and direct that such goods be deposited in some
                   other place whereupon the goods shall for all purposes be
                   deemed to have been deposited in a Customs warehouse as
                   from the time that they are required to be so deposited.
                         (4) The owner of goods shall be liable for any
                   deterioration or loss of the goods during the period of
                   deposit in a Customs warehouse.
                         (5) The Customs authority shall not be liable for the
                   loss or damage to goods occasioned by reason of being
                   deposited and dealt with in a Customs warehouse.
                         (6) All costs incurred during or as a result of the
                   deposit of goods in a Customs warehouse shall be
                   chargeable to the owner of goods.
                         (7) Goods deposited in a Customs warehouse shall
                   only be examined in the presence of the owner of the
                   goods.
Sale by public           201. (1) The Customs authority may, where goods
auction of goods
deposited in
                   deposited in a Customs warehouse are not lawfully
Customs            removed within two months after deposit, sell such goods
warehouse.         by public auction after one month’s notice in the Gazette.
                         (2) Goods which are of a perishable nature may be
                   sold by the Customs authority without notice, either by
                   public auction or otherwise, at any time after deposit in the
                   Customs warehouse.
                         (3) The proceeds of sale shall, where goods are sold
                   under this section, be applied in order of priority in
                   discharge of —
                         (a) duties, if any;
                         (b) expenses of removal and sale;
                         (c) rent and charges due to the Customs authority;
                             and
                         (d) any other charges.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 171


      (4) Any balance remaining after the proceeds of
sale have been applied in accordance with subsection (3)
shall —
      (a) be paid into the Customs revenue, if the goods
           were prohibited or restricted goods in relation to
           which there had been a contravention or if no
           application for the balance is made by the owner
           pursuant to paragraph (b);
      (b) be paid to the owner of goods subject to
           application being made by the owner within one
           month of the date of the sale.
      (5) Goods offered for sale in accordance with this
section which cannot be sold for a sum sufficient to cover
the charges referred to in subsection (3) may be destroyed
or disposed of in such a manner as the Comptroller may
direct.
      (6) The Customs authority may refuse delivery of
goods deposited in a Customs warehouse until the Customs
authority is satisfied that all duties and other charges and
expenses due in respect of those goods have been paid.

                        PART XVI
                       FREE ZONES
      202. (1) For the purposes of this Act, a Free Zone         Definition.
means a part of the territory of The Bahamas where any
goods introduced are regarded, insofar as duties only are
concerned, as being outside of the Customs territory.
      (2) The provisions of this Act shall, in all respects
other than stated in subsection (1), apply to all goods and
materials entering, existing or being processed within, and
exiting from, Free Zones except in such cases as may be
determined by the Minister.
      203. (1) The Government may designate, by Act of           Establishment
Parliament, parts of the territory of The Bahamas as Free        and concession.
Zones.
      (2) Points of entry and exit in relation to Free Zones
shall be defined.
      (3) Persons established or with goods located in a
Free Zone shall, in the event of the closure of the Free
Zone and subject to compliance with the applicable
conditions and formalities, be given sufficient time —
      (a) to remove their goods to another Free Zone; or

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 172]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (b) to place them under a Customs procedure.
Authorised                 204. (1) Admission to a Free Zone shall not be
goods, prohibited
goods and other
                    refused solely on the grounds that the goods, irrespective
restrictions.       of country of origin or country of shipment, are liable to
                    prohibitions or restrictions not being prohibitions and
                    restrictions imposed on grounds of—
                           (a) public morality or order, public security or
                                health, or veterinary or phytosanitary
                                considerations; or
                           (b) protection of an intellectual property right.
                           (2) Subject to subsection (1), admission to a Free
                    Zone shall be authorised for —
                           (a) goods of any class or description imported
                                directly from abroad; or
                           (b) any goods brought from the Customs territory
                                being goods deemed to be exported for the
                                purpose of drawback under this Act.
                           (3) The Customs authority may require that
                    hazardous goods, which are likely to affect other goods or
                    which require special safety precautions, shall be placed in
                    premises specially equipped to receive them.
Authorised                 205. (1) Goods admitted to a Free Zone shall be
operations.         allowed to undergo —
                           (a) loading, unloading and transhipment;
                           (b) any form of handling such as breaking bulk,
                                grouping of packages, sorting, grading and
                                repacking;
                           (c) storage; and
                           (d) all operations necessary for their preservation.
                           (2) The Government may authorise, by Act to
                    Parliament, the manufacture and processing of goods
                    placed in a Free Zone and shall specify the processing or
                    manufacturing operations to which goods may be
                    subjected.
                           (3) The Government shall, by Act to Parliament,
                    enumerate the cases in which goods to be consumed inside
                    a Free Zone may be admitted in exemption of duties and
                    shall lay down the requirements which must be met.
                           (4) Goods admitted to a Free Zone may transfer
                    ownership.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 173


      (5) Goods admitted to a Free Zone may be used as
stores for vessels and aircraft used for international trade.
      206. (1) Entries shall be made for goods entering or       Entry and
leaving a Free Zone.                                             removal of
                                                                 goods.
      (2) The Customs authority may conduct checks on
goods entering or leaving a Free Zone.
      (3) The Customs authority may carry out checks at
any time on the goods stored in a Free Zone to ensure
that—
      (a) the goods are being accounted for satisfactorily;
      (b) the goods are subject only to operations
            authorised by the Government under this Act or
            other Customs legislation; and
      (c) no unauthorised goods have been introduced or
            removed from the Free Zone.
      (4) A person carrying on an activity of the kind
specified in sections 205(1) and (2) shall —
      (a) keep records in a form prescribed by the
            Customs authority; and
      (b) when goods are transshipped within a Free
            Zone, keep all documents relating to such
            activity at the disposal of the Customs authority.
      (5) Goods admitted to or produced in a Free Zone
may be —
      (a) removed in part or in full to another Free Zone;
      (b) exported or re-exported; or
      (c) brought into the Customs territory to be placed
            under a Customs procedure, subject to
            compliance with the conditions and formalities
            applicable in each case.
      (6) The Customs authority may, where appropriate,
certify on request of the exporter that the goods leaving the
Free Zone originate in The Bahamas.
      (7) There shall be no limit imposed, unless
otherwise prescribed by the Minister by order published in
the Gazette, on the duration of the stay of goods in a Free
Zone.
      207. (1) The introduction or re-introduction of            Payment of duty.
dutiable goods in the Customs territory shall entail
payment of the appropriate duty.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 174]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       (2) The rates of duty chargeable on goods removed
                from a Free Zone and imported into the Customs territory
                shall be those in force with respect to the goods of that
                class or description at the time of the removal of the goods
                from the Free Zone for home consumption.
                       (3) Where goods have undergone processing and
                manufacturing in a Free Zone —
                       (a) the amount of import duty chargeable on goods
                           entered for home consumption after such
                           processing or manufacturing shall be limited to
                           the amount of import duty applicable to the
                           imported goods in the state in which they were
                           originally introduced into the Free Zone; and
                       (b) the nature of goods, their Customs value and the
                           quantity to be taken into consideration shall be
                           those that existed at the time the goods were
                           entered in the Free Zone had they not undergone
                           such processing or manufacturing.
                       (4) The amount of import duty chargeable on goods
                imported into the Customs territory for home consumption
                after processing or manufacturing in a Free Zone shall,
                where goods of Bahamian origin were used, be limited to
                the amount of import duty applicable to the imported goods
                used and in the state in which they were originally
                introduced into the Free Zone.
                       (5) The Customs value and the rate of duty
                applicable in the case of uncustomed goods shall be those
                which would apply in respect of such goods at the time the
                goods became uncustomed goods, if known, or the rate and
                Customs value in force on the day of forfeiture, whichever
                is the higher.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 175



                    PART XVII
        PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED GOODS
       208. (1) It shall be unlawful to import into the          Prohibited and
Customs territory any of the goods specified in Head A of        restricted
                                                                 imports.
the First Schedule.                                              First Schedule.
       (2) The goods specified in Head B of the First            First Schedule.
Schedule are restricted goods and such goods may not be
imported in the Customs territory except in accordance
with the conditions of the relevant restriction.
       (3) The Minister may, by order published in the
Gazette, amend the First Schedule.
       (4) A prohibition or restriction imposed by an order
made under subsection (3) may —
       (a) be general;
       (b) be limited to the importation of goods from a
            specified place or by or from a specified person
            or class of persons; or
       (c) whether general or limited, be absolute or
            conditional.
       (5) All orders in force at the commencement of this
Act prohibiting or restricting the importation of goods into
the Customs territory shall continue in force as if they were
made under this Act, unless revoked.
       (6) No goods otherwise dutiable are exempt from
duty because their importation is unlawful.
       209. (1) It shall be unlawful to export from the          Prohibited and
Customs territory any of the goods specified in Head A of        restricted
                                                                 exports.
the Second Schedule.                                             Second Schedule.
       (2) The goods specified in Head B of the Second           Second Schedule.
Schedule are restricted goods and these goods may not be
exported from the Customs territory except in accordance
with the conditions of the relevant restriction regulating
their exportation.
      (3) The Minister may, by order published in the
Gazette, amend the Second Schedule.                               Second Schedule.

     (4) A prohibition or restriction imposed by an order
made under subsection (3) may —
     (a) be general;



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 176]                          CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            (b) be limited to the exportation of goods to a
                                  specified place or by or from a specified person
                                  or class of persons; or
                            (c) whether general or limited, be absolute or
                                  conditional.
                            (5) All orders in force at the commencement of this
                      Act prohibiting or restricting the exportation of goods from
                      the Customs territory shall continue in force as if they were
                      made under this Act, unless revoked.
                            (6) No goods otherwise dutiable are exempt from
                      duty because their exportation is unlawful.
                            (7) No prohibition under this section applies to
                      goods that are already loaded into or onto the exporting
                      means of transport at the time when the prohibition comes
                      into force.
Production of               210. (1) A conditional prohibition may allow the
licence or permit
for goods.
                      importation or exportation of goods —
                            (a) under the authority of a licence, permit or
                                  consent granted by the competent authority or
                                  by any other person named therein, whether
                                  granted before or after the importation of the
                                  goods, subject to such terms and conditions not
                                  inconsistent with the provisions of the
                                  prohibition as may be imposed by the grantor; or
                            (b) on or subject to any other prescribed conditions.
                            (2) The Customs authority shall, where under this
                      Act or any other Act the importation or exportation of
                      goods of any class or description is prohibited or restricted,
                      refuse to enter such goods or to clear them for exportation
                      unless —
                            (a) the goods are imported or exported under the
                                  authority of a licence, permit or consent; and
                            (b) the importer or exporter produces such licence,
                                  permit or consent in respect of the goods.
Goods in transit,           211. (1) Sections 208 and 210 shall not, save where
for transshipment
or as stores for
                      expressly provided to the contrary in the First Schedule,
vessel or aircraft.   apply to goods imported in transit or for transshipment, or
First Schedule.       as the bona fide stores of any aircraft or vessel and —
                            (a) such goods shall be duly re-exported within such
                                  time as the Comptroller may specify; and




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                               LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 177



     (b) if not so re-exported, such goods shall as from
          the last date on which they should have been re-
          exported be deemed to be prohibited or
          restricted goods, as the case may be, and to have
          been imported on such date.
     (2) Section 209 and 210 shall not, save where
expressly provided to the contrary in the Second Schedule,
apply to goods in transit or for transshipment, or goods
exported as stores of any aircraft or vessel, and —
     (a) such goods shall be duly exported or re-exported
          within such time as the Comptroller may
          specify; and
     (b) if not so exported or re-exported, such goods
          shall as from the last date on which they should
          have been exported or re-exported be deemed to
          be prohibited or restricted goods, as the case
          may be.

                PART XVIIA
    EXPORT CONTROL AND REGULATION OF
         SCRAP METAL AND COPPER
     211A. (1) In this Part —                                     Interpretation.

     “authorised dealer” means an exporter, shipper or            23 of 2013, s. 22.
           vendor of scrap metal in possession of a valid
           business licence issued pursuant to the Business       Ch. 329.
           Licence Act;
     “authorised officer” means a —
           (a) customs officer;
           (b) police officer; or
           (c) Department of Environmental Health
                Officer of Assistant Director or above,
     assigned to the special investigation unit within the
     Customs Department;
     “certified shipment” means a shipment or container
           of scrap metal presented for export or
           transshipment which has been inspected and
           certified by an authorised officer to contain
           permitted scrap;
     “documented chain of custody” means the
           documentary evidence referred to in section
           211B certifying the origin and history of scrap
           metal;
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 178]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      “permitted scrap” means metal generated from —
                           (a) contracted demolition;
                           (b) authorised removal of derelict vehicles;
                           (c) authorised scrapping of industrial equip-
                                ment; or
                           (d) a verified dump site;
                      “restricted metals” means copper, aluminium, brass
                            and catalytic converters which comprise
                            permitted scrap;
                     “special investigation unit” means the unit within the
                            Customs Department established pursuant to
                            section 211C.
                     (2) No person shall —
                     (a) export scrap metal from The Bahamas to any
                           place outside The Bahamas; or
                     (b) transship scrap metal from a Family Island to
                           New Providence or to any other Family Island,
                     unless —
                           (i) such person is an authorised dealer;
                          (ii) records showing a documented chain of
                               custody have been submitted with the
                               shipment or container;
                         (iii) the shipment or container is a certified
                               shipment;
                         (iv) in the case of copper, the exporter, shipper or
                               vendor has held the copper in his possession
                               for a period of 30 days prior to its
                               presentation for export or transshipment; and
                         (v) permission for export or transshipment has
                               been granted by a customs officer of the
                               special investigation unit.
                     (3) A person who contravenes any provision of
                subsection (2) commits an offence and shall be liable on
                summary conviction to —
                     (a) a fine not exceeding fifty thousand dollars or
                           three times the value of the shipment or
                           container of scrap metal, whichever is the
                           greater sum;
                     (b) imprisonment for a term not exceeding twelve
                           months; or



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 179


      (c) both fine and imprisonment as described in
          paragraphs (a) and (b).
   211B. (1) An authorised dealer shall keep records of           Requirement to
                                                                  keep records to
each customer from whom he receives scrap metal and               document chain
such records shall include, for each customer —                   of custody.
      (a) a valid photo identification;                           23 of 2013, s. 22.
      (b) a receipt signed by the customer for each
          transfer of scrap metal to the dealer;
      (c) a certification by the customer —
           (i) that the scrap metal was legitimately
               obtained by him;
          (ii) outlining the origin and history of the scrap
               metal prior to its possession by the
               customer; and
      (d) in the case of copper, the customer’s seal on the
          container.
      (2) The records referred to in subsection (1) shall —
      (a) provide a documented chain of custody when
          submitted in respect of a shipment or container of
          scrap metal presented for export or
          transshipment; and
      (b) be kept in accordance with the provisions of
          section 70.
    211C. (1) The Comptroller shall establish a special           Special
                                                                  investigation
investigation unit within the Customs Department —                unit.
      (a) to investigate and inspect shipments or containers      23 of 2013, s. 22.
          of scrap metal presented for export or
          transshipment;
      (b) after due investigation and inspection —
            (i) to certify that a shipment or container
                contains permitted scrap; or
           (ii) to refer the matter to the Royal Bahamas
                Police Force where a shipment or container
                does not contain permitted scrap;
      (c) to conduct a comprehensive chain of custody
           investigation and inspection where a shipment or
           container of permitted scrap comprises copper or
           other restricted metals.
      (2) The special investigation unit may comprise, in
addition to customs officers, officers assigned to it from


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 180]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     the Royal Bahamas Police Force and the Department of
                     Environmental Health Services.
                           (3) The special investigation unit shall carry out its
                     inspection and sealing of scrap metal containers laden for
                     export —
                           (a) either at the point of demolition and during
                               loading into a container for export; or
                           (b) at the exporter’s place of business, if different
                               from (a).
                           (4) Officers of the special investigation unit only
                     shall be authorised to certify that a shipment or container
                     of scrap metal presented for export or transshipment
                     contains permitted scrap.
                            (5) A customs officer of the special investigation
                     unit only shall be authorised to grant permission to export
                     or transship permitted scrap.
Grant of                 211D. (1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), a customs
permission to
export.
                     officer of the special investigation unit shall grant
                     permission to export or transship permitted scrap where —
23 of 2013, s. 22.
                            (a) the shipment is a certified shipment;
                            (b) the exporter or shipper is an authorised dealer;
                                and
                            (c) a documented chain of custody has been
                                submitted with the shipment or container.
                            (2) A customs officer of the special investigation
                     unit shall not, where a certified shipment comprises
                     restricted metals excluding copper, grant permission to
                     export or transship until after a period of 15 days has
                     elapsed since presentation for export or transshipment, as
                     the case may be, to ensure and facilitate a comprehensive
                     chain of custody investigation and inspection by the special
                     investigations unit.
                            (3) A customs officer of the special investigation
                     unit shall not, where a certified shipment comprises
                     copper, grant permission to export or transship unless —
                            (a) the exporter, shipper or vendor has held the
                                copper in his possession for a period of 30 days
                                prior to its presentation for export or
                                transshipment;
                            (b) the special investigations unit has completed a
                                comprehensive chain of custody investigation


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                 [CH.293– 181


          and inspection and verified the legitimacy of the
          origin and history of the copper; and
      (c) where the copper comes from equipment or
          appliances, such equipment or appliance has
          been presented for export in its assembled state.

                      PART XVIII
                  COUNTERFEIT AND
                   PIRATED GOODS
       212. (1) This Part sets out the conditions for action       Customs action
by the Customs authority when goods are suspected of               against goods
                                                                   suspected of
infringing an intellectual property in the following               infringing certain
situations —                                                       intellectual
                                                                   property rights.
       (a) when they are imported into the Customs
            territory;
       (b) when they are exported or re-exported from the
            Customs territory;
       (c) when they are entered into a bonded warehouse;
       (d) when they are entered for temporary admission
            into the Customs territory;
       (e) when they are in transit; or
       (f) when they are found during checks conducted
            by the Customs authority on goods —
            (i) deposited in a Customs-approved transit
                  shed;
            (ii) in the process of being re-exported; or
            (iii) placed in a Free Zone.
       (2) For the purposes of this Act, “goods infringing
intellectual property rights” means —
       (a) “counterfeit goods” namely —
            (i) goods, including packaging, bearing
                  without authorisation a trademark identical
                  to the trademark validly registered in
                  respect of the same type of goods, or which
                  cannot be distinguished in its essential
                  aspects from such a trademark, and which
                  thereby infringes the trademark-holder’s
                  rights;
            (ii) any trademark symbol, including a logo,
                  label, sticker, brochure, instructions for use
                  or guarantee document bearing such a
                  symbol, even if presented separately, which

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 182]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                                 infringes the trademark-holder’s rights in
                                 the same manner of the goods referred to in
                                 subparagraph (i);
                           (iii) packaging materials bearing the trademarks
                                 of counterfeit goods, presented separately,
                                 which infringe the trademark-holder’s
                                 rights in the same manner of the goods
                                 referred to in subparagraph (i);
                      (b) “pirated goods”, namely goods which are or
                           contain copies made without the consent of the
                           holder of the copyright or related right or design
                           right, or of a person duly authorised by the
                           holder in the country of production, regardless
                           of whether it is registered pursuant to the law of
                           The Bahamas;
                      (c) goods which infringe —
                           (i) a patent;
                           (ii) a national plant variety right;
                           (iii) geographical indications; or
                           (iv) any such other intellectual property right as
                                 may be prescribed by the Minister by
                                 regulation pursuant to section 354.
                      (3) For the purposes of this section and sections 213
                to 218, “right-holder” means —
                      (a) the holder of a trademark, copyright or related
                           right, design right, patent, plant variety right or a
                           protected designation of origin, or a protected
                           geographical indication; and
                      (b) any other person authorised to use any of the
                           intellectual property rights mentioned in
                           paragraph (a) or a representative of the right-
                           holder or authorised user.
                      (4) Any mould or matrix which is specifically
                designed or adapted for the manufacture of goods
                infringing intellectual property rights shall be treated as
                goods of that kind, if the use of such moulds or matrices
                infringes the right-holder’s rights under the law of The
                Bahamas.
                      (5) This Part shall not apply to goods which have
                been manufactured with the consent of the right-holder but
                are placed under one of the situations referred to in
                subsection (1) —



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 183


      (a) bearing a trademark with the consent of the
           right-holder of that trademark;
      (b) bearing a protected geographical indication;
      (c) being protected by a patent, a copyright or
           related right or by a design right; or
      (d) being protected by a plant variety right.
      (6) The provisions of this Part shall not apply where
traveller’s personal baggage contains goods of a non-
commercial nature within the limits of the duty-free
allowance and there are no material indications to suggest
the goods are part of commercial traffic.
      213. (1) A right-holder of an intellectual property        Application for
right may make application to the Customs authority, in          action by the
                                                                 Customs
accordance with this Act, for suspension of Customs              authority.
clearance procedures and detention of goods where the
right-holder suspects goods infringing intellectual property
rights are found in one of the situations referred to in
section 212(1).
      (2) An application by a right-holder under
subsection (1) shall be submitted to the Central Office of
the Bahamas Customs Department.
      (3) An application in respect of goods suspected to
infringe intellectual property rights shall be submitted in
writing in such format, including by electronic means, as
may be prescribed by the Customs authority and contain all
information required to enable the goods in question to be
readily recognised by the Customs authority, including —
      (a) the name and business address of the applicant;
      (b) a statement of the grounds for the application for
           border measures related to the goods in
           question;
      (c) an accurate and detailed technical description of
           the goods in respect of which an intellectual
           property right applies together with all necessary
           documentation and, where appropriate, a sample
           of the genuine product;
      (d) any specific information the right-holder may
           have concerning the type or pattern of fraud;
      (e) details specific to the type of intellectual
           property right referred to in the application for
           action;


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 184]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     (f) the name and address of the person appointed by
                         the right-holder to be contacted by the Customs
                         authority in case goods suspected to infringe the
                         concerned intellectual property right are found
                         by the Customs authority;
                     (g) in the case of a specific shipment of allegedly
                         infringing goods or for all shipments in
                         general —
                         (i) a statement including prima facie evidence
                               showing that such intellectual property right
                               has been infringed or that right is about to
                               be infringed;
                         (ii) information on particulars identifying the
                               consignment;
                         (iii) the location of the goods;
                         (iv) the scheduled arrival or departure date of
                               the goods;
                         (v) the means of transport used;
                         (vi) the identity of the importer, exporter or
                               holder of the goods;
                         (vii) the technical differences, if known, between
                               the authentic and suspect goods;
                     (h) where appropriate, information on previous
                         findings showing examples of goods infringing
                         the intellectual property right referred to in the
                         application.
                     (4) An application under this section shall be
                accompanied, where appropriate, by —
                     (a) adequate evidence by, or on behalf of, the
                         applicant of the ownership of a valid intellectual
                         property right for the goods in question;
                     (b) authorisation from the right-holder, in
                         accordance with the applicable law, where the
                         applicant is any other person authorised to use
                         the intellectual property right, or a representative
                         of the right-holder;
                     (c) a declaration from the right-holder, which may
                         be submitted in writing or electronically in
                         accordance with the laws of The Bahamas —
                         (i) accepting liability towards the persons
                               involved in a situation referred to in section
                               212(1) in the event that a procedure


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                 [CH.293– 185


                 initiated pursuant to section 215 is
                 discontinued owing to an act or omission by
                 the right holder or in the event that the
                 goods in question are subsequently found
                 not to infringe an intellectual property right;
            (ii) agreeing to bear all costs incurred during
                 the procedure for assistance in keeping
                 goods under Customs control pursuant to
                 section 209; and
       (d) the fee as prescribed in regulations.
       (5) The Customs authority shall not reject an
application without further examination on the basis that
the applicant has not provided some of the information
listed in subsections (3) and (4) but may, at any time,
request further information from an applicant if the
Customs authority considers that the information is
relevant to the application.
       (6) The Customs authority shall, within a
reasonable period of time not to exceed thirty working days
from the date of receipt of the application, notify the
applicant in writing whether the application has been
accepted or rejected and, if the application is rejected,
clearly state the reasons for the rejection.
       (7) The Customs authority shall for a duration of
one year, unless the applicant requests a shorter period for
assistance or applies for action in cases of specific
shipments, provide assistance regarding applications made
under this section and shall on expiry of the one year
period extend that period upon the written application of
the right-holder.
       (8) The Customs authority shall inform all its
offices immediately after the granting of an application of
the details of the application and of the goods referred to in
the application.
       (9) A right-holder having commenced action under
this section shall inform the Customs authority if his
intellectual property right ceases to be valid or if he ceases
to be the owner of the intellectual property right for any
reason whatsoever.
       (10) Where the Customs authority has sufficient
grounds in the course of action taken pursuant to section
212(1), and before an application pursuant to subsection


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
 CH.293 – 186]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     (1) has been lodged by a right-holder or granted, to believe
                     that there are goods infringing intellectual property rights,
                     the Customs authority may suspend the release of such
                     goods or detain them for a period of three working days
                     from the moment of receipt of a notification by the right-
                     holder and by the holder of the goods, if the latter is
                     known, in order to enable the right-holder to submit an
                     application for action under this section.
                            (11) The Customs authority may, during the course
                     of any action pursuant to subsection (10), without
                     divulging any information other than the actual or
                     supposed number of items and their nature and before
                     informing the right-holder of any possible infringement,
                     request the right-holder to provide the proper officer with
                     such further information that may be needed to confirm the
                     suspicion of infringement.
 Provision of               214. (1) The Customs authority may require an
 security.           applicant to provide a security or equivalent assurance or
                     undertaking sufficient to protect the consignee, consignor
                     or owner of the goods and the Customs authority.
                            (2) The security or equivalent assurance pursuant to
                     subsection (1) shall not be fixed at an amount which would
                     unreasonably deter recourse to these procedures and shall
                     be sufficient to protect the interests of the right-holder.
                            (3) Payment of the security shall not affect the other
                     legal remedies available to the right-holder.
 Detention of               215. (1) The Customs authority shall, where it is
 suspected
 counterfeit or
                     satisfied after consulting with the applicant, if necessary,
 pirated goods.      that goods found in one of the situations referred to in
                     section 212(1) are suspected to infringe intellectual
23 of 2013, s. 23.   property rights, detain the goods referred to in the
                     application and such detention shall remain in force for an
                     initial period, and any extension thereof, in accordance
                     with sections 216(1) and (2).
                            (2) The proper officer shall immediately inform the
                     Central Office of the Bahamas Customs Department which
                     processed an application of a detention.
                            (3) The Customs authority shall immediately inform
                     the owner of the goods, the consignee or consignor and the
                     applicant, of a detention of goods and may inform them of
                     the actual or estimated quantity, and the actual or supposed
                     nature, of the goods which have been detained.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 187


      (4) The Customs authority shall, with a view to
establishing whether an intellectual property right has been
infringed and without prejudice to the protection of
personal data, commercial and industrial secrecy and
professional and administrative confidentiality, notify the
right-holder of the names and addresses of the consignee,
consignor, the owner of goods and the origin and place of
shipment of goods suspected of infringing an intellectual
property right.
      (5) The Customs authority shall give an applicant          23 of 2013, s. 23.
and the persons involved in any of the situations referred to
in section 212(1) an opportunity to examine goods which
have been detained; and —
      (a) when examining such goods, the proper officer
           may take samples, and provide them to the right-
           holder, strictly for the purposes of analysis and
           to facilitate subsequent procedures; and
      (b) any analysis of samples shall be carried out
           under the sole responsibility of the right-holder
           and at the right-holder’s expense.
      (6) A right-holder receiving a notification pursuant       23 of 2013, s. 23.
to subsection (4) shall use the information solely for the
purposes specified in section 216(1) and, upon any other
use by the right-holder, the Customs authority may in its
sole discretion —
      (a) suspend the right-holder’s application for action
           for the period of validity remaining before
           renewal;
      (b) refuse to renew the application.
      (7) The Customs authority shall determine the
conditions of storage of goods that are suspected of
infringing intellectual property rights during a period of
suspension of release or detention.
      (8) The right-holder may, where the Customs
authority has detained goods that are suspected of
infringing intellectual property rights, request the Customs
authority to permit such goods to be abandoned for
destruction under Customs control, without a determination
that an intellectual property right has been infringed,
subject to the following conditions —
      (a) the right-holder —



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 188]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                                (i) informs the Customs authority in writing
                                     within ten working days, or three working
                                     days in the case of perishable goods, of
                                     receipt of a notification under section 215
                                     that the goods concerned are infringing
                                     intellectual property rights within the
                                     meaning of this Act; and
                                (ii) provides the Customs authority with the
                                     written agreement of the importer, the
                                     owner of the goods, or the holder of the
                                     goods, to abandon the goods for
                                     destruction;
                           (b) the information and agreement referred to in
                                paragraph (a) —
                                (i) with the consent of the Customs authority,
                                     may be provided directly to the Customs
                                     authority by the importer, the owner of the
                                     goods or the holder of the goods;
                                (ii) shall be deemed to have been accepted by
                                     the parties for the purposes of this section if
                                     the importer, the owner of the goods or the
                                     holder of the goods has not specifically
                                     opposed the destruction of the goods within
                                     the prescribed period; and
                           (c) the Customs authority may, if in its opinion the
                                circumstances warrant, extend the prescribed
                                period by a further ten working days.
                           (9) Destruction of infringing goods pursuant to
                    subsection (8) shall be carried out at the expense, and
                    under the responsibility, of the right-holder and shall in all
                    cases be preceded by the taking of samples of such goods
                    for keeping by the Customs authority as are necessary to
                    constitute evidence admissible in any future legal
                    proceedings.
                           (10) The simplified procedures set out in subsection
                    (8) shall not be available to the right-holder if the importer,
                    the holder of the goods or the owner of the goods objects
                    to, or contests in any way, the destruction of the goods that
                    are suspected of infringing intellectual property rights.
Release of goods.          216. (1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), goods
                    shall be released subject to completion of all other Customs
                    formalities if, within a period of ten working days after the
                    applicant has been served notice of a detention, the


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                               LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 189


Customs authority has not been informed that proceedings
have been initiated by a party other than the defendant to
determine —
       (a) whether an intellectual property right has been
            infringed; or
       (b) that the Customs authority has undertaken
            measures to prolong the detention of the goods
            pursuant to subsection (2).
       (2) The Customs authority may in appropriate cases
extend the period referred to in subsection (1) by a
maximum of ten working days.
       (3) The period for detention shall, in the case of
perishable goods that are suspected of infringing
intellectual property rights, be three working days and such
period may not be extended.
       (4) The owner or holder or consignee of goods
shall, in the case of goods that are suspected of infringing
intellectual property rights other than trademarks,
copyright and related rights, be entitled to obtain the
release of the goods on the posting of a security and on
condition that —
       (a) the Customs authority has been notified that a
            procedure has been initiated within the period
            provided for in subsection (1) to establish
            whether an intellectual property right has been
            infringed under the law of The Bahamas;
       (b) all Customs formalities have been completed;
       (c) the security provided is sufficient to protect the
            interest of the rightholder for any infringement;
       (d) the payment of such security will not prejudice
            any other remedy available to the right holder;
            and
       (e) the security shall be released if the right holder
            fails to pursue his right of action within a
            reasonable period of time.
       (5) The security referred to in subsection (4) shall
be released if the rightholder does not exercise his right to
institute legal proceedings within twenty working days of
the date on which he receives notification of the suspension
of release or detention.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 190]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (6) This section shall also apply in cases where
                    goods are detained in the course of any criminal
                    investigation.
Provisions                 217. (1) Goods found to infringe intellectual property
applicable to
goods found to
                    rights shall not be —
infringe                   (a) entered for home consumption;
intellectual
property rights.           (b) exported or re-exported from the Customs
                                territory;
                           (c) placed under transit procedures;
                           (d) entered in a bonded warehouse;
                           (e) temporarily admitted in the Customs territory; or
                           (f) placed in a Free Zone.
                           (2) The Customs authority may, where it is
                    determined by court order that goods detained under
                    provisions of this Act are subject to confiscation as goods
                    infringing intellectual property rights, without prejudice to
                    other legal remedies open to the right-holder —
                           (a) destroy such goods at no cost to the Treasury; or
                           (b) have such goods destroyed by the right-holder
                                under the supervision of the Customs authority.
Liability of the           218. (1) The right-holder’s liability to other parties
Customs
authority and the
                    shall be governed by the law of The Bahamas.
right holder.              (2) Save as otherwise provided by the laws in force
                    in The Bahamas, the acceptance of an application shall not
                    entitle the right-holder to compensation in the event that
                    such goods are not detected by the Customs authority and
                    are released or no action is taken to detain them in
                    accordance with section 215(1).
                           (3) The lawful execution of authority conferred on
                    the Customs authority under this Part to take action in
                    respect of goods that are suspected of infringing
                    intellectual property rights shall not render the Customs
                    authority liable for loss or damages to any person affected
                    by the exercise of such authority.
                                       PART XIX
                               CUSTOMS ADVANCE RULINGS
Application for           219. (1) A person may make an application, in
Customs ruling.     respect of particular goods specified in the application, to
                    the Customs authority for a Customs ruling in respect of
                    any one or more of the following matters —
                          (a) tariff classification of goods;

STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 191


       (b) determination of the origin of the goods for the
           purposes of this Act and other Customs
           legislation; or
       (c) valuation of the goods.
       (2) An application under subsection (1) may be
made —
       (a) at any time before the date of importation or
           exportation into or from the Customs territory of
           the goods that are the subject of the application;
           or
       (b) at any later time, if the Customs authority, in its
           sole discretion, permits.
       (3) A person may, in addition to those matters
specified in subsection (1), make application to the
Customs authority for a Customs ruling in relation to the
correct application of any provision of this Act or other
Customs legislation including any regulations, order or
rules, made pursuant to such legislation.
       (4) Every application under this section shall be in
the prescribed form, and shall —
       (a) state the name and address of the applicant;
       (b) specify the particular goods that are the subject
           of the application;
       (c) specify, in respect of those goods, the matter or
           matters listed under subsections (1) and (3) on
           which the applicant requests a Customs ruling
           and the applicant’s opinion as to what the
           Customs ruling should be;
       (d) unless the Customs authority agrees otherwise,
           be accompanied by the goods, or a sample of the
           goods, or sufficient technical description or
           documentation as is deemed necessary by the
           Customs authority;
       (e) contain, or have attached, all information
           relevant to a proper consideration of the
           application; and
       (f) be accompanied by such fee as may be
           prescribed by the Custom authority.
      (5) A ruling may be requested by, and given to, a
single person or several persons having a direct interest in
the matter.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 192]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (6) The Customs authority may, at any time, request
                  further information from an applicant if the Customs
                  authority considers such information to be relevant to the
                  application.
Making of               220. (1) Subject to subsection (8), the Customs
Customs ruling.   authority shall —
                        (a) in the case of an application made under section
                             219(1), make a ruling in respect of the goods
                             specified in the application and in respect of the
                             matter or matters on which the ruling is sought;
                             or
                        (b) in the case of an application made under section
                             219(3), make a ruling in respect of the particular
                             matter specified in the application.
                        (2) The Customs authority shall make a ruling
                  under subsection (1) as soon as possible and at the latest
                  within sixty working days, or such other time or times as
                  may be prescribed, from the date on which the request is
                  received by the Customs authority.
                         (3) The Customs authority shall, where it is unable
                  to comply with the time limits referred to in subsection (2),
                  inform the applicant of that fact before the expiry of such
                  time limits, stating the reasons and indicating the further
                  period of time it considers necessary in order to give a
                  ruling on the request.
                         (4) The applicant shall be notified in writing of the
                  Customs ruling which shall set out the grounds on which it
                  is based.
                         (5) The Customs ruling shall refer to the right of
                  appeal provided for in section 228.
                         (6) The Customs authority may decline to make a
                  Customs ruling if, in the Customs authority’s opinion, it
                  has insufficient information to do so.
Advance binding          221. (1) The Customs authority shall, on application
rulings.          by a person with an interest therein and in a format to be
                  prescribed by the Comptroller, issue a binding advance
                  ruling to permit the applicant to determine the status of
                  goods to be imported prior to the importation for purposes
                  of this Act and other Customs legislation with respect to —
                         (a) classification for tariff purposes of specific
                              goods (called a “BTC ruling”);



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 193


      (b) origin of specific goods (called a “BOI ruling”);
            or
      (c) proper valuation of specific goods for Customs
            purposes (called a “BVI” ruling).
      (2) An application for obtaining a BTC, BOI or BVI
ruling shall be refused —
      (a) where the request is made, or has already been
            made, to the Customs authority by or on behalf
            of person or persons who have already obtained
            a determination in respect of the same goods
            and, in the case of BOI rulings, under the same
            factual circumstances in relation to determining
            the origin of the goods; or
      (b) where, in the opinion of the Customs authority,
            the application does not relate to any intended
            use of the requested ruling or any intended use
            of a Customs procedure.
      (3) BTC, BOI or BVI rulings shall be binding only
in respect of the tariff classification, determination of the
origin of the goods, or determination of the valuation
methodology to be applied for specific goods under
specific circumstances.
      (4) BTC, BOI or BVI rulings shall be binding on
the Customs authority, in relation to the person to whom
the ruling was addressed, only in respect of goods for
which Customs formalities have been completed after the
date of the ruling.
      (5) BTC, BOI or BVI rulings shall be binding on
the holder of the ruling, in relation to the Customs
authority, only with effect from the date on which
notification of the ruling is received.
      (6) BTC, BOI or BVI rulings shall be valid until
such rulings are annulled or modified by the Customs
authority.
      (7) The person to whom a BTC, BOI or a BVI
ruling is addressed shall, in order for such ruling to apply
in the context of a particular Customs procedure, prove —
      (a) in the case of a BTC ruling, that the goods
            declared correspond in every respect to those
            described in the ruling;
      (b) in the case of a BOI ruling, that the goods
            declared and the circumstances determining the

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 194]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            acquisition of origin correspond in every respect
                            to the goods and the circumstance described in
                            the ruling; or
                        (c) in the case of a BVI ruling, that the goods
                            declared and the commercial circumstances or
                            arrangements surrounding their acquisition
                            which may have an effect on determining their
                            valuation for customs purposes correspond in
                            every respect to the goods and commercial
                            circumstances or arrangements described in the
                            ruling.
                        (8) BTC, BOI and BVI rulings shall be annulled
                  and considered null and void where it is determined, after
                  issuance, that they have been based on inaccurate or
                  incomplete information from the applicant and the person
                  to whom the ruling was addressed shall be notified of the
                  annulment.
                         (9) Subsection (1) shall not prevent the Customs
                  authority from issuing rulings in relation to any other
                  Customs technical or procedural matter designed to
                  facilitate trade or streamline Customs procedures in such
                  circumstances as it sees fit.
                       (10) Pursuant to section 8, the Comptroller shall
                  make rules prescribing the conditions —
                       (a) for the implementation of a formal system for
                            the issuance of BTC, BOI and BVI rulings by
                            the Customs authority;
                       (b) for the building and maintenance of a database
                            at the Central Office of the Customs authority;
                            and
                       (c) for the publication in the Gazette of the BTC,
                            BOI and BVI rulings issued by the Customs
                            authority.
Notice of               222. (1) The Customs authority shall promptly give
Customs ruling.   notice in writing or by such electronic means as may be
                  prescribed, to the applicant of —
                        (a) a Customs ruling, together with the reasons for
                             the ruling, and the conditions, if any, to which it
                             is subject;
                        (b) an advance binding ruling, in the form
                             prescribed by regulations made by the Customs
                             authority.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 195


      (2) Rulings given by the Customs authority shall,
unless otherwise specified, be valid throughout the
Customs territory.
      (3) All BTC, BOI and BVI rulings given by the               23 of 2013, s. 24.
Customs authority shall be published in the Gazette.
      223. (1) Subject to section 226 —                          Effect of
                                                                 Customs ruling.
      (a) a ruling in respect of specific goods, in respect
            of which a ruling has been given under sections
            220(1)(a) and 221(1), shall be conclusive
            evidence for the purposes of this Act and other
            Customs legislation.
      (b) a ruling in respect of a particular matter, in
            respect of which a ruling has been given under
            section 220(1)(b), shall be conclusive evidence
            for the purposes of this Act and other Customs
            legislation.
      224. The Customs authority may by notice in writing,       Confirmation of
at any time after a Customs ruling is made pursuant to           basis of Customs
                                                                 ruling.
sections 220 and 221, require the applicant to satisfy the
Customs authority in such manner and within such time
limits as the Customs authority considers appropriate —
      (a) that the facts or information on which the
            Customs ruling was made remain correct; and
      (b) that any conditions on which the Customs ruling
            was made have been complied with.
      225. (1) The Customs authority may, without                Amendment or
prejudice to provisions in this Act which specify the cases      revocation of
                                                                 Customs ruling.
in and the conditions under which decisions are invalid or
become null and void, amend or revoke a Customs ruling
at any time where, in cases other than those referred to in
section 226, the Customs ruling does not conform or no
longer conforms with this Act or any regulations
prescribed under this Act.
      (2) The person to whom a Customs ruling was
addressed shall be notified of its annulment.
      (3) Annulment of a Customs ruling shall take effect
as from the date on which the initial customs ruling took
effect, unless otherwise specified in the decision in
accordance with the Customs legislation.
      (4) A Customs ruling shall be revoked or amended
where, in cases other than those referred to in subsection


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 196]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                (1), one or more of the conditions laid down for its issue
                were not or are no longer fulfilled.
                      (5) Subject to subsection (7) —
                      (a) the Customs authority shall promptly after
                           making an amendment of a Customs ruling give
                           notice in writing to the person to whom the
                           ruling was addressed; and
                      (b) the ruling as amended shall be applied as from
                           the date on which notice of the amendment is
                           received, or is deemed to have been received, by
                           the person to whom it was addressed.
                      (6) The Customs authority may in exceptional
                cases, where in the opinion of the Customs authority the
                legitimate interests of the person to whom the ruling was
                addressed so require, defer the date on which revocation or
                amendment takes effect.
                      (7) Notwithstanding subsection (5), the Customs
                ruling as given prior to an amendment under this section
                shall be applied to goods if the amended ruling has the
                effect of increasing any duty liability in respect of such
                goods where the goods —
                      (a) are imported or exported within three months of
                           the date notice of the amendment is given,
                           pursuant to a binding contract entered into
                           before that date;
                      (b) have left the warehouse in the country from
                           which they are being exported for direct
                           shipment to the Customs territory at the date
                           notice of the amendment of the ruling is given;
                           or
                      (c) are imported or exported on or before the date
                           notice of the amendment is given but have not
                           been entered for home consumption or export.
                      (8) Notwithstanding subsection (5), the provisions
                of section 176 shall, where the amendment to a Customs
                ruling has the effect of decreasing any duty liability in
                respect of any goods, apply as if the higher duty had been
                paid in error.
                      (9) A Customs ruling addressed to several persons
                may, unless specified elsewhere in this Act or other
                Customs legislation, be revoked only in respect of a person
                who fails to fulfil an obligation imposed under that ruling.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 197


      (10) Pursuant to section 8, the Comptroller shall
prescribe rules for the implementation of this section
including with respect to rulings addressed to several
persons.
      226. Without prejudice to section 225, a Customs           Cessation of
ruling shall cease to have effect on the earliest of the         Customs ruling.
following dates —
      (a) the date of a material change in the Customs
           legislation if that date occurs prior to
           importation or exportation of the relevant goods,
           as the case may be;
      (b) the date on which any of the conditions to which
           the Customs ruling was made subject cease to be
           met or complied with;
      (c) the date of a failure to satisfy the requirements
           of the Customs authority under section 224; or
      (d) the date of any amendment or revocation of the
           Customs ruling under section 225.
      227. (1) Where an applicant has relied on a Customs        No liability
ruling in relation to specific goods or a specific matter,       where Customs
                                                                 ruling relied on.
and, as a result —
      (a) the applicant has not paid the amount of duty
            that, but for the ruling, is payable on the goods;
      (b) the applicant would, but for the ruling, be liable
            to the imposition of a penalty under section 230;
            or
      (c) goods, but for the ruling, would be liable to
            seizure under this Act,
the amount of the duty otherwise payable shall not be
recoverable as a debt due to the Crown, and no penalty
shall be imposed under section 230, and the goods shall not
be liable to seizure under this Act, as the case may be.
      (2) Subsection (1) shall apply —
      (a) only in relation to a matter on which a Customs
            ruling has been given and in circumstances
            where the Customs ruling has not ceased under
            section 226; and
      (b) in accordance with any amendment to a
            Customs ruling of which the applicant has
            received notice under section 225.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 198]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Appeal from             228. (1) Any person who is dissatisfied with a
rulings or
decisions of      Customs ruling or a decision to amend a Customs ruling
Customs           made by the Customs authority under this Act may —
authority and
suspension of           (a) within fifteen working days after the date on
implementation.              which notice of such ruling or decision is
                             received, appeal to the Comptroller under
                             Division Two of Part XXIV; and
                        (b) if dissatisfied with the decision made by the
                             Comptroller, within fifteen working days after
                             the date on which notice of the decision is given
                             appeal to the Commission under Division Three
                             of Part XXIV.
                        (2) The submission of an appeal shall not suspend
                  the implementation of a disputed Customs ruling or
                  decision.
                        (3) Where a disputed ruling or decision has the
                  effect of causing Customs duties, fees or taxes to be
                  payable, suspension of such Customs ruling or decision
                  shall be conditional upon the provision of a security.
                       (4) This section and section 229 shall not apply to
                  appeals lodged with a view to the annulment, revocation or
                  amendment of a decision taken by a judicial authority.
Rulings or              229. Sections 220 and 221 shall apply with regard to
decisions on
appeal.
                  rulings or decisions by the Customs authority on appeals.

                                     PART XX
                              OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
                           DIVISION I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Customs                 230. (1) Penalties for failure to comply with the
penalties.        provisions of this Act and other Customs legislation shall
                  be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
                        (2) For the purposes of this Act, penalties shall take
                  one, or both, of the following forms —
                        (a) a pecuniary charge by the Customs authority,
                             including a settlement applied in place of and in
                             lieu of a criminal penalty; and
                        (b) the withdrawal, suspension and or amendment
                             of any authorization held by the person
                             concerned including the revocation of any
                             licence granted under this Act.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 199


       (3) Aggregation of penalties shall, where penalties
are combined on the basis of the same fact, be
proportionate to the offence involved.
       231. (1) Subject to section 232, where the Customs        Imposition of
authority is satisfied that an entry contains an error or        penalty.
omission —
       (a) and as a result an amount of duty payable under
            this Act has not been paid or declared for
            payment or would not have been paid or
            declared for payment; or
       (b) resulting in the declaration being materially
            incorrect,
the Customs authority shall give notice to the person who
made the entry to pay all sums that the Customs authority
has determined to be owing within ten working days of the
issuance of the notice.
       (2) The Customs authority shall issue a notice of
penalty to be paid, in accordance with subsections (3) and
(4), in addition to any duties otherwise owing unless the
person receiving a notice pursuant to subsection (1) —
       (a) makes payment within twenty working days
            after receiving such notice; or
       (b) satisfies the Customs authority that such person
            is entitled under section 232 to an exemption
            from the imposition of a penalty.
       (3) The Customs authority shall, in any case where
as a result of an error or omission an amount of duty
payable under this Act has not been paid or declared for
payment, issue a notice requiring the person who made the
entry to pay the greater of —
       (a) fifty dollars; or
       (b) an amount equal to five per centum of the duty
            unpaid or not declared.
       (4) The Customs authority shall, in any case where        23 of 2013, s. 25.
an error or omission has resulted in an entry being
materially incorrect only, issue a notice requiring the
person who made the entry to pay fifty dollars in respect of
such entry.
      (5) The due date for the payment of any penalty
imposed under this section shall be the date that is fourteen
working days after the date on which notice of the penalty
is given by the Customs authority.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 200]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (6) The amount of a penalty shall constitute a debt
                 due to the Crown and shall be recoverable by action at the
                 suit of the Customs authority.
                        (7) No person by whom or on whose behalf the
                 amount of a penalty is paid shall, unless otherwise
                 determined by the Customs authority, be prosecuted for an
                 offence in relation to the error or omission and the goods in
                 relation to which the error or omission occurred shall not
                 be liable to seizure under this Act.
                        (8) Nothing in subsection (7) shall apply to a
                 prosecution or seizure in relation to goods that have been
                 forfeited to the Crown by reason of the importation of the
                 goods being prohibited or unlawful.
                        (9) For the purposes of this section, “materially
                 incorrect” means that the entry contains an error or
                 omission in relation to any of the terms of the declaration.
                        (10) An additional penalty equivalent to the Prime
                 Rate shall be imposed where any penalty imposed under
                 this section remains unpaid by the due date for payment.
                        (11) A penalty shall, where goods referred to in
                 subsection (1) become free of duty or subject to a lower
                 rate of duty under the Customs Tariff after the entry is
                 made, be calculated according to the provisions of
                 subsection (3) as if the duty liability had not so changed.
                        (12) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
                 the Customs authority under this section may —
                        (a) within fifteen working days after the date on
                             which notice of the decision is given, appeal to
                             the Comptroller under Division Two of Part
                             XXIV; and
                        (b) if dissatisfied with the decision made by the
                             Comptroller, within fifteen working days after
                             the date on which notice of the decision is given
                             appeal to the Commission under Division Three
                             of Part XXIV.
No penalty in           232. A person shall not be liable to the imposition of
certain cases.   a penalty under section 231 where —
                        (a) such person has voluntarily disclosed the error
                             or omission to the Customs authority before the
                             Customs authority has notified such person of
                             the error or omission;



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 201



      (b) such person satisfies the Customs authority that
           he formed a view as to the relevant facts
           pertaining to the entry which, while incorrect,
           was reasonable having regard to the information
           available to such person when the entry was
           prepared;
      (c) such person satisfies the Customs authority that
           he acted in good faith on information provided
           by the importer or supplier of the goods to
           which the entry relates and reliance on the
           accuracy or completeness of the information so
           provided was reasonable in the circumstances;
      (d) the total correct Customs value of the goods to
           which the error on the entry relates is less than
           one hundred dollars;
      (e) an information for an offence against this Act
           has been laid in relation to the error or omission;
           or
      (f) the period between the date of lodgement of the
           entry and the date on which the error or
           omission was first identified exceeds three
           years.
      233. An offence shall, where this Act creates an           General penalty.
offence without providing for a specific penalty, be
prosecuted summarily and the person so prosecuted shall
be liable on summary conviction to a maximum fine of five
thousand dollars.
      233A. If any sum of money due and payable under            Fee for late
                                                                 payment.
this Act is not paid for thirty days or more, there shall be
                                                                 19 of 2015, s 4
added thereto, from the day on which the sum of money
became due and payable until the day on which payment is
made, as a surcharge a sum equal to ten per centum per
annum of the annual sum due.

        DIVISION II - OFFENCES IN RELATION
             TO CUSTOMS AUTHORITY
      234. (1) No person shall —                                 Threatening or
                                                                 resisting a
      (a) threaten by using abusive or offensive language;       Customs officer.
      (b) assault or molest; or
      (c) by force resist or intentionally intimidate, any
           Customs officer or any other person employed
           by the Customs Department, or a person acting

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 202]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                             in the officer’s aid, while acting or proceeding to
                             act in the execution of his public duty or in the
                             execution of any power described in this Act or
                             any other Customs legislation.
                        (2) A person who commits an offence against this
                  section shall be liable on conviction on information to
                  imprisonment for a maximum term of five years.
                        (3) Any person aiding, abetting or assisting in
                  actions having the effect or the purpose to commit an
                  offence under subsection (1) shall be liable on summary
                  conviction to imprisonment for a maximum term of two
                  years and to a maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
Obstructing a           235. (1) A person who, otherwise than by force —
Customs officer
or interfering          (a) intentionally obstructs or hinders any Customs
with Customs                 officer or authorised person in the performance
property.                    of a duty or the exercise of a power imposed or
                             conferred on him under any Customs enactment;
                        (b) commits any act that impedes or attempts to
                             impede the carrying out of a search for anything
                             liable to forfeiture under any Customs enactment
                             or detention, seizure or removal under this Act;
                        (c) unless there is just and sufficient cause,
                             intentionally interferes with any equipment,
                             means of transport, animal, communications
                             system, or other aid used, or intended for use, by
                             the Customs authority;
                        (d) commits any act having the effect or purpose of
                             impairing the effectiveness of any equipment,
                             means of transport, animal, communications
                             system, or other aid used, or intended for use, by
                             the Customs authority;
                        (e) damages, breaks, or destroys goods to prevent
                             seizure thereof by a proper officer;
                        (f) does anything calculated to prevent the
                             procuring or giving of evidence as to whether or
                             not anything is liable to forfeiture;
                        (g) prevents or impedes in any way the arrest or
                             apprehension of a person under any Customs
                             enactment; or
                        (h) releases or attempts to release any person
                             apprehended or arrested for any offence
                             punishable under this Act or any other Customs
                             enactment,


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 203



commits an offence and shall be liable on summary
conviction to imprisonment for a maximum term of two
years, or to a maximum fine of five thousand dollars, or to
both such fine and imprisonment.
      (2) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (1), or any act contrary to any provision of this
Act, armed with any firearm or other weapon shall be
liable on conviction on information to imprisonment for a
maximum term of twenty years.
      (3) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (1), or any act contrary to any provision of this
Act, disguised in any way shall be liable on conviction on
information to —
      (a) imprisonment for a maximum term of two years;
      (b) a maximum fine of five thousand dollars; or
      (c) both such fine and imprisonment.
      (4) A person who, whether or not he causes
physical damage, intentionally fires —
      (a) at an aircraft, vessel or vehicle in the service of
           the Customs authority; or
      (b) at a Customs officer executing his duty or a
           person acting in the officer’s aid,
commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction on
information to imprisonment for a maximum term of
twenty years.
      (5) A person who, with intent to obstruct any
Customs officer or authorised person under this Act in the
execution of his duty, warns or does any act for the
purpose of warning any other person engaged in the
commission of an offence under this Act, whether or not
such other person is in a position to take advantage of such
warning or act, commits an offence and on summary
conviction shall be liable to —
      (a) imprisonment for a maximum term of two years;
      (b) a maximum fine of five thousand dollars; or
      (c) both such fine and imprisonment.
      (6) A person shall not be liable to any legal
proceedings for —
      (a) preventing any other person from giving a
           warning described in subsection (5); and
      (b) for purposes of paragraph (a), entering any land.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 204]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (6) A person aiding, abetting or assisting in actions
                   having the effect or the purpose to commit an offence
                   under subsection (1) commits an offence and on summary
                   conviction shall be liable to —
                        (a) imprisonment for a maximum term of two years;
                        (b) a maximum fine of five thousand dollars; or
                        (c) both such fine and imprisonment.
Carrying away           236. (1) Where a means of transport departs from the
officers.          Customs territory carrying on board a Customs officer
                   without his consent, the master of the vessel or the
                   commander of the aircraft or the person in charge of the
                   means of transport, as the case may be, commits an offence
                   and on conviction on indictment shall be liable to —
                        (a) imprisonment for a maximum term of twenty
                             years; and
                        (b) a maximum fine of fifty thousand dollars.
                         (2) In addition to any other liability imposed on any
                   person under subsection (1), the amount of any expenses
                   incurred by the Customs authority or the Government of
                   the Bahamas caused by the carrying away of a Customs
                   officer may be recovered from such person or from the
                   owner of the means of transport.
Impersonation of         237. (1) A person commits an offence who, not being
Customs officer.   a Customs officer or an authorised person for the purposes
                   of this Act, for the purpose of obtaining admission to any
                   building, vessel, aircraft or other place, or for the purpose
                   of performing or procuring to be performed any act that
                   such person is not entitled to perform or procure to be
                   performed, or for any other unlawful purpose —
                         (a) falsely assumes the name, designation or
                              character of the Comptroller, a Customs officer
                              or of any other person authorised by the
                              Comptroller to discharge any duty relating to an
                              assigned matter; or
                         (b) by words, conduct or demeanour holds himself
                              out to be the Comptroller or a Customs officer
                              or any other person authorised by the
                              Comptroller to discharge any duty for the
                              purposes of this Act or wears or uses the
                              uniform, name, designation or description of the
                              Comptroller or of a Customs officer or an
                              authorised person for the purposes of this Act.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 205


      (2) A person who commits an offence under this
section, in addition to any other proceedings that may be
taken against him, shall be liable on summary conviction to
imprisonment for a maximum term of two years, or to a
fine of five thousand dollars, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.
      238. (1) A person who, in order to induce him to           Bribery and
perform or abstain from performing any act related to an         collusion.
assigned matter whereby the Government of The Bahamas
is or may be defrauded, or that is otherwise unlawful or in
contravention of the duties of the Comptroller, a Customs
officer or other person authorised under this Act —
      (a) directly or indirectly offers or gives to the
            Comptroller, or any Customs officer, or to any
            other person authorised by the Comptroller to
            discharge any duty for the purposes of this Act,
            any payment or other reward, whether pecuniary
            or other, or any promise or security for any such
            payment or reward; or
      (b) proposes or enters into any agreement with the
            Comptroller, a Customs officer or any other
            person authorised by the Comptroller, to
            discharge any duty for the purposes of this Act,
commits an offence and shall be liable on summary
conviction or on indictment to imprisonment for a
maximum term of five years and to a maximum fine of ten
thousand dollars.
      (2) A Customs officer or any other person
authorised under this Act to act as a Customs officer —
      (a) who in connection with any of his duties directly
            or indirectly asks for or takes any payment or
            other reward, whether pecuniary or otherwise, or
            any promise or security for any such payment or
            reward, not being a payment or a reward which
            he is lawfully entitled to claim or receive; or
      (b) who enters into or acquiesces in any agreement
            to do, abstain from doing, permit, conceal, or
            connive at any act or thing whereby the Customs
            revenue is or may be defrauded, or which is
            contrary to the Customs laws or the proper
            execution of his duty,
commits an offence and on conviction on information shall
be liable to imprisonment for a maximum term of three


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 206]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    years, or to a fine of ten thousand dollars, or to both such
                    fine and imprisonment.
Counterfeit seals         239. (1) A person commits an offence who, without
or marks.           lawful authority or excuse, has in his possession, makes or
                    uses, any counterfeit seal, stamp, or mark in imitation of or
                    closely resembling any seal, stamp, or mark used by the
                    Customs authority for the purposes of this Act or other
                    Customs legislation.
                          (2) On summary conviction of a person for an
                    offence under this section —
                          (a) such person shall be liable to imprisonment for a
                               maximum term of five years and to a maximum
                               fine of ten thousand dollars; and
                          (b) goods in respect of which the offence has been
                               committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
Obligations of            240. (1) A person commits an offence who wilfully
persons arriving
in or departing
                    fails to comply with any requirement imposed on such
from the            person by or under any of sections 80, 81, 82, 86, 87 or 88.
Customs
territory.                (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                    section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                    maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
Unauthorised              241. (1) A person commits an offence who, without
presence in
certain Customs
                    the permission of a Customs officer, enters into, or remains
controlled areas.   in when directed by a Customs officer to leave, a Customs
                    controlled area when that area is being, or is about to be,
                    used for any of the purposes for which it is licensed.
                          (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                    section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                    maximum fine of fifty thousand dollars.


                          DIVISION III - OFFENCES IN RELATION TO
                              POWERS OF CUSTOMS OFFICERS
Failure to answer         242. (1) A person commits an offence who, when
questions.          required under this Act or other Customs legislation, to
                    answer any question put to such person —
                          (a) without reasonable excuse, fails or refuses to
                               answer it; or
                          (b) intentionally gives a misleading answer.
                          (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                    section shall be liable on summary conviction to


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 207


imprisonment for a maximum term of three years, or to a
maximum fine of five thousand dollars, or to both such fine
and imprisonment.
      (3) It shall be a defence to a prosecution for an
offence against this section for a person to prove that he —
      (a) did not, when required to answer the question,
           have the information required to answer the
           question in his knowledge, possession, or
           control; or
      (b) honestly and reasonably believed that the answer
           he gave was, in all the circumstances, correct at
           that time.
      (4) It shall not be a reasonable excuse for the
purposes of subsection (l)(a) if a person fails or refuses to
answer a question on the grounds that to answer the
question would or might incriminate or tend to incriminate
that person.
      243. (1) A person commits an offence who fails             Failure to
without reasonable excuse to comply with a demand made           produce evidence
                                                                 of identity or
under section 33.                                                entitlement to
                                                                 travel.
      (2) A person who commits an offence under this
section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
      244. (1) A person commits an offence who fails or          Failure to
refuses to produce or account for any goods when required        produce or
                                                                 account for
to do so under sections 39, 40 or 41.                            goods.
      (2) A person who commits an offence against this
section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
      (3) A person shall not be liable to an offence under
this section if such person did not have possession or
control of the goods or were otherwise unable, for good
reason, to comply with the requirements of the Customs
authority.
      245. (1) A person commits an offence who fails or          Failure to comply
refuses to comply with a requirement of the Customs              with requisition
                                                                 to produce
authority to produce any document under section 47.              documents.
      (2) A person who commits an offence against this
section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of five thousand dollars.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 208]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (3) A person shall not be liable to an offence under
                     this section if such person did not have possession or
                     control of the documents or information or did not have
                     knowledge of the relevant documents, books, or records.
Failure or refusal         246. (1) A person commits an offence who —
to remain at
place.                     (a) fails or refuses to remain at the place that is
                                being searched until the earlier of the events
                                specified in section 55(2)(a) and (b); or
                           (b) fails or refuses to remain at the place where such
                                person is being searched until the search is
                                completed.
                           (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                     section shall be liable on summary conviction to
                     imprisonment of a maximum term of one year, or to a
                     maximum fine of five thousand dollars, or to both such fine
                     and imprisonment.

                          DIVISION IV - OFFENCES IN RELATION TO
                             CUSTOMS CONTROLLED AREAS AND
                                            WAREHOUSES
Absence of                 247. (1) A person who contravenes section 14
licence.             commits an offence.
                           (2) A person who uses a building, or permits it to be
                     used, as a bonded warehouse without such building having
                     been licensed as a bonded warehouse under section 191
                     commits an offence.
                           (3) A person who commits an offence under this
                     section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                     maximum fine of one thousand dollars.
Failure to comply          248. (1) A person commits an offence who fails to
with conditions
of licence.
                     comply with, or acts in contravention of, any term,
                     condition, or restriction subject to which a licence has been
                     granted under sections 16 or 191.
                           (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                     section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                     maximum fine of one thousand dollars.
Unauthorised               249. (1) A person commits an offence who —
access to bonded
warehouses.                (a) being a person other than the proper officer, or
                                the warehouse keeper, or an employee of the
                                warehouse keeper duly authorised in that
                                behalf —


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 209


           (i) opens a bonded warehouse without the
                authority of the proper officer and without
                just and sufficient cause; or
           (ii) creates or obtains access to a bonded
                warehouse, or to goods in a bonded
                warehouse, without the authority of the
                proper officer and without just and
                sufficient cause.
      (b) being a person other than the proper officer, or
           the warehouse keeper, or any employee of the
           warehouse keeper duly authorised in that
           behalf —
           (i) enters a bonded warehouse, or any part
                thereof, contrary to the orders of a proper
                officer; or
           (ii) refuses to leave any bonded warehouse, or
                part thereof, when directed to do so by the
                proper officer.
      (2) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (1) shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of one thousand dollars.
      250. (1) A person commits an offence who —                 Other offences in
                                                                 relation to
      (a) contravenes any condition imposed in section           warehouses.
           193(3) (which relates to the maintenance of
           goods); or
      (b) deals with warehoused goods contrary to
           subsections (5) and (6) of section 195 (which
           relates to the use of warehoused goods as stores
           for an aircraft or a vessel proceeding to a place
           outside of the Customs territory).
      (2) A person —
      (a) who takes, or causes or permits to be taken,
           goods from a bonded warehouse otherwise than
           in accordance with this Act; or
      (b) who wilfully destroys or damages any
           warehoused       goods     otherwise    than   in
           circumstances provided for in this Act,
commits an offence and shall be liable on summary
conviction to imprisonment for a maximum term of two
years, or to a maximum fine of five thousand dollars, or to
both such fine and imprisonment.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 210]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                             (3) The goods in respect of which an offence is
                      committed under subsections (1) and (2) shall be liable to
                      forfeiture.

                          DIVISION V - OFFENCES IN RELATION TO
                          ARRIVAL AND DEPARTURE OF MEANS OF
                                            TRANSPORT
Offences in               251. (1) A person commits an offence who —
relation to arrival
of means of               (a) being the person in charge of any means of
transport.                     transport, fails to comply with section 72(1)(a)
                               (which relates to notification of arrival) or any
                               direction given by a Customs officer under
                               section 72(1)(b);
                          (b) being the person in charge of, or the owner of, or
                               a member of the crew of, or a passenger on or
                               in, any means of transport —
                               (i) refuses to answer any question put to such
                                    person by a Customs officer under section
                                    73(2)(a) (which relates to a requirement to
                                    answer questions) or knowingly gives a
                                    false answer to the question; or
                               (ii) fails to comply with any request made
                                    under section 73(2)(b);
                          (c) being the master of a vessel, fails to comply with
                               any direction of a Customs officer under section
                               74(1) and (4) (which relates to the bringing-to of
                               a ship), or fails to comply with section 74(3);
                          (d) being the person in charge of any means of
                               transport, fails to comply with section 75(1)
                               (which relates to the arrival of means of
                               transport at a nominated Customs place only);
                          (e) being a member of the crew of, or a passenger
                               on or in, any means of transport, acts in
                               contravention of section 75(2);
                          (f) being a person in charge of any means of
                               transport, fails to comply with, or acts in
                               contravention of, section 76(2) (which relates to
                               means of transport arriving at a place other than
                               a nominated Customs place);
                          (g) being a member of the crew of, or a passenger
                               on or in, any means of transport, acts in
                               contravention of section 76(3) or (4);



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                 [CH.293– 211


      (h) being the person in charge of or the owner of
           any means of transport —
            (i) fails to obey a Customs direction given
                 under section 78(2)(b);
           (ii) refuses to answer any question put to such
                 person by a Customs officer under
                 subsection 78(6)(a) (which relates to a
                 requirement to answer questions) or
                 knowingly gives a false answer to the
                 question; or
           (iii) fails to produce any documents required by
                 a Customs officer under subsection
                 78(6)(b).
      (2) On conviction of a person for an offence under
paragraph (c) of subsection (1) —
      (a) in the case of the master of a light aircraft or of a
           vessel less than one hundred and fifty tons
           register —
           (i) such person shall be liable on summary
                 conviction to a maximum fine of five
                 thousand dollars; and
           (ii) the means of transport in respect to which
                 the offence is committed may be liable to
                 forfeiture;
      (b) in the case of the master in charge of an aircraft
           other than a light aircraft, or of a vessel of one
           hundred and fifty tons register or more––
           (i) such person shall be liable on summary
                 conviction to a maximum fine of twenty
                 thousand dollars; or, on conviction on
                 information, to a maximum fine of one
                 hundred thousand dollars; and
           (ii) the aircraft or vessel in respect of which the
                 offence is committed may be seized and
                 detained until the fine is paid or security
                 given.
      (3) A person who commits an offence under
paragraphs (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of subsection (1)
shall be liable on summary conviction to a maximum fine
of five thousand dollars.
      (4) The master or commander or the person in
charge of a means of transport, as the case may be, shall
within all reasonable delays make report of the means of

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 212]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     transport, its cargo and stores to the nearest Customs
                     officer where such means of transport is —
                           (a) lost or wrecked; or
                           (b) compelled to land or to-bring to within the
                                Customs territory owing to accident, stress of
                                weather or other unavoidable cause.
                           (5) A person who contravenes subsection (4)
                     commits an offence and shall be liable on summary
                     conviction to a maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
Offences in                252. (1) The person being in charge of the means of
relation to inward
report.
                     transport and the owner of the means of transport each
                     commit an offence where —
                           (a) such person, being the person in charge of or the
                                owner of a means of transport, as the case may
                                be, fails to comply with section 78(2)(a) (which
                                relates to the delivery of inward reports);
                           (b) an inward report delivered pursuant to section
                                78 is erroneous, misleading, or defective in any
                                material particular; or
                           (c) a document delivered in support of an inward
                                report is not genuine or is erroneous or
                                misleading.
                           (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                     section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                     maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
Signalling to              253. (1) In this section references to a “prohibited
smugglers.           signal” or a “prohibited message” are references to a signal
                     or message connected with the smuggling or intended
                     smuggling of goods and or people into or out of the
                     Customs territory.
                           (2) A person who by any means sends a prohibited
                     signal or transmits a prohibited message from any place or
                     from any means of transport within the Customs territory
                     to a person in any other means of transport commits an
                     offence and on summary conviction —
                           (a) shall be liable to imprisonment for a maximum
                                term of one year and to a maximum fine of ten
                                thousand dollars; and
                           (b) any equipment or apparatus used for the sending
                                of the signal or message shall be liable to
                                forfeiture.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 213


     (3) Subsection (2) applies whether or not the person
for whom the signal or message is intended is in a position
to receive it or is actually engaged at such time in
smuggling.
       (4) For the purposes of this section, any means of
transport to which a signal described in subsection (1) is
sent shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to be a
smuggling means of transport if such means of transport—
       (a) changes its course;
       (b) if a vessel and if at anchor, weighs anchor and
            re-anchors; or
       (c) sends a signal in apparent response.
       254. A person on board a means of transport who, for      Communicating
the purpose of committing an offence under this Act,             with arriving
                                                                 means of
communicates in any way with another means of transport          transport.
arriving from a place outside the Customs territory before
it is cleared by the proper officer commits an offence and
on summary conviction shall be liable to —
       (a) imprisonment for a maximum term of one year;
            and
       (b) a maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
       255. (1) A person commits an offence who —                Offences in
                                                                 relation to
       (a) being the person in charge of any means of            departure of
            transport, fails to comply with section 89 (which    means of
            relates to clearance of means of transport);         transport.

       (b) being the person in charge of any means of
            transport—
            (i) refuses to answer any question put to such
                  person by a Customs officer under section
                  90(b) (which relates to a requirement to
                  answer questions) or knowingly gives a
                  false answer to the question;
            (ii) fails to produce any documents required by
                  a customs officer under section 90(c); or
            (iii) fails to comply with any requirement made
                  under section 90(d);
       (c) being a person in charge of, or a member of the
            crew of, any means of transport, fails to comply
            with section 91(which relates to boarding of
            outward means of transport);



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 214]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (d) being a person in charge of any means of
                             transport, fails to comply with a demand made
                             by a Customs officer under section 92 (which
                             relates to the production of a certificate of
                             clearance), or refuses to answer any question put
                             to such person under that section or knowingly
                             gives a false answer to the question; or
                        (e) being a person in charge of any means of
                             transport, acts in contravention of section 93
                             (which relates to the departure of means of
                             transport only from a Customs place).
                        (2) A person who commits an offence under
                  paragraphs (a) to (e) of subsection (1) shall be liable on
                  summary conviction to a maximum fine of five thousand
                  dollars.
Offences in             256. (1) The person being in charge of the means of
relation to
outward report.
                  transport and the owner of the means of transport each
                  commit an offence where —
                        (a) such person, being the person in charge or the
                             owner of any means of transport, as the case
                             may be, fails to comply with section 90(1)(a)
                             (which relates to the delivery of outward
                             reports);
                        (b) an outward report delivered pursuant to section
                             90 is erroneous, misleading, or defective in any
                             material particular; or
                        (c) any document delivered in support of an
                             outward report is not genuine or is erroneous or
                             misleading.
                        (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                  section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                  maximum fine of five thousand dollars.


                             DIVISION VI - OTHER OFFENCES
Offences in             257. (1) Without limiting the scope of section 270, a
relation to
coasting trade.
                  person who carries coastwise, or unloads after carriage
                  coastwise, or puts on board any means of transport for
                  carriage coastwise —




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 215


      (a) any goods the importation of which is prohibited        23 of 2013, s. 26.
           under section 208; or
      (b) any restricted goods contrary to any condition
           regulating the carriage coastwise of such goods,
commits an offence and on summary conviction —
           (i) such person shall be liable to imprisonment
                 for a maximum term of three years, or to a
                 maximum fine of ten thousand dollars, or to
                 both such fine and imprisonment;
           (ii) any goods in respect of which the offence is
                 committed shall be liable to forfeiture; and
           (iii) the means of transport in relation to which
                 the offence is committed may be seized and
                 detained.
      (2) Subject to subsection (1) —
      (a) a person who is in any way responsible for or
           partakes in any actions described in sub-
           paragraphs (i) and (ii) commits an offence where
           goods for carriage coastwise, without the
           permission of the Customs authority, and
           contrary to any conditions the Customs authority
           may have imposed —
           (i) have been unloaded from or loaded to a
                 coasting vessel or aircraft at any place other
                 than a proper place of loading or a
                 sufferance wharf; or
           (ii) having been unloaded or landed, have not
                 been conveyed to a Customs controlled
                 area; and
      (b) on summary conviction of a person described in
           paragraph (a) —
           (i) such person shall be liable to a maximum
                 fine of five thousand dollars;
           (ii) the goods in respect of which the offence is
                 committed shall be liable to forfeiture; and
           (iii) the means of transport in relation to which
                 the offence is committed may be seized and
                 detained until the fine is paid.
      (3) A person in charge of a coasting vessel or
aircraft —



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 216]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       (a) who causes a coasting vessel or aircraft to depart
                            from any Customs port or airport within the
                            Customs territory without clearance; or
                       (b) who delivers an account which is false or
                            incorrect in any material particular,
                       commits an offence and on summary conviction —
                            (i) such person shall be liable to a maximum
                                  fine of five thousand dollars; and
                            (ii) the means of transport in relation to which
                                  the offence is committed may be seized and
                                  detained until the fine is paid.
                       (4) A person in charge of a coasting vessel or
                aircraft arriving at any port or place within the Customs
                territory —
                       (a) who fails to obtain a certificate of clearance for
                            the coastwise voyage; or
                       (b) who permits, without the permission of the
                            proper officer, any goods to be unloaded before
                            the delivery of the certificate of clearance,
                       commits an offence and on summary conviction —
                            (i) such person shall be liable to a maximum
                                  fine of five thousand dollars;
                            (ii) any goods in respect of which the offence is
                                  committed shall be liable to forfeiture; and
                            (iii) the means of transport in relation to which
                                  the offence is committed may be seized and
                                  detained until the fine is paid.
                       (5) The master of any coasting vessel or the
                commander of any coasting aircraft —
                       (a) which deviates from its voyage, unless forced to
                            do so by circumstances beyond his control the
                            proof whereof shall lie on such master or
                            commander; or
                       (b) which having deviated from its voyage, or
                            having taken on board any wreck or other goods,
                            or discharged any goods, in the course of a
                            voyage from one part of The Bahamas to
                            another —
                            (i) does not forthwith proceed directly to the
                                  nearest Customs port or airport and explain
                                  the circumstances to the satisfaction of the
                                  proper officer; and


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 217


            (ii) does not deliver any such wreck or other
                 goods taken on board to the proper officer,
            commits an offence and on summary
                 conviction —
            (i) any goods in respect of which the offence is
                 committed shall be liable to forfeiture; and
            (ii) the means of transport in relation to which
                 the offence is committed may be seized and
                 detained.
       (6) A person in charge of a coasting vessel or a
coasting aircraft —
       (a) who refuses to answer any questions lawfully
            put to him or to produce any books or document
            required of him under this section; or
       (b) who makes any false or incorrect reply to any
            question,
       commits an offence and on summary conviction —
            (i) such person shall be liable to a maximum
                 fine of five hundred dollars; and
            (ii) the means of transport in relation to which
                 the offence is committed may be seized.
       258. (1) The person in charge and the owner of a          Adapting means
means of transport each commit an offence if the means of        of transport for
                                                                 smuggling.
transport comes to or is found within the Customs territory
having —
       (a) any part, or any secret or disguised place,
            adapted for the purpose of concealing goods or
            persons; or
       (b) any device adapted for the purpose of
            concealing goods or persons.
       (2) On conviction of a person for an offence under
this section —
       (a) in the case of a light aircraft or of a vessel less
            than one hundred and fifty tons register —
            (i) such person shall be liable on summary
                 conviction to a maximum fine of five
                 thousand dollars;
            (ii) the means of transport, and any goods
                 found in or attached in any manner to the
                 means of transport, in respect to which the



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 218]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                                      offence is committed shall be liable to
                                      forfeiture;
                           (b) in the case of an aircraft, other than a light
                                aircraft, or of a vessel of one hundred and fifty
                                tons register or more —
                                (i) such person shall be liable on summary
                                      conviction to a maximum fine of ten
                                      thousand dollars or on conviction on
                                      information to a fine of one hundred
                                      thousand dollars;
                                (ii) the aircraft or vessel in respect of which the
                                      offence is committed may be seized and
                                      detained until the fine is paid or security
                                      given; and
                                (iii) any goods, in respect of which the offence
                                      has been committed, found in the means of
                                      transport or attached in any manner to it,
                                      shall be liable to forfeiture.
Interference with          259. (1) A person acting as described in paragraph
seals and
fastenings.
                    (b) and the person in charge of the means of transport each
                    commit an offence where —
                           (a) in pursuance of a power conferred under this Act
                                a lock, mark or seal has been placed by a
                                Customs officer on goods to secure or identify
                                such goods or a fastening, lock, seal, or mark
                                has been placed on a hatchway, opening, or
                                other place or device on a means of transport;
                                and
                           (b) without the authority of a Customs officer, a
                                person opens, alters, breaks, or erases any
                                fastening, lock, seal or mark referred to in
                                paragraph (a) while the means of transport or
                                the goods are within the Customs territory.
                           (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                    section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                    maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
Interference with          260. (1) A person who acts as described in any one of
cargo.              paragraphs (a) to (d) and the person in charge of the means
                    of transport each commit an offence where, at any time
                    after a means of transport carrying goods from a point
                    outside the Customs territory arrives within the Customs
                    territory and before a report is made in accordance with
                    section 78, the person so acting —


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                              LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 219


      (a) interferes with any cargo;
      (b) makes any alteration in the storage of goods
          carried so as to facilitate the unloading of any of
          the goods before the report has been made;
      (c) opens any package; or
      (d) damages, removes, destroys, or throws
          overboard, any of the goods in order to prevent
          seizure.
      (2) Subsection (1) shall not apply if the act was —
      (a) authorised by the Customs authority;
      (b) required by any statutory or other requirement
          relating to navigation or safety; or
      (c) compelled by accident, stress of weather, or
          other necessity.
     (3) A person who commits an offence under
paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of subsection (1) shall be liable
on summary conviction to a maximum fine of five
thousand dollars.
     (4) On conviction of a person for an offence under
paragraph (d) of subsection (1) —
     (a) in the case of a light aircraft or of a vessel less
          than one hundred and fifty tons register —
          (i) such person shall be liable on summary
               conviction to a maximum fine of five
               thousand dollars; and
          (ii) the means of transport, and any goods
               found in or attached in any manner to it, in
               respect to which the offence is committed
               shall be liable to forfeiture;
     (b) in the case of an aircraft other than a light
          aircraft, or of a vessel of one hundred and fifty
          tons register or more —
          (i) such person shall be liable on summary
               conviction to a maximum fine of ten
               thousand dollars or on conviction on
               information to a maximum fine of one
               hundred thousand dollars;
          (ii) the aircraft or vessel in respect of which the
               offence is committed may be seized and
               detained until the fine is paid or security
               given; and


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 220]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                               (iii) any goods in respect of which the offence
                                     has been committed, found in the means of
                                     transport or attached in any manner to it,
                                     shall be liable to forfeiture.
Unloading goods           261. (1) A person who acts in contravention of
without
authorisation.
                    section 83(2) commits an offence.
                          (2) On summary conviction of a person for an
                    offence under this section —
                          (a) such person shall be liable to a maximum fine of
                               ten thousand dollars; and
                          (b) the goods in respect of which the offence has
                               been committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
Offences in               262. (1) A person commits an offence who —
relation to
movement and              (a) acts in contravention of section 110 (which
storage of goods.              relates to transportation of imported goods);
                          (b) subject to section 270(1), acts in contravention
                               of section 111 (which relates to the removal of
                               goods from a Customs controlled area); or
                          (c) subject to section 270(1), takes goods out of a
                               Customs controlled area or does any act in
                               relation to goods taken out of a Customs
                               controlled area that constitutes a contravention
                               of the permission granted by the Customs
                               authority under section 112 (which relates to the
                               temporary removal of goods from a Customs
                               controlled area).
                          (2) On summary conviction of a person for an
                    offence under this section —
                          (a) such person shall be liable to a maximum fine of
                               five thousand dollars; and
                          (b) the goods in respect of which the offence has
                               been committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
Interference with         263. (1) A person who, except with the permission of
goods subject to
Customs control.
                    a Customs officer —
                          (a) makes any alteration in the condition of goods
                               subject to the control of Customs;
                          (b) interferes with, including by way of addition to
                               or taking away from, such goods;
                          (c) unpacks or repacks such goods; or




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 221


      (d) removes such goods from any place in which a
           Customs officer has directed that the goods are
           to be stored,
commits an offence and on summary conviction —
           (i) such person shall be liable to imprisonment
                for a maximum term of three years, or to a
                maximum fine of ten thousand dollars, or to
                both such fine and imprisonment; and
           (ii) the goods in respect of which the offence is
                committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
      (2) A person, other than a proper officer or a person
otherwise authorised by law, on finding any uncustomed
goods on land or in the sea —
      (a) who interferes with or picks up any such goods
           found on land or floating upon or sunk in the
           sea; or
      (b) who fails to report his discovery to the nearest
           Customs officer,
commits an offence and on summary conviction —
           (i) such person shall be liable to a maximum
                fine of five thousand dollars; and
           (ii) the goods in respect of which the offence is
                committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
      264. (1) A person commits an offence who —                 Offences in
                                                                 relation to
      (a) fails to make an entry required under this Act; or     entries.
      (b) makes or signs, or causes to be made or signed,
           or submits or causes to be submitted to the
           Customs authority, an entry required under this
           Act that is erroneous or defective in any material
           particular.
      (2) A person who commits an offence under this
section shall be liable on summary conviction to
imprisonment for a maximum term of three years, or to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars, or to both such fine
and imprisonment.
      265. (1) A person commits an offence who —                 Offences in
                                                                 relation to other
      (a) makes or causes to be made any declaration,            declarations and
           certificate, application, or other document, or       documents.
           written statement, under this Act that is false or
           incorrect in any material particular; or



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 222]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      (b) produces or delivers to a Customs officer any
                           document that is erroneous in any material
                           particular.
                      (2) A person who commits an offence under
                subsection (1) shall be liable on summary conviction to
                imprisonment for a maximum term of three years, or to a
                maximum fine of ten thousand dollars, or to both such fine
                and imprisonment.
                      (3) A person, with respect to a document that is
                required under this Act or that is used in the transaction of
                any business relating to an assigned matter under this
                Act —
                      (a) who counterfeits or falsifies that document;
                      (b) who knowingly accepts, receives or uses any
                           such document so counterfeited or falsified;
                      (c) who alters any such document after it has been
                           officially issued; or
                      (d) who produces or delivers to a Customs officer
                           any document that is not genuine,
                commits an offence and shall be liable on summary
                conviction to imprisonment for a maximum term of three
                years, or to a maximum fine of ten thousand dollars, or to
                both such fine and imprisonment.
Offences in           266. (1) A person commits an offence who fails to
relation to
records.
                keep records that are required to be kept under section 70.
                      (2) A person who commits an offence under
                subsection (1) shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
                      (3) A person commits an offence who —
                      (a) fails without reasonable excuse to make
                           available to the Customs authority, or to give the
                           Customs authority on the request of a Customs
                           officer access to, the records that are required to
                           be kept by section 70;
                      (b) fails, when requested by a Customs officer, to
                           operate any mechanical or electronic device on
                           which any records or information required to be
                           kept by section 70 are stored for the purpose of
                           enabling the Customs officer to obtain the
                           records or information.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 223


       (4) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (3) shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
       (5) A person commits an offence who, with intent
to defeat the purposes of this Act —
       (a) destroys, alters, or conceals any book,
            document, or record required to be kept under
            this Act; or
       (b) sends or attempts to send out of the Customs
            territory any book, document, or record required
            to be kept under this Act.
       (6) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (5) shall be liable on summary conviction to
imprisonment for a maximum term of two years and to a
maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
       (7) In any prosecution for an offence alleged to
have been committed under subsection (5) it shall be
presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary, where
it is proved that the person charged with the offence has
committed an act as described in paragraph (a) or (b) of
subsection (5), that in committing such act the person
intended to defeat the purposes of this Act.
       267. (1) A person commits an offence who, without         Possession of
lawful authority or cause, has in his possession or brings       incomplete
                                                                 documents.
into the Customs territory any document or form that is —
       (a) incomplete or fraudulently produced;
       (b) capable of being used for any purpose under this
            Act; and
       (c) signed, certified or bears any mark or inscription
            to indicate that it is correct or authentic.
       (2) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (1) shall be liable on summary conviction to
imprisonment for a maximum term of three years, or to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars, or to both such fine
and imprisonment.
       268. (1) A person acting as described in paragraph        Offences in
(a) or (b), where goods under any provision of this Act or       relation to use of
                                                                 goods.
the Tariff Act are exempt from duty or liable to a lower         Ch. 295.
rate of duty if entered for a particular purpose or under any
condition imposed by the Minister by order and goods
have been entered under such provision, commits an
offence where such person —

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 224]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         (a) knowingly uses or deals with such goods for a
                              purpose other than that for which they have been
                              so entered; or
                         (b) knowingly fails to comply with a condition
                              imposed by the responsible Minister in respect
                              of the goods so entered.
                         (2) A person who commits an offence under
                    subsection (1) shall on summary conviction —
                         (a) be liable to payment of import or export duty as
                              from the date of importation or exportation of
                              the goods;
                         (b) have any deposit given brought to account as
                              duty or, if security was given, the owner of
                              goods shall be required to pay duty; and
                         (c) be liable to a maximum fine of either —
                              (i) ten thousand dollars; or
                              (ii) an amount equal to three times the amount
                                    of the duty that would have been payable if
                                    the goods had been entered otherwise than
                                    under the provision under which they were
                                    entered,
                              whichever sum is the greater.
Provisions               269. For the purposes of this Act —
relating to
offences against         (a) every declaration, invoice, certificate, written
sections 264 to               statement, or other document, required or
269.                          authorised by or under this Act to be made or
                              produced by a person making an entry shall be
                              deemed to form part of such entry;
                         (b) every amendment of an entry shall be deemed to
                              form part of such entry; and
                         (c) an amendment to an entry shall not relieve a
                              person from liability to the imposition of a
                              penalty, seizure of goods, or criminal liability,
                              incurred in respect of the entry before its
                              amendment.
Offences in              270. (1) A person commits an offence who —
relation to
importation or           (a) imports into or lands in the Customs territory
exportation of                goods the importation of which is prohibited
prohibited or
restricted goods.
                              under section 208 or exports, or transports with
                              intent to export, goods from the Customs
                              territory the exportation of which is prohibited
                              under section 209;


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 225


      (b) without lawful justification or cause, removes
          from a Customs controlled area goods the
          importation or exportation of which is prohibited
          under section 208 or section 209; or
      (c) commits a breach of, or fails to comply with, a
          term or condition on or subject to which a
          licence, permit, or consent has been granted
          under section 210.
      (2) On summary conviction of a person for an
offence under subsection (1) —
      (a) such person shall be liable to imprisonment for a
          maximum term of three years, or to a maximum
          fine of ten thousand dollars, or to both such fine
          and imprisonment;
      (b) any goods in respect of which the offence is
          committed shall be liable to forfeiture; and
      (c) the means of transport in relation to which the
          offence is committed may be seized and
          detained.
      (3) A person commits an offence who is —
      (a) knowingly concerned or conspires in any
          importation,      exportation,      transportation,
          shipment, or landing of goods to which
          paragraphs (a) or (b) of subsection (1) applies;
      (b) knowingly concerned or conspires in the
          removal from a Customs controlled area of
          goods to which paragraph (c) of subsection (1)
          applies; or
      (c) knowingly concerned in a breach or failure to
          comply with a term or condition to which
          paragraph (d) of subsection (1) applies.
      (4) On summary conviction of a person for an
offence under subsection (3) —
      (a) such person shall be liable to imprisonment for a
          maximum term of five years, or to a maximum
          fine of ten thousand dollars, or to both such fine
          and imprisonment;
      (b) any goods in respect of which the offence is
          committed shall be liable to forfeiture; and
      (c) the means of transport in relation to which the
          offence is committed may be seized and
          detained.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 226]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         (5) It shall not be a defence in a prosecution for an
                  offence under subsection (3) that the defendant had no
                  knowledge or no reasonable cause to believe that the goods
                  in respect of which the offence was committed were
                  prohibited imports or prohibited exports, as the case may
                  be.
Offences in              271. (1) A person commits an offence who —
relation to
importation and          (a) acts in contravention of subsections (2) to (5) of
exportation of                section 104 (which relates to entries required);
goods.
                         (b) fails to comply with a request made under
                              section 104(6)(b); or
                         (c) fails, or is knowingly concerned in any failure,
                              to comply with section 106 (which requires
                              goods for import to be dealt with according to
                              entry).
                         (2) A person who commits an offence under
                  subsection (1) shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                  maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
                         (3) A person commits an offence who —
                         (a) acts in contravention of section 113(1) (which
                              relates to entries required);
                         (b) fails to comply with a request made under
                              section 113(2)(b);
                         (c) fails, or is knowingly concerned in any failure,
                              to comply with section 115 (which requires
                              goods for export to be dealt with according to
                              entry);
                         (d) acts in contravention of section 116(2) (which
                              relates to goods to be loaded only after an entry
                              has been made and passed);
                         (e) acts in contravention of section 118 (which
                              relates to the requirement for goods for export
                              not to be re-landed); or
                         (f) acts in contravention of section 187(3) (which
                              relates to drawbacks of duty on certain goods).
                         (4) A person who commits an offence under
                  subsection (3) shall be liable on summary conviction to a
                  maximum fine of five thousand dollars.
Offences in              272. (1) Without limiting the scope of section 260, a
relation to       person commits an offence who, without lawful
Customs-
approved secure   justification or reasonable cause —
export schemes.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 227


       (a) alters, removes, damages, disposes of, or
            otherwise interferes with, a Customs seal
            applied to a package of goods; or
       (b) applies an approved seal or markings of the kind
            referred to in section 127(l)(b) to a Customs-
            approved secure package otherwise than in
            accordance with the relevant Customs-approved
            secure exports scheme.
       (2) Subsection (1) applies to a package if the
package is —
       (a) a package to which a Customs seal has been
            lawfully applied; or
       (b) a Customs-approved secure package to which a
            seal or marking of the kind referred to in section
            127(l)(b) has been lawfully applied.
       (3) A person commits an offence who, without
lawful justification or reasonable cause, tampers or
interferes with a package to which paragraphs (a) or (b) of
subsection (2) applies by adding other goods to the goods
in it when it was secured.
       (4) A person who commits an offence under this
section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
       273. (1) A person commits an offence who does any          Defrauding the
act, or omits to do any act, for the purpose of —                 Customs
                                                                  authority of
       (a) evading, or enabling any other person to evade,        revenue.
            payment of duty or full duty on goods;
       (b) obtaining, or enabling any other person to
            obtain, money by way of drawback or a refund
            of duty on goods to which such person or such
            other person is not entitled under this Act;
       (c) conspiring with any other person, whether that
            other person is in the Customs territory or not, to
            defraud the revenue of the Customs authority in
            relation to goods; or
       (d) defrauding in any other manner the revenue of
            the Customs authority in relation to goods.
       (2) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (1) shall be —
       (a) guilty of defrauding the revenue of the Customs
            authority; and


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 228]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (b) liable on summary conviction to imprisonment
                                for a term of five years and to a maximum fine
                                of ten thousand dollars.
Possession or              274. (1) A person commits an offence who,
custody of
uncustomed
                    knowingly and without lawful justification, has in their
goods or            possession or custody uncustomed or prohibited or
prohibited or       restricted goods.
restricted goods.
                           (2) On summary conviction of a person for an
                    offence under this section —
                           (a) such person shall be liable to imprisonment for a
                                maximum term of three years, or to a maximum
                                fine of ten thousand dollars, or to both such fine
                                and imprisonment; and
                           (b) any goods in respect of which the offence is
                                committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
Purchase, sale,            275. (1) A person commits an offence who,
exchange, etc. of
uncustomed
                    knowingly and without lawful justification, purchases,
goods or            offers for sale, exchanges, or otherwise acquires or
prohibited or       disposes of, any uncustomed or prohibited or restricted
restricted goods.   goods.
                           (2) On summary conviction of a person for an
                    offence under this section —
                           (a) such person shall be liable to imprisonment for a
                                maximum term of three years, or to a maximum
                                fine of five thousand dollars, or to both such fine
                                and imprisonment; and
                           (b) any goods in respect of which the offence is
                                committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
Possession or              276. (1) A person commits an offence who
control of
concealed goods.
                    knowingly has in his possession or keeps concealed goods
                    which he knows, or ought reasonably to have known, to
                    be —
                           (a) dutiable goods;
                           (b) prohibited goods;
                           (c) restricted goods; or
                           (d) uncustomed goods.
                           (2) On summary conviction of a person for an
                    offence under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) —
                           (a) such person shall be liable to a maximum fine of
                                five thousand dollars; and



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                              LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 229


       (b) any goods in respect of which the offence is
            committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
       (3) On summary conviction of a person for an
offence under paragraph (b) or (c) or (d) of subsection
(1) —
       (a) such person shall be liable to imprisonment for a
            maximum term of three years, or to a maximum
            fine of ten thousand dollars, or to both such fine
            and imprisonment; and
       (b) any goods in respect of which the offence is
            committed shall be liable to forfeiture.
       277. (1) A person commits an offence who, having          Offences in
custody of goods pursuant to section 293, acts in breach of      relation to seized
                                                                 goods.
any requirement of, or imposed pursuant to, subsection (8)
of that section.
       (2) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (1) shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
       (3) A person commits an offence who, without the
permission of the Customs authority, takes or carries away
or otherwise converts to his or her own use goods,
including any means of transport, that have been seized as
forfeited.
       (4) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (3) shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
       278. (1) A person commits an offence who, with            Offences in
intent to deceive, makes any false or misleading statement       relation to
                                                                 Customs Appeal
or any material omission in any information given to the         Commission.
Customs Appeal Commission for the purposes of this Act.
       (2) A person who commits an offence under
subsection (1) shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
       (3) A person commits an offence who, after being
summoned to attend before the Customs Appeal
Commission to give evidence or to produce any papers,
documents, records, or things, without sufficient cause —
       (a) fails to attend in accordance with the summons;
       (b) refuses to be sworn or to give evidence or,
            having been sworn in, refuses to answer any
            question that the person is lawfully required by

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 230]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            the Commission to answer concerning the
                            subject of the proceedings; or
                        (c) fails to produce any paper, document, record, or
                            thing.
                        (4) A person commits an offence who —
                        (a) willfully obstructs or hinders a member of the
                            Commission or any person authorised by the
                            Commission in any inspection or examination of
                            papers, documents, records, or things pursuant
                            to section 329(1)(a);
                        (b) without sufficient cause, fails to comply with
                            any requirement of the Commission or any
                            person authorised by the Commission made
                            under section 329(1)(b); or
                        (c) without sufficient cause, acts in contravention of
                            or fails to comply with any order made by the
                            Commission under section 329(3) or any term or
                            condition of the order.
                        (5) A person who commits an offence under
                  subsection (3) or subsection (4) of this section shall be
                  liable on summary conviction to a maximum fine of ten
                  thousand dollars.
Unauthorised            279. (1) A person commits an offence who —
access to or
improper use of         (a) knowingly and without lawful authority, by any
Customs                      means gains access to or attempts to gain access
computerised
management
                             to any Customs computerised system;
system.                 (b) having lawful access to any Customs
                             computerised system, knowingly uses or
                             discloses information obtained from such a
                             computer system for a purpose that is not
                             authorised; or
                        (c) knowing that they are not authorised to do so,
                             receives information obtained from any Customs
                             computerised system and uses, discloses,
                             publishes, or otherwise disseminates such
                             information.
                        (2) A person who commits an offence under this
                  section shall be liable on summary conviction to
                  imprisonment for a maximum term of three years or to a
                  maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 231



      280. (1) A person commits an offence who —                 Interference with
                                                                 Customs
      (a) by any means, knowingly falsifies any record or        computerised
           information stored in any Customs computerised        systems.
           system; or
      (b) knowingly damages or impairs any Customs
           computerised system.
      (2) A person who commits an offence under this
section shall be liable on summary conviction to
imprisonment for a maximum term of three years or to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.
      281. (1) A person commits an offence who, to gain          Offences in
access to a Customs computerised system or to                    relation to
                                                                 unauthorised use
authenticate a transmission of information to or from a          of codes for
Customs computerised system —                                    accessing
                                                                 Customs
      (a) uses an access code, not being an approved user        computerised
           of a Customs computerised system; or                  systems.
      (b) being an approved user uses an access code of
           any other approved user.
      (2) A person who commits an offence under this
section shall be liable on summary conviction to a
maximum fine of ten thousand dollars.


    DIVISION VII - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
                RELATING TO OFFENCES
      282. (1) For the purposes of this section, the term        Liability of
“corporation” includes a company, trust, partnership, or         officers and
                                                                 corporations.
other enterprise.
      (2) Where a corporation commits an offence under
a provision of this Act every person described in
paragraphs (a) and (b) who participated in, directed,
authorised, acquiesced in, or assented to, the act or
omission constituting the offence also commits an offence
under such provision, such persons being —
      (a) a director, manager, secretary, officer, or agent,
           of the corporation; and
      (b) a person purporting to act in the capacity of a
           person referred to in paragraph (a).
      (3) An individual who commits an offence pursuant
to subsection (2) shall be liable on conviction —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 232]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (a) to the penalty prescribed by the provision
                                creating the offence in respect of an individual
                                who is convicted of it; or
                           (b) if no penalty is prescribed in respect of an
                                individual, to the penalty prescribed for the
                                offence.
                           (4) A person may be convicted of the offence
                    pursuant to subsection (2) even though the corporation has
                    not itself been charged with, or convicted of, the offence.
Liability of               283. (1) A declaration or any other document or
principal and
authorised agent.
                    certificate made, or other act done, by an authorised agent
                    in the course of his agency in relation to the report, entry,
                    or clearance of any means of transport or goods, or any
                    other matter under this Act, shall be deemed also to have
                    been made or done by the authorised agent’s principal.
                           (2) A principal who authorises an agent to act for
                    him in relation to a report, entry, or clearance of any means
                    of transport or goods, or any other matter under this Act,
                    may be prosecuted for any offence committed by the
                    authorised agent and shall accordingly be liable to the
                    penalties imposed but —
                           (a) a principal shall not be sentenced to
                                imprisonment for an offence committed by his
                                authorised agent unless the principal consented
                                to the commission of the offence; and
                           (b) nothing contained in this Act shall relieve the
                                authorised agent from liability to prosecution in
                                respect of such offence.
                           (3) For the purposes of this section, the knowledge
                    or intent of an authorised agent shall be imputed to the
                    principal in addition to the principal’s own knowledge or
                    intent.
                           (4) For the purposes of this section, a person
                    described in paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) shall be deemed also
                    to be the authorised agent of the principal —
                           (a) an employee of the authorised agent;
                           (b) a person performing any function of or for the
                                authorised agent;
                           (c) a person acting under the instruction of the
                                authorised agent.
                           (5) A person who acts or purports to act as the
                    authorised agent of any other person in relation to a report,


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 233


entry, or clearance of any means of transport or goods, or
any other matter under this Act, shall be liable to the same
penalties as if he were the principal for whom he so acts or
purports to act.
       284. An accomplice or any other person aiding,            Accomplices and
abetting or assisting a person in action having the effect or    other persons
                                                                 having interest in
the purpose to commit an offence under this Act may be           offence.
prosecuted for any offence committed under this Act and
shall, accordingly, be liable to the penalties imposed by
this Act.
       285. An attempt to commit an offence under this Act       Attempts to
shall be an offence punishable in the same manner and            commit an
                                                                 offence.
gives rise to the same cause for seizure as if the offence
attempted had been committed.
       286. (1) This section applies to an offence that is       Power of
committed in relation to goods —                                 Customs
                                                                 authority to deal
       (a) the Customs value of which does not exceed one        with petty
            thousand dollars;                                    offences.

       (b) on which duty payable under this Act does not
            exceed one thousand dollars; or
       (c) on which the duty evaded or attempted to be
            evaded does not exceed one thousand dollars.
       (2) The Customs authority may —
       (a) where a person admits in writing that he has
            committed an offence in relation to goods to
            which this section applies; and
       (b) where such person requests that the offence be
            dealt with by the Customs authority,
order such person, at any time before an information has
been laid in respect of the offence, to pay such sum of
money not exceeding five hundred dollars as the Customs
authority may think fit in full satisfaction of any fine or
other penalty to which the person would otherwise be
liable under this Act.
       (3) The payment of a sum satisfactory to the
Customs authority pursuant to subsection (2) shall relieve
an offender of further liability to prosecution for the
offence in respect of which payment has been made.
       (4) An admission in writing of the commission of
an offence made by an offender shall not, where the
Customs authority declines to exercise its power under


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 234]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   subsection (2), be admissible as evidence in any
                   prosecution for the offence.
Assembling to            287. Each person commits an offence under this Act
evade Customs
enactment.
                   and each person shall be liable on summary conviction to
                   imprisonment for a maximum term of three years and to a
                   maximum fine of ten thousand dollars where persons —
                         (a) assemble in groups of two or more for the
                              purpose of evading any provision of a Customs
                              enactment; or
                         (b) having assembled as described in paragraph (a),
                              do evade any such provision.
Second                   288. Upon a second or subsequent conviction of a
convictions.       person for an offence under sections 236, 251(1), 257(1),
                   258, 259, 261, 262, 264, 267, 268, 269 or 270
                   respectively —
                         (a) such person shall be liable —
                              (i) for the amount of duty payable on the
                                   goods in respect of which the offence was
                                   committed together with all interest owing
                                   in accordance with this Act; and
                              (ii) to a fine in an amount equal to the amount
                                   of duty payable on the goods in respect of
                                   which the offence was committed or to the
                                   fine prescribed in respect of an offence
                                   committed under sections 242, 257(1),
                                   263(1), 264, 265, 267, 268, 270, 273, 274,
                                   275 or 276 respectively, whichever is the
                                   greater;
                         (b) the court before which such person is convicted
                              may, if the person is the holder of any licence
Ch. 329.                      issued under the Business Licence Act, order in
                              addition to any other penalty imposed that the
                              licence shall cease to have effect from the date
                              of the order and, upon such order, the licence
                              shall accordingly cease to have effect.
Fine up to three         289. The court may, where on conviction for an
times the value
of goods may be
                   offence under this Act a person becomes liable to a fine of
imposed.           a specified amount, impose a fine of three times the value
                   of the goods in respect of which the offence was
                   committed or such specified amount, whichever is the
                   greater; and for the purpose of determining the value of
                   goods —



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 235


       (a) the Comptroller shall cause the goods to be
            appraised by the proper officer;
       (b) the proper officer shall appraise the goods
            according to the rules set out in the Third          Third Schedule.
            Schedule;
       (c) no regard shall be had to any damage or injury
            sustained by the goods; and
       (d) a certificate of the appraised value given under
            the hand of the Comptroller shall be prima facie
            evidence of the value of the goods.
       290. (1) Subject to subsection (2), where the             Compounding of
Comptroller is satisfied that a person has committed an          offences by the
                                                                 Comptroller.
offence under this Act in respect of which a fine is
provided or in respect of which any thing is liable to
forfeiture, the Comptroller may —
       (a) compound the offence and order the person to
            pay such sum of money, not exceeding the
            amount of the fine to which the person would be
            liable if he were convicted of the offence, as he
            may think fit; and
       (b) order any thing liable to forfeiture in connection
            with the offence to be forfeited.
       (2) The Comptroller shall not exercise his powers
under this section unless the person admits in writing that
he has committed the offence and requests the Comptroller
to deal with the offence under this section.
       (3) Where the Comptroller makes an order under
this section —
       (a) such order shall be put into writing and shall
            have attached to it the request made to the
            Comptroller to deal with the matter;
       (b) the order shall specify the offence which the
            person committed and the penalty imposed by
            the Comptroller;
       (c) a copy of the order shall be given to the
            offender;
       (d) the offender shall not be liable to any further
            prosecution in respect of the offence;
       (e) the order may be enforced in the same manner
            as an order of the court;



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 236]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (f) the order shall be published in the Gazette or in
                             any other daily newspaper in general circulation
                             in The Bahamas.
                        (4) Notwithstanding subsection (3)(d), where any
                  prosecution is brought it shall be a good defence for the
                  offender to prove that the offence with which he is charged
                  has been compounded under this section.

                                       PART XXI
                                FORFEITURE AND SEIZURE

Application.             291. This Part shall apply to all forfeitures under this
                  Act.
Goods liable to         292. (1) The following goods shall, in addition to any
forfeiture.       other circumstances in which goods are liable to forfeiture
                  under this Act, be liable to forfeiture —
                        (a) prohibited goods;
                        (b) restricted goods which are dealt with contrary to
                             any condition regulating their importation,
                             exportation or carriage coastwise;
                        (c) goods subject to Customs control which are
                             moved, altered, or in any way interfered with,
                             except with the permission of the Customs
                             authority;
                        (d) goods in respect of which any drawback, rebate,
                             remission or refund of duty, has been unlawfully
                             obtained;
                        (e) goods in respect of which an erroneous
                             statement, declaration, certificate, or claim, has
                             been made or produced to any Customs officer;
                        (f) goods in respect of which, in any matter relating
                             to the Customs authority, an entry, declaration,
                             certificate, application, answer, statement or
                             representation, which is false or incorrect in any
                             material particular has been delivered, made or
                             produced by any person knowing the same to be
                             false or incorrect;
                        (g) all goods that have been unlawfully imported
                             into the Customs territory or in respect of which
                             an attempt to so import has been made;
                        (h) all goods unlawfully exported from the Customs
                             territory or in respect of which an attempt to so
                             export has been made;

STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 237


      (i) goods dealt with in contravention of,
          respectively, sections 83, 106, 110, 111, 115 and
          132;
      (j) uncustomed goods that are found in any place;
      (k) dutiable goods found concealed in or on any
          means of transport bulk cargo container, pallet
          or similar device, or any other thing;
      (l) dutiable goods packed in any package, whether
          with or without other goods, in a manner
          appearing to be intended to deceive the customs
          authority;
      (m) dutiable goods found on or in any means of
          transport, bulk cargo container, or pallet or
          similar device that is unlawfully in any place;
      (n) dutiable goods found on or in any means of
          transport, bulk cargo container, pallet, or similar
          device, after arrival in any Customs place from a
          point outside the Customs territory —
          (i) not being goods specified or referred to in
               the inward report or baggage belonging to
               the crew or passengers; and
          (ii) not being accounted for to the satisfaction
               of the Customs authority;
      (o) goods which are imported contained in any
          package of which the entry, application for
          shipment, or application to unload, does not
          correspond with the goods;
      (p) dutiable goods found in the possession of any
          person who when questioned under sections 30
          or 31, denied or failed to disclose the possession
          of those goods;
      (q) goods in package where those goods are not
          fully accounted for in the entry or declaration
          relating to such package;
      (r) goods in respect of which an offence has been
          committed under —
          (i) section 239 (which relates to offences in
               relation to counterfeit seals or marks);
          (ii) section 265 (which relates to offences in
               relation to declarations and other
               documents);



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 238]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            (iii) section 272 (which relates to offences in
                                  relation to Customs approved secure export
                                  schemes);
                            (iv) section 273 (which relates to defrauding the
                                  revenue of the Customs authority);
                            (v) sections 274 and or 275 (which relates to
                                  the possession or custody, sale or exchange,
                                  of uncustomed or prohibited goods);
                            (vi) section 276 (which relates to possession or
                                  control of concealed goods).
                       (2) Notwithstanding section 119, for the purposes of
                subsection (l)(h) goods, the exportation of which is
                prohibited under this Act, shall be deemed to have been
                exported as soon as they are placed on or in any means of
                transport for exportation.
                       (3) Notwithstanding this Act, where prohibited or
                restricted goods have been shipped for importation without
                knowledge by the shipper of the prohibition or restriction
                and, in the opinion of the Customs authority, before the
                expiration of a reasonable time for the information to be
                available at the point of shipment outside of the Customs
                territory —
                       (a) such goods shall not on importation be liable to
                            forfeiture but shall be re-exported, or otherwise
                            disposed of, in such manner as the Customs
                            authority may determine; and
                       (b) pending re-exportation or disposal, such goods
                            shall be subject to Customs control.
                       (4) Forfeiture of goods shall extend to the forfeiture
                of the case, covering, or other enclosure, not being a bulk
                cargo container, pallet or a similar device, in or on which
                the goods are contained at the time of seizure, importation,
                or exportation.
                       (5) Notwithstanding subsection (4), forfeiture of
                goods shall extend to the forfeiture of a bulk cargo
                container, pallet or a similar device where such bulk cargo
                container, pallet or similar device has been adapted for the
                purpose of concealing goods.
                       (6) Where goods have become liable to forfeiture
                under this Act or any other Customs enactment, every
                means of transport or any other thing shall also be liable to
                forfeiture including —



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 239


      (a) any machinery or equipment in or on the means
          of transport or thing, or any animal that is being
          or has been used for the carriage, handling,
          deposit, or concealment of any goods liable to
          forfeiture, either at the time of any alleged
          offence for which it later became liable to
          forfeiture or after it became liable to forfeiture;
          and
      (b) any other article mixed, packaged or found with
          the article liable to forfeiture.
       (7) A means of transport shall be liable to forfeiture
where —
       (a) such means of transport is or has been within the
            Customs territory while constructed, adapted,
            altered or fitted in any manner for the purpose of
            concealing goods;
       (b) at any time while it is within the Customs
            territory, any part of its cargo or any article
            carried on board is thrown overboard or is
            damaged or destroyed to prevent seizure; or
       (c) it has imported cargo into the Customs territory
            and —
            (i) a substantial part of such cargo is
                  afterwards found to be missing; and
            (ii) the master or the commander, or the person
                  in charge, of the means of transport, as the
                  case may be, is unable to account. for such
                  missing cargo to the satisfaction of the
                  Customs authority.
       (8) All tackle, apparel or furniture belonging to a
means of transport shall, where such means of transport is
liable to forfeiture, also be liable to forfeiture.
       (9) Notwithstanding subsections (6)(a), and (7)(b)
and (c), any aircraft other than a light aircraft, and any
vessel of one hundred and fifty tons register or more, made
use of in the importation, landing, removal, conveyance,
exportation or carriage coastwise, of any goods liable to
forfeiture under this Act shall not itself be liable to
forfeiture unless the offence in respect of or in connection
with which the forfeiture is sought —
       (a) was the primary purpose of the voyage during
            which the offence was committed; or


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 240]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (b) was committed while the vessel was under chase
                                after refusing to stop when required to do so.
                           (10) Notwithstanding subsection (6)(a) —
23 of 2013, s. 27.         (a) where any aircraft other than a light aircraft and
                                any vessel of one hundred and fifty tons register
                                or more would, but for subsection (9), be liable
                                to forfeiture for or in connection with an offence
                                under any Customs enactment; and
                           (b) where in the opinion of the Customs authority,
                                the master or the commander, or any other
                                person in charge, of such means of transport, as
                                the case may be, is implicated by his own act or
                                by neglect in the offence,
                     the master or the commander, or any other person in
                     charge, of that means of transport, as the case may be,
                     commits that offence and shall be liable on summary
                     conviction to a maximum fine of ten thousand dollars or on
                     conviction on information to a maximum fine of one
                     hundred thousand dollars and, until the fine is paid or
                     security given, the Customs authority may withhold
                     clearance of such means of transport.
                           (11) Pursuant to section 10, no claim shall be brought
                     against the Customs authority for damages in respect of the
                     payment of any deposit or security or the detention of any
                     vessel under this section.
                            (12) The exemption from forfeiture of any means of
                     transportation under this section shall not affect the
                     liability to forfeiture of any goods carried on board.
Procedure for               293. (1) A Customs officer or a police officer —
seizure.
                            (a) may seize any thing which is liable to forfeiture
                                 under this Act or which he has reasonable
                                 grounds to believe is liable to such forfeiture
                                 including but not limited to any —
                                 (i) aircraft,
                                 (ii) vessel,
                                 (iii) vehicle,
                                 (iv) animal, or
                                 (v) goods;
                            (b) may seize any thing as mentioned in paragraph
                                 (a) whether or not any prosecution for any
                                 offence under this Act which would render such



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 241


           thing liable to forfeiture has been, or will be,
           taken.
       (2) Goods may be seized wherever the goods are
found within the Customs territory.
       (3) Goods liable to forfeiture may be seized within
three years of the date on which the goods became liable to
forfeiture and, in accordance with section 314, shall not be
seized after three years from such date.
       (4) Anything liable to forfeiture under this Act and
any other Customs enactment may be seized or detained by
a proper officer.
       (5) A Customs officer or a police officer may use
such force as is reasonably necessary for effecting the
seizure and securing of goods.
      (6) Except as provided in subsections (7) and (8),
all goods seized shall be taken to, and detained at, such
place of security as the Customs authority directs.
      (7) The Customs authority may, where goods,
including any means of transport or animal, have been or
may be seized and detained under this Act, leave such
goods in the custody of either —
      (a) the person from whom the goods have been
           seized; or
      (b) any other person designated by the Customs
           authority and who consents to having such
           custody.
      (8) A person who has the custody of goods under
subsection (7) shall hold them in safekeeping, without
charge to the Government and in accordance with any
reasonable conditions that may be imposed by the Customs
authority, until a final decision is made as to whether or not
they are to remain forfeit, and further shall —
      (a) make the goods available to the Customs
           authority on request;
      (b) not alter, or dispose of, or remove the goods
           from the Customs territory, unless they are
           authorised to do so by a Customs officer; and
      (c) return the goods on demand to the custody of the
           Customs authority.
      (9) A thing may —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 242]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          (a) where the person seizing or detaining a thing
                               liable to forfeiture under a Customs enactment is
                               a police officer; and
                          (b) where the thing seized is required for use, in
                               connection with proceedings that may be
                               brought under a law other than a Customs
                               enactment,
                     be retained in the custody of the police until either
                     proceedings are completed or it is decided that no
                     proceedings will be brought.
                           (10) Notice in writing of the seizure or detention
                     shall, where the thing may be required for use in
                     connection with proceedings that may be brought under a
                     law other than a Customs enactment, be given immediately
                     to the Customs authority with full particulars of the thing
                     seized or detained.
23 of 2013, s. 28.         (11) A Customs officer shall, where a thing is
                     retained in the custody of the police under subsection (9),
                     be authorised to examine and take account of it while it
                     remains in such custody.
                           (12) Where any thing liable to forfeiture under this
                     Act has been seized —
                           (a) if any person is being prosecuted for the offence
                                by reason of which the thing was seized, such
                                thing shall be detained until the determination of
                                the prosecution and shall be dealt with in
                                accordance with section 304(1); and
                           (b) the thing shall, in all other cases, be detained
                                until one month after the date of the seizure or of
                                any notice given under section 294, as the case
                                may be.
Notice of seizure.         294. (1) The Customs authority shall, where any
                     thing has been seized under section 293 and unless the
                     thing was seized in the presence of the owner or, in the
                     case of a means of transport, of the master or the person in
                     charge of the means of transport, as the case may be, give
                     notice in writing of the seizure and the reasons for it in the
                     prescribed form —
                           (a) as soon as is reasonably practicable in the
                                circumstances but, in any event, within one
                                month of the seizure;
                           (b) to any person known or believed to have an
                                interest in the goods or means of transport or,


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                              LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 243


            where such person is in a foreign country, to
            their agent or representative in the Customs
            territory.
       (2) A seizure shall not be invalidated or rendered
illegal by reason of any failure to give notice under
subsection (1) if reasonable steps were taken to give the
notice.
       295. A forfeiture shall, where pursuant to section 292     Forfeiture to
goods are forfeited and the goods are seized, relate back to      relate back.
the date of the act or event from which the forfeiture arose.      23 of 2013, s. 29.

       296. (1) The Comptroller may, where any goods              Delivery of
other than prohibited goods have been seized as being             goods seized on
                                                                  deposit of value.
liable to forfeiture, deliver the goods at any time before
their forfeiture to the owner or other person from whom
they were seized on the deposit with the Comptroller of —
       (a) a cash sum equal to the value of the goods; and
       (b) any duty, as determined by the Comptroller, to
            which the goods may be liable.
       (2) Any money deposited pursuant to subsection (1)
shall be deemed substituted for the goods seized and all the
provisions of this Part so far as they are applicable shall
accordingly apply to such money.
       297. (1) The Customs authority may sell or destroy         Sale of certain
any thing seized as being liable to forfeiture where such         seized goods.
thing is —
       (a) a living creature; or
       (b) anything that, in the opinion of the
            Comptroller —
            (i) is of a perishable nature;
            (ii) is likely to deteriorate or diminish in value
                  by keeping;
            (iii) it is desirable to sell immediately; or
            (iv) is likely to create a health or safety risk if
                  kept.
       (2) The net proceeds of a sale pursuant to
subsection (1) shall be deemed to be substituted for the
thing sold and all the provisions of this Part so far as they
are applicable shall accordingly extend and apply to such
proceeds.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 244]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Application to            298. (1) Subject to section 293(12)(a), the owner
the Comptroller
for notice          may, where goods liable to forfeiture under this Act have
disallowing         been seized, claim such goods by notice in writing to the
seizure.            Comptroller within one month of the date of the seizure or
                    of any notice given under section 294, as the case may be.
                          (2) Goods seized shall, where a notice of claim has
                    been given in accordance with subsection (1), be detained
                    by the Comptroller to be dealt with in accordance with this
                    Act but —
                          (a) subject to paragraph (b), the Comptroller may
                               permit the goods seized to be delivered to the
                               claimant;
                          (b) the claimant shall give security for the payment
                               of the value, as determined by the Comptroller,
                               of the goods in the event of their forfeiture.
Procedure after           299. (1) The Comptroller, where a notice of claim
notice of claim.    has been given pursuant to section 298(1), may within two
                    months after the receipt of the claim —
                          (a) by notice in writing to the claimant, require the
                               claimant to institute proceedings for the
                               recovery of the goods claimed within two
                               months of the date of the notice; or
                          (b) himself institute proceedings for the forfeiture of
                               the goods claimed.
                          (2) Subject to subsection (3), goods seized shall be
                    released to the claimant where the Comptroller pursuant to
                    subsection (1) fails within the period of two months —
                          (a) to require the claimant to institute proceedings;
                               or
                          (b) himself to institute proceedings.
                          (3) Goods claimed pursuant to section 298(1) which
                    are prohibited or restricted goods which have been
                    imported, or carried coastwise, or attempted to be exported,
                    in contravention of any regulations relating to such
                    goods —
                          (a) shall not be released to the claimant; and
                          (b) may be disposed of in such manner as the
                               Comptroller may direct.
Application for
order disallowing         300. (1) Any person claiming an interest in goods
seizure where       seized as being liable to forfeiture under this Act who did
notice not
received.
                    not receive notice under section 294 may, except where the
                    goods have already been forfeited to the Crown, apply to


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 245


the court within six months after the date on which the
goods were seized for an order —
       (a) where the goods seized have not been sold,
            destroyed, or otherwise disposed of, of the kind
            specified in section 298(1); or
       (b) where the goods seized have been sold,
            destroyed, or otherwise disposed of, that
            compensation be paid by the Crown for the
            whole or part of any loss suffered by the
            applicant.
       (2) The court may, on any application made under
subsection (1), dismiss the application or make an order —
       (a) where the goods seized have not been sold,
            destroyed, or otherwise disposed of, of the kind
            specified in section 299(1); or
       (b) where the goods seized have been sold,
            destroyed, or otherwise disposed of, that
            compensation in such amount as the court thinks
            fit be paid by the Crown to the applicant for the
            whole or any part of any loss suffered by the
            applicant and such order may be made on such
            terms and conditions as the court thinks fit.
       (3) No order for the payment of compensation shall
be issued except in respect of goods that, in the opinion of
the court, were seized or detained without reasonable cause
and except to the extent that the court disallows the seizure.
       (4) An order by the court dismissing an application
under this section shall be deemed to be an order for
forfeiture of the goods to the Crown unless the goods have
already been forfeited pursuant to section 301.
       (5) Without prejudice to subsection (2), the court
may dismiss an application under subsection (1) that is not
made as soon as reasonably practicable after the applicant
became aware of the seizure of the goods.
       301. Goods seized as liable to forfeiture shall, where    Forfeiture if no
no claim under section 298(1) is made within one month of        claim against
                                                                 seizure.
the seizure, be deemed to be forfeited to the Crown.
       302. Goods claimed shall, where the Comptroller has       Forfeiture if
required the claimant pursuant to section 299(1)(a) to           claim against
                                                                 seizure is
institute proceedings within the period of two months and        discontinued.
the claimant has failed to do so, be forfeited on the
expiration of such period.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 246]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Waiver of                303. (1) A person who but for the forfeiture would be
forfeiture.
                  entitled to goods may, where goods have been seized under
                  this Act as liable to forfeiture, apply to the Minister for a
                  waiver of the forfeiture.
                         (2) An application for a waiver under this section
                  may be made before or after the seizure of the goods but
                  shall be made —
                         (a) in the case of a person who received notice of
                              the seizure under section 294, not later than
                              twenty working days after the date on which
                              notice was given to the person; and
                         (b) in the case of a person who did not receive
                              notice of the seizure under section 294, not later
                              than thirty working days after the date of the
                              seizure.
                         (3) The Minister may, on an application made under
                  this section where he considers it equitable to do so,
                  subject to such terms and conditions as the Minister may
                  determine, and whether or not the thing has been
                  forfeited —
                         (a) waive the forfeiture either in whole or in part;
                              and
                         (b) direct the return in whole or in part of the goods
                              or property so seized.
                        (4) Without prejudice to subsection (3), any waiver
                  may be made subject to the condition that there is paid to
                  the Crown in respect of the goods or property a sum equal
                  to the whole or any part of any one or more of —
                        (a) any costs or expenses incurred by the Customs
                            authority;
                        (b) any duty not already paid; or
                        (c) any duty already refunded.
                        (5) The Minister may, either generally or
                  particularly, delegate to the Comptroller any of his powers
                  under this section except the power of delegation.
Forfeiture of           304. (1) Subject to subsection (2), where this Act
seized goods on
conviction.
                  provides that on the commission of an offence any goods
                  are liable to forfeiture, the conviction of any person for
                  such offence has effect as a forfeiture, without suit or
                  judgement, of any goods that have been seized and —
                        (a) in respect of which the offence was committed;
                             or


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 247


      (b) that were otherwise liable to forfeiture under this
          Act.
      (2) The court may, where it imposes a sentence on
the conviction of any person for an offence to which
subsection (1) applies, order if it thinks fit the restoration
of the goods forfeited to the person from whom the goods
were seized and, where such an order is issued, the
conviction shall not have effect as a forfeiture of those
goods.
      (3) The court may, on issuing an order pursuant to
subsection (2), impose such conditions as it thinks fit.
      (4) Subsection (2) shall not apply where the goods
before the conviction have been —
      (a) sold by public auction;
      (b) restored to the person from whom they were
           seized; or
      (c) otherwise disposed of by the Comptroller under
           any other provision of this Act.
      (5) The forfeiture of any thing which has been
seized under this Act as being liable to forfeiture shall in
no way be affected by the fact that the owner of the thing
was in no way concerned with the act which rendered the
thing liable to forfeiture.
       (6) A forfeiture shall, where any thing is forfeited
under this Act, have effect as from the date when the
liability to forfeiture arose.
       305. (1) Ownership of forfeited goods, or in any          Disposal of
deposit made under section 296, or in the proceeds of sale       forfeited goods.
under section 297, as the case may be, shall vest in the
Crown.
       (2) Forfeited goods, unless they are prohibited or
restricted goods, may after their forfeiture as the Customs
authority directs be —
       (a) destroyed;
       (b) sold by public auction;
       (c) used or otherwise disposed of.
      (3) Any auction under this section shall be
advertised in the Gazette and on the Bahamas Customs
website not less than fourteen working days before it is due
to take place.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 248]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (4) None of the following persons shall be
                 permitted to bid for anything at an auction under this
                 section —
                        (a) a Customs officer or any other person serving or
                             employed within the Customs Department; or
                        (b) any person who has or had an interest in the
                             goods or any other thing being auctioned.
                        (5) The proceeds of sale shall, where goods are sold
                 under this section, be applied in order of priority in the
                 discharge of —
                        (a) applicable duties, if any;
                        (b) expenses of removal and sale;
                        (c) rent and charges due to the Customs authority;
                             and
                        (d) any other charges,
                 and the balance of the proceeds of sale, if any, shall be paid
                 into the Customs revenue.
                        (6) Anything not sold at an auction under this
                 section may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the
                 Comptroller may direct.
                        (7) Nothing in this section shall prevent the
                 Comptroller from authorising —
                        (a) the withholding from sale of anything forfeited
                             or deemed to be forfeited; and
                        (b) the use by a proper officer of anything withheld
                             from sale, where such retention and use would
                             assist such officer in the performance of his
                             duty.
Application of          306. The provisions of this Act with respect to the
forfeiture
provisions.
                 forfeiture of goods shall apply to any means of transport, or
                 other thing, forfeited under this Act.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 249



                        PART XXII
                        EVIDENCE

      307. (1) An allegation made on behalf of the               Burden of proof.
Government shall be presumed to be true unless the
contrary is proven where such allegation —
      (a) is made in any proceedings under this Act
           instituted by or on behalf of or against the
           Government, other than a prosecution for an
           indictable offence;
      (b) is made in any statement of claim, statement of
           defence, plea, or information; and
      (c) relates to the —
           (i) identity or nature of any goods;
           (ii) value of any goods for duty;
           (iii) country or time of exportation of any
                 goods;
           (iv) fact or time of the importation of any
                 goods;
           (v) place of manufacture, production, or origin
                 of any goods; or
           (vi) payment of any duty on goods.
      (2) The presumption in subsection (1) shall not be
excluded by the fact that evidence is produced on behalf of
the Government in support of any such allegation.
      (3) This section shall apply to proceedings in which
the existence of an intent to defraud the revenue of the
Customs authority is in issue.
      (4) Notwithstanding subsections (1), (2) and (3), the
prosecution shall bear the burden of proving intent beyond
a reasonable doubt in any proceeding relating to an offence
under this Act where it is alleged that the defendant
intended to commit the offence.
      (5) The onus shall, in any proceedings under a
Customs enactment, be on the defendant to prove that —
      (a) duties assessed have been paid in respect of
           goods;
      (b) goods were, as applicable —
           (i) lawfully loaded into or unloaded from any
                 aircraft or vessel;


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 250]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           (ii) lawfully transferred from one aircraft or
                                 vessel to another aircraft or vessel; or
                           (iii) lawfully imported in, or exported from, the
                                 Customs territory.
                      (6) It shall be sufficient evidence of the matter or
                fact in question, until the contrary is proven, where the
                Crown avers by the Comptroller that —
                      (a) the Comptroller has elected that a particular
                           penalty should be sued for or recovered;
                      (b) a person is or was the Minister, the Comptroller,
                           a Customs officer or a police officer;
                      (c) a person is or was authorised by the Comptroller
                           to discharge, or was engaged by the orders or
                           with the concurrence of the Comptroller in the
                           discharge of, any duty under this Act;
                      (d) goods were thrown overboard, damaged, broken
                           or destroyed for the purpose of preventing or
                           avoiding their seizure;
                      (e) an offence was committed or an act was
                           performed within the limits of any Customs
                           place or other Customs controlled area, or at, in,
                           or over, any part of The Bahamas;
                      (f) the Comptroller is or is not satisfied as to any
                           matter as to which he is required to be satisfied
                           under this Act or by any other Customs
                           legislation; or
                      (g) the Comptroller has directed or requested any
                           proceedings under this Act to be instituted.
                      (7) Where upon any trial a question arises as to
                whether a person is a proper officer —
                      (a) such person’s own evidence on the matter shall
                           be deemed sufficient; and
                      (b) a proper officer shall be deemed a competent
                           witness upon the trial of any suit
                           notwithstanding such officer may be entitled to a
                           reward upon the conviction of the party charged
                           in the suit.
                      (8) In all cases where the fine for an offence under a
                Customs enactment is an amount that is to be determined
                by the value of goods —
                      (a) such value shall be determined in accordance
                           with the Third Schedule; and


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 251


      (b) a certificate signed by the proper officer
          attesting to the value of the goods shall be
          accepted by the court as prima facie evidence of
          the value of the goods.
      (9) An order for seizure by a court under any
Customs legislation may be proven in any court, or before
any competent tribunal, by the production of a certificate
of seizure to be signed by the officer of the court.
      308. (1) The court may, in any proceeding under this       Documents made
Act, admit in evidence as proof of any fact in issue a           overseas.
document made in a country outside the Customs territory.
      (2) Any certificate or copy of an official document
shall be receivable in evidence and be sufficient evidence
of the matter in question if it purports to be certified under
the hand and seal or stamp of office —
      (a) of a Customs department or similar institution in
           any member country of the World Customs
           Organisation; or
      (b) of any diplomatic or consular representative of
           The Bahamas in any foreign country.
      309. (1) The production of any document under the          Prescribed forms.
hand of a Customs officer purporting to be a prescribed
form, an extract from a prescribed form, or a copy of any
such form or extract shall, in all courts and in all
proceedings, be sufficient evidence of the fact that the form
was prescribed and all courts shall take judicial notice of
the signature of the Customs officer either on the
prescribed form or on any extract or copy thereof.
      (2) Any document purporting to be signed by the
Minister or the Comptroller, or by their order, or by a
person with their authority, or by any person in the service
of the Government of The Bahamas shall, until the
contrary is proven, be deemed to have been so signed and
the matters contained in such document may, in
proceedings under this Act or any other legislation, be
proven by the production of such document or any
document purporting to be a copy of such document.
      (3) The production of a certificate purporting to be
signed by the competent authority shall, in any proceeding
under this Act or other Customs legislation, be sufficient
evidence of all matters stated in the certificate unless the
contrary is proven.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 252]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Record of                 310. A computer printout of an extract of a record
computer
transmission
                   kept by the Customs authority or an approved third party
admissible in      certified by or on behalf of the Comptroller under the seal
evidence.          of the Customs Department as a true copy shall, in any
                   proceedings under this Act or any other legislation and in
                   all courts, be admissible as evidence of the electronic
                   message received by or sent to or from the Customs
                   authority set out in such printout, unless the contrary is
                   proven.
Presumption of            311. All documents purporting to be signed by or on
authenticity of
documents.
                   behalf of the Comptroller, or to be sealed with the seal of
                   the Customs Department, shall in all courts and in all
                   proceedings under this Act and any other legislation be
                   deemed to have been so signed or sealed with due
                   authority, unless the contrary is proven.

                                      PART XXIII
                                  LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

Jurisdictions in         312. (1) All disputed matters involving a Customs
respect of
appeals in
                   enactment may be prosecuted in Supreme Court —
Customs matters.         (a) after exhaustion of all appeal proceedings
                              available under this Act before the Comptroller
                              and the Customs Appeal Commission; and
                         (b) subject to any provisions to the contrary in any
                              Customs legislation.
                         (2) Without prejudice to the powers of any court,
                   civil proceedings under the Customs laws relating to any
                   claim to any thing which has been seized under this Act
                   and any claim to any duty, fee, charge, expense or any sum
                   payable under the Customs laws may be heard or
                   determined without limit of amount before the Supreme
                   Court.
                         (3) Subject to subsection (4), proceedings for an
                   offence under this Act and any other Customs legislation,
                   or for forfeiture of goods, shall not be commenced except
                   by order of the Comptroller in writing.
                         (4) Notwithstanding subsection (3), any court
                   before which a person who has been arrested for an offence
                   under any Customs enactment is brought may deal
                   preliminarily with the case against him.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 253


      (5) An offence under this Act or any other Customs
legislation shall be regarded as having been committed,
and every cause of complaint as having arisen, either —
      (a) in the place in which the offence was actually
           committed or arose; or
      (b) in any place in The Bahamas where the offender
           or person prosecuted may be brought.
      313. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall confer        Actions by or
any right of action against the Comptroller in his               against the
                                                                 Comptroller.
representative capacity, whether in contract or in tort.
      (2) The Comptroller may, where under this Act any
proceedings may be brought by or against the Comptroller,
sue or be sued by the name of the Comptroller and may, for
all purposes, be described by such name.
      (3) The Comptroller shall, notwithstanding that any
such action may lie in tort, be responsible for the errors or
omissions of any Customs officer or any other person
performing any duty under this Act as if such officer or
person were the servant or agent of the Comptroller.
      (4) Costs may, where under this Act any
proceedings are brought by or against the Comptroller, be
awarded to or against the Comptroller.
      (5) Where under this Act any proceedings are
brought by or against the Comptroller and —
      (a) any sums or costs are covered by the
           Comptroller, such sums or costs shall be paid
           out of the Customs authority revenues;
      (b) any damages or costs are ordered to be paid by
           the Comptroller, such damages or costs shall be
           paid by the Government and the Comptroller
           shall not be personally liable for them.
      (6) The fact that security has been given by bond or
otherwise for the payment of any duty or for the
compliance with any condition shall not in any proceedings
brought be a defence to a charge of non-payment or non-
compliance, as the case may be.
      (7) Any officer or other person authorised by the
Comptroller, although not an attorney-at-law, may
prosecute and conduct any information or other
proceedings under any Customs enactment in respect of
any offence or penalty.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 254]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            (8) Any summons or other process issued for the
                     purpose of proceedings under this Act shall be deemed to
                     have been duly served —
                            (a) if delivered personally to the person to whom it
                                 is addressed; or
                            (b) if left at his last known place of abode or
                                 business or, in the case of a corporate body, at
                                 its registered or principal office.
                            (9) Any summons, notice, order or other document
                     issued for the purposes of any proceedings under this Act,
                     or an appeal from the decision of the court in such
                     proceedings, may be served by a proper officer.
Limitation of               314. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act
Customs action.      and other Customs legislation and notwithstanding any
                     provision in any other enactment to the contrary, any
                     proceedings for an offence under this Act shall not be
                     commenced, and anything liable to forfeiture under this
                     Act shall not be seized, after three years from the date of
                     the offence or from the date on which the goods became
                     liable to forfeiture, as the case may be.
Protection of               315. (1) No witness on behalf of the Crown or the
witnesses.           Comptroller in any proceedings under this Act shall be
                     compelled to disclose the fact that he received any
                     information relating to any Customs matter, or the nature
                     of any such information, or the name of the person who
                     gave any information.
                            (2) No Customs officer appearing as a witness in
                     any proceedings shall be compelled to produce any
                     confidential information or reports made or received by
                     him in his official capacity.
Enforcement of              316. (1) The obligation to pay a fine imposed by a
court’s decisions.   court’s decision under this Act shall not be suspended by
                     any appeal.
                            (2) The court may, where it has imposed a fine for
                     an offence against a Customs enactment and such fine
                     without reasonable excuse is not paid within three months,
                     and notwithstanding anything contained in any other law,
                     order the defendant who was convicted of the offence to be
                     imprisoned for —
                            (a) a term not exceeding five years where the fine
                                 does not exceed five thousand dollars; or,




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 255



      (b) for a maximum term of ten years where the fine
           exceeds five thousand dollars.
      (3) Where a defendant who was convicted of an
offence under this Act dies before the completion of the
payment of a fine imposed by the court —
      (a) the defendant’s estate shall be deemed to be the
           same person as the defendant and not to be a
           trust;
      (b) the executors or administrators shall be
           responsible for satisfying the obligation set out
           by the court’s decision; and
      (c) the estate and the executors or administrators
           shall be jointly and severally liable for the
           payment of such fine as is payable by the
           deceased estate except that the executors or the
           administrators shall be liable for the payment of
           such fine as became payable before the
           defendant died only to the extent of the assets of
           the estate after satisfying the claims of creditors
           whose claims rank in priority to the claim of the
           Crown.
      (4) The Customs authority may, where the Customs
authority has good reasons to think that a defendant who
was convicted of an offence under this Act has organised
his insolvency, apply to the court for an order deeming
those persons who participated in the organisation of such
insolvency to be jointly and severally liable for the
payment of the fine imposed by the court’s decision.
      (5) The Minister may, in circumstances where he
deems it appropriate, waive in writing the requirement that
the executors or administrators of a deceased individual
pay a fine owed.

                PART XXIV
             APPEALS AGAINST
       CUSTOMS RULINGS AND DECISIONS
         DIVISION I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
      317. (1) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision      Right of appeal.
made by the Customs authority which concerns such
person directly and individually may appeal, in first
instance, to the Comptroller under Division Two of this
Part.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 256]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                        (2) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
                  the Comptroller pursuant to this Act may appeal to the
                  Commission under Division Three of this Part.
                        (3) A party who is dissatisfied with a decision of the
                  Commission under this Act as being erroneous in point of
                  law may appeal to the Supreme Court.
                        (4) Appeals shall be lodged in written or electronic
                  form within the Customs territory.
                        (5) Sections 317 to 338 shall not apply to appeals
                  lodged with a view to the annulment, revocation, or
                  amendment, of a decision taken by a judicial authority.
Suspension of           318. (1) The submission of an appeal shall not cause
implementation.   implementation of the decision subject to the appeal to be
                  suspended.
                        (2) The Customs authority may suspend
                  implementation of the decision subject to appeal, in whole
                  or in part, where it has good reason to suspect that it is
                  inconsistent with the Customs legislation.
                        (3) Suspension of a decision subject to appeal shall,
                  where such decision has the effect of causing import duties
                  or export duties to be payable or the amount payable to be
                  increased, be conditional upon the provision of a security.

                        DIVISION II - APPEAL TO COMPTROLLER
Conditions and          319. (1) Where the amount of duty demanded or any
proceedings.      decision of the Customs authority under this Act is
                  disputed by the importer —
                        (a) the amount in dispute shall be paid by the
                             importer under protest and the decision
                             implemented;
                        (b) the importer may, within fifteen working days
                             from the date of payment or after the date on
                             which notice of such decision is given, appeal to
                             the Comptroller in respect of the disputed entry
                             or decision; and
                        (c) the importer in his appeal shall request the
                             Comptroller to reconsider the disputed decision,
                             whether or not such reconsideration is based on
                             information not available at the time of
                             assessment.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 257


      (2) A request made pursuant to subsection (1)
shall—
      (a) state the grounds for disputing the decision
            made by the Customs authority; and
      (b) outline      the    further   documentation    or
            information, if any, on which the request is
            based.
      (3) The Comptroller, after investigating the matter
within fifteen working days of the receipt of a request
pursuant to subsection (1), and taking into account any
further submissions of the importer or his agent, may
confirm the original decision or substitute a new decision
for the original decision resulting in —
      (a) an increase, decrease or confirmation of the
            amount of duty originally determined to be due;
            or
      (b) the confirmation or the revocation of the initial
            decision.
      (4) A person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
the Comptroller under this section may, within fifteen
working days after the date on which notice of the decision
is given, appeal to the Commission pursuant to Division
Three of this Part.


   DIVISION III - CUSTOMS APPEAL COMMISSION
      320. (1) The Minister shall, by regulation pursuant to     Establishment of
section 354 establish a body independent of the Customs          Customs Appeal
                                                                 Commission.
authority to be known as the Customs Appeal Commission
which shall hear and decide appeals by complainants in           23 of 2013, s. 29A.
respect of decisions made by the Comptroller pursuant to
this Act and other Customs legislation as well as
complaints in respect of any other matter that the Minister
shall by regulation prescribe.
      (2) The Minister may from time to time change the
designation of the body referred to in subsection (1).
      (3) The Minister shall, by notice in the Gazette,
appoint the members of the Commission, which shall
consist of—
      (a) a Chairman, being an attorney-at-law having
           been a member of the Bahamas Bar Association
           for at least seven years; and


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 258]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     (b) two assessors, being persons outside of the
                          Customs Department having experience in
                          Customs matters and, by reason of their
                          profession and training, qualified to be members
                          of the Commission.
                     (4) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a
                person appointed as a member of the Commission shall be
                appointed for such term, not exceeding three years, as the
                Minister thinks fit and may from time to time be
                reappointed.
                      (5) Subject to subsection (6), a person appointed as
                a member of the Commission may at any time —
                      (a) be suspended or removed from office by the
                            Minister for —
                            (i) engaging in any occupation for reward
                                  outside the duties of his or her office;
                            (ii) disability;
                            (iii) bankruptcy;
                            (iv) neglect of duty;
                            (v) misconduct proved to the satisfaction of the
                                  Minister; or
                      (b) resign their office by writing addressed to the
                            Minister.
                      (6) A person shall not be liable to be suspended or
                removed from office under subsection (5) by reason of
                engaging in any occupation for reward where his terms of
                appointment as a member of the Commission permit him to
                engage in such occupation for reward outside the duties of
                his office.
                      (7) A member of the Commission whose term of
                office has expired or who has resigned his office shall be
                deemed to continue to be a member of the Commission for
                the purpose of deciding any appeal that was wholly heard
                before the expiration of his term of office or before his
                resignation took effect, as the case may be.
                      (8) A person appointed as a member of the
                Commission shall, before entering upon the exercise of the
                duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath before a
                Judge of the Supreme Court that he will faithfully and
                impartially perform the duties of his office.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 259



      (9) The Minister may, in the event of the sickness
or other incapacity of a member of the Commission,
appoint any person who is qualified to be appointed as a
member of the Commission to act in the place of such
person during the incapacity and any person so appointed
shall have authority to act on behalf of the Commission
and, while so acting, shall be deemed to be a member of
the Commission.
      (10) No appointment of a person under subsection
(9), and no act done by any person by virtue of such
appointment, shall in any proceeding be questioned on the
ground that the occasion of the appointment had not arisen
or had ceased.
      (11) No person appointed as a member of the
Commission and no person appointed under subsection (9)
shall be personally liable for any act done or omitted to be
done by him in good faith in pursuance or intended
pursuance of his powers and authorities under this Act.
      (12) The Customs Appeal Commission shall have a
seal which shall be judicially noted in all courts.
      321. A decision of the Customs Appeal Commission           Right to further
pursuant to this Part may be appealed, on matters of law         appeal.
only, to the Supreme Court.

             DIVISION IV - PROCEEDINGS
      322. (1) The procedures of the Customs Appeal              Procedure.
Commission shall, subject to this Act and any regulations
made under this Act, be determined by the Commission.
      (2) Proceedings before the Commission shall be
commenced by the lodging of an application in the
prescribed form, together with the prescribed fee, with the
Commission.
      323. Appeals     before    the   Customs      Appeal       Nature of appeal.
Commission shall be by way of a hearing de novo.
      324. The Commission may, where under this Act a            Commission may
person is entitled to appeal to the Commission within a          extend time for
                                                                 appeal.
specified time, on an application made within the specified
time extend the time within which the appeal may be
brought.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 260]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Hearing.               325. (1) Subject to section 326, the Commission shall
                as soon as the Commission considers that an appeal is
                ready to be heard —
                       (a) fix a date, time, and place for the hearing of the
                            appeal; and
                       (b) notify the appellant and the Comptroller of the
                            date, time, and place so fixed.
                       (2) A notice to an appellant under subsection (1)
                shall —
                       (a) in addition to the matters referred to in
                            subsection (1), inform the appellant of the
                            provisions of subsection (6); and
                       (b) be served on the appellant by personal service or
                            by post in accordance with this Act.
                       (2) At the hearing of an appeal before the
                Commission, the appellant and the Comptroller
                respectively —
                       (a) may provide evidence; and
                       (b) shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either
                            in person or by a person authorised by the
                            appellant or Comptroller to appear on his behalf,
                            without regard to whether such person is an
                            attorney-at-law.
                       (4) The Commission may, upon proof of service of
                the notice of the hearing, proceed to determine the appeal
                where the appellant or the Comptroller, or both, or the
                person authorised by the appellant or the Comptroller to
                appear on his behalf, fail to appear before the Commission
                at the time and place appointed.
                       (5) The Commission may require the presence at
                the hearing of any person having particular expertise on the
                matter in question to assist the Commission in making its
                decision.
                       (6) The hearing of an appeal before the Commission
                shall be in private.
                       (7) The Commission may —
                       (a) order that any part of any evidence given, or the
                            name of any witness, not be published; and
                       (b) make any order as referred to in paragraph (a)
                            subject to such conditions as the Commission
                            thinks fit.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 261


      326. (1) Notwithstanding        section     325,     the   Commission may
Commission may, if it thinks fit and if both parties consent,    decide appeal
                                                                 without oral
decide an appeal without holding an oral hearing.                hearing if both
                                                                 parties consent.
      (2) The Commission shall, where the Commission
at any time during its consideration of an appeal in
accordance with subsection (1) decides that an oral hearing
should be held, fix a date, time, and place for the hearing of
the appeal in accordance with section 325.
      327. (1) The Chairman of the Commission shall, for         Commission’s
the purposes of dealing with the matters before it, have the     powers.
powers of a Magistrate in the exercise of its civil
jurisdiction in respect of citing parties and conducting and
maintaining order at the hearings of the Commission.
      (2) The Commission in any proceedings may —
      (a) order a party to pay to the other party such costs
           and expenses, including witness’s expenses, as it
           considers reasonable; and
      (b) apportion any costs referred to in paragraph (a)
           between the parties or any of them in such
           manner as the Commission thinks fit.
      (3) The Commission may order a party in default to
pay to the Government such sum for costs as the
Commission considers reasonable where it considers it
proper to do so due to failure of the party in default —
      (a) to prosecute any proceedings at the time fixed
           for a hearing; or
      (b) to give adequate notice of the abandonment of
           any proceedings.
      328. (1) The Commission may receive as evidence            Evidence.
any statement, document, information or matter that, in the
opinion of the Commission, may assist the Commission to
deal effectually with the proceedings, whether or not it
would be admissible in a court of law.
      (2) The Commission may take evidence on oath.
      (3) The Commission may permit a person appearing
as a witness before it to give evidence by tendering a
written statement and, if the Commission thinks fit,
verifying it by oath.
      329. (1) The Commission, or any person authorised          Power of
in writing by the Commission, for the purposes of dealing        investigation.
with the matters before it, may —

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 262]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      (a) inspect and examine any papers, documents,
                           records, or articles;
                      (b) require any person to produce for examination
                           any papers, documents, records, or articles in the
                           possession or under the control of such person
                           and to allow copies of or extracts from any such
                           papers, documents, or records to be made; and
                      (c) require any person to furnish, in a form
                           approved by or acceptable to the Commission,
                           any information or particulars that may be
                           required by it and any copies of or extracts from
                           any papers, documents, or records in the
                           possession or under the control of such person.
                      (2) The Commission may, if it thinks fit, require
                that any written information or particulars or any copies or
                extracts furnished under this section be verified by
                statutory declaration or otherwise as the Commission may
                require.
                      (3) The Commission, for the purposes of dealing
                with the matters before it, may either of its own motion or
                on application —
                      (a) order that any information or particulars, or a
                           copy of the whole or part of any paper,
                           document, or record furnished or produced to it,
                           be supplied to any person appearing before the
                           Commission; and
                      (b) in any order under paragraph (a), impose such
                           terms and conditions as the Commission thinks
                           fit in respect of the production of and use to be
                           made of the information, particulars, or copy.
                      (4) A person shall have the same privileges as
                witnesses have in courts of law in relation to the —
                      (a) giving of information to the Commission;
                      (b) answering of questions put by the Commission;
                           and
                      (c) production of papers, documents, records, and
                           articles to the Commission.
Power to              330. (1) The Commission may, for the purposes of
summon
witnesses.
                dealing with the matters before it, either of its own motion
                or on application, issue in writing a summons requiring any
                person to attend at the time and place specified in the
                summons —



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 263



      (a) to give evidence; and
      (b) to produce any papers, documents, records, or
           articles in the possession or under the control of
           such person that are relevant to the matters
           before the Commission.
      (2) The Commission may, where it has of its own
motion issued a witness summons, direct that the amount
of fees, allowances and or travelling expenses be paid by
the Government.
      (3) A party to the proceedings who has requested
the issue of a witness summons shall be liable for payment
of the witness’s fees, allowances and travelling expenses.
       331. (1) A summons to a witness may be served             Service of
by —                                                             summons.

      (a) delivering it to the person summoned; or
      (b) posting it by registered letter addressed to the
            person summoned at that person’s usual place of
            residence or business.
      (2) A summons shall —
      (a) where it is served under subsection (1)(a), be
            served at least forty- eight hours before the
            attendance of the witness is required;
      (b) where it is served under subsection (1)(b), be
            served at least ten working days before the date
            on which the attendance of the witness is
            required.
      (3) A summons posted by registered letter shall be
deemed for the purposes of subsection (2)(b) to have been
served at the time when the letter would be delivered in the
ordinary course of postal service.
      332. A witness giving evidence and a counsel or            Protection of
agent or other person appearing before the Commission            persons
                                                                 appearing.
shall have the same privileges and immunities as witnesses
and counsel in courts of law.
      333. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the appellant in an    Grounds of
appeal shall be limited to the grounds stated in the             appeal and
                                                                 burden of proof.
appellant’s notice of appeal and the burden of proof shall
be on the appellant.
      (2) The Commission may, either on the application
of the appellant or of its own motion, amend the grounds
stated in a notice of appeal.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 264]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Sittings of                334. (1) Sittings of the Commission shall be held at
Commission.         such times and places as the Commission determines.
                           (2) The Commission may adjourn a sitting or
                    modify the place of a sitting either before the time of the
                    sitting or at the sitting.
Commission may             335. The Commission may at any time dismiss an
dismiss frivolous
or vexatious
                    appeal if it is satisfied that the appeal is frivolous or
appeal.             vexatious.
Decision of                336. (1) Every decision of the Commission shall be
Commission.         given in writing with a statement of the reasons for the
                    decision.
                           (2) A copy of the decision shall be given to the
                    parties to the appeal and shall be accompanied by a written
                    statement of the provisions of section 337(1).
Appeals to the             337. (1) A party who is dissatisfied with a decision of
Supreme Court.      the Commission under this Act as being erroneous in point
                    of law may appeal to the Supreme Court.
                           (2) An appeal under this section shall be made by
                    filing a notice of appeal within twenty working days after
                    the date of the decision appealed against or within such
                    further time as the court may allow.
                          (3) The appellant shall, where a notice of appeal is
                    filed in accordance with subsection (2), serve within the
                    time specified in that subsection a copy of the notice on the
                    Commission.
Stating case for          338. (1) The Commission may, on the application of
Supreme Court.      the appellant or the Customs authority or on its own
                    motion, state a case for the opinion of the Supreme Court
                    on any question of law arising in respect of any appeal that
                    was heard before the Commission.
                          (2) The Commission shall give notice to the
                    Comptroller and the appellant of the Commission’s
                    intention to state a case under this section.

                                             PART XXV
                                           SECURITIES
Requirement to
                          339. Pursuant to sections 43 and 44, the Customs
give security.      authority may require any person to give security for the
                    due compliance by such person with this Act and, pending
                    the giving of any such security, the Customs authority may
                    refuse to permit delivery or exportation of the goods or to
                    pass any entry in relation to them.

STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 265


      340. (1) Any security which is required to be given        Provisions
                                                                 relating to giving
under this Act may be given to the satisfaction of the           of security.
Customs authority either —
      (a) by bond, in such sum and subject to such
           conditions and with such sureties as the Customs
           authority may reasonably require;
      (b) by cash deposit; or
      (c) partly by bond and partly by cash deposit.
      (2) Any security which is required to be given
under this Act for any particular purpose may, with the
approval of the Customs authority, be given to cover any
transactions which the person giving such security may
enter into within such period as the Customs authority may
approve.
      (3) A bond required to be given under this Act shall
be so framed that —
      (a) the person giving it, and any surety to it, shall be
           bound to the Customs authority for the due
           performance of the conditions of the bond; and
      (b) unless sooner discharged by the due
           performance of its conditions, the bond may be
           discharged by the Customs authority on the
           expiration of one year from the date of the bond
           but without prejudice to the right of the Customs
           authority to require fresh security.
      (4) The Customs authority shall, where any bond
given under this Act is discharged, cause such bond to be
cancelled and an endorsement of its cancellation shall be
made on the bond.
      (5) Notwithstanding that it or any surety to it is
given by a person under the age of eighteen years, a bond
given under this Act shall be valid and enforceable as if it
were given by a person of full age.
      (6) All securities executed under the Customs laws
before the commencement of this Act shall be valid and
enforceable as if executed under this Act.
      341. (1) Without prejudice to any right of a surety to     Provisions
any bond given under this Act against the person for whom        relating to
                                                                 sureties.
he is surety, a surety shall be deemed for all the purposes
of any bond to be the principal debtor and accordingly a
surety shall not be discharged, nor his liability affected,
by —

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 266]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            (a) the giving of time for payment;
                            (b) the omission to enforce the bond for breach of
                                 any of its conditions; or
                            (c) any other act or omission which would not have
                                 discharged the bond had he been the principal
                                 debtor.
                            (2) All sureties executed under any Customs
                     legislation before the commencement of this Act shall be
                     valid and enforceable as if executed under this Act.
                            (3) The Customs authority may require the person
                     giving a bond to enter into fresh security where any person
                     being a surety to such bond —
                            (a) dies;
                            (b) becomes bankrupt;
                            (c) enters into any arrangement or composition
                                 with, or for the benefit of, his creditors; or
                            (d) departs from The Bahamas without leaving
                                 sufficient property in The Bahamas to satisfy the
                                 whole amount of the bond.
Enforcement of              342. (1) The Customs authority may, where the
bond.                conditions of any bond have not been complied with, take
                     legal proceedings for enforcement of the bond.
                            (2) The production of the bond shall, where any
                     legal proceedings are taken pursuant to subsection (1),
                     entitle the Customs authority without further proof to
                     judgement for the stated liability unless the person against
                     whom proceedings are taken proves —
                            (a) compliance with all the conditions of the bond;
                            (b) that the bond or surety was not executed by him;
                            (c) that the person has been released from the
                                 provision of the bond or surety; or
                            (d) that he has already made satisfaction for the full
                                 amount of the bond or surety.

                                      PART XXVI
                               MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Simplification of          343. (1) The Comptroller may pursuant to section 8
the application of
the Act.
                     prescribe rules laying down in which cases, and under
                     which conditions, the application of this Act may be
                     simplified and recommend to the Minister any other


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                 [CH.293– 267


measures relating to the simplification of the application of
this Act.
       (2) The Comptroller shall, in addition to
implementing provisions referred to in this Act, adopt rules
laying down rules and standards for the interoperability of
Customs computer systems to bring about improved
cooperation based upon electronic data exchange
between —
       (a) the Customs authority and Customs authorities
            of other countries and territories outside the
            Customs territory of The Bahamas; and
       (b) the Customs authority and approved economic
            operators or other public agencies.
       344. (1) Subject to this section, this Act shall apply to   Application of
postal articles and to goods contained in postal articles in       Act to postal
                                                                   articles.
the same manner as this Act applies to other goods.
       (2) In this section the term “postal article” means
any letter, parcel, packet, or other thing received or
transmitted by, or through, a postal operator and includes
any such articles imported by air courier companies.
       (3) Postal articles may be entered at such place and
in such manner as the Minister may direct by Order.
       (4) Any officer in the service of the Post Office or
any other authorised person performing any duty in
relation to the importation or exportation of any postal
article shall perform such duty in accordance with this Act.
       (5) All imported articles and postal articles intended
for exportation shall, if the Comptroller so requires, be
produced by an officer of the Post Office or any other
person authorised to perform any duty in relation to the
importation or exportation of any postal article —
       (a) for examination either —
            (i) at the port of arrival in or departure from
                 The Bahamas, as the case may be; or
            (ii) at such other place in The Bahamas as the
                 Customs authority may direct; and
       (b) such officer or other authorised person shall, for
            purposes of the examination referred to in
            paragraph (a), be deemed to be the agent of the
            importer or exporter.



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 268]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      (6) The Customs authority may, where goods are
                imported in postal articles, accept for the purpose of
                assessing the duty on the goods the Customs declaration on
                the form provided by the postal administration in the
                country of origin in lieu of the entry required under the
                Customs laws.
                      (7) The Customs authority may, where goods are
                exported by post, deem any form or label affixed to the
                parcel and bearing a description of the contents and a
                declaration of their value to be the entry required under the
                Customs laws.
                      (8) Unless otherwise provided by law, dutiable
                goods imported as postal articles shall not be removed
                from Customs control until all duty chargeable on the
                goods has been paid.
                      (9) A postal article and all its contents shall be
                deemed to be goods imported or exported contrary to the
                Customs laws and shall be dealt with in accordance with
                the Customs laws where such postal article, or any part of
                its contents, is on examination found —
                      (a) to be conveyed otherwise than in conformity
Ch. 300.                   with the Post Office Act;
                      (b) not to agree with any declaration which
                           accompanies or is affixed to such postal article
                           or with any entry, invoice, or other document
                           purporting to relate to its contents and which
                           may be either transmitted with such postal
                           article or produced by the addressee; or
                      (c) to consist of goods prohibited from being
                           conveyed by post or from being imported or
                           exported, as the case may be, or goods regulated
                           by or under the Customs laws imported or
                           exported contrary to any conditions regulating
                           such importation or exportation.
                      (10) The time of entry of any goods imported or
                exported by post shall —
                      (a) in the case of goods imported for home
                           consumption, be deemed to be the time when the
                           duty on such goods is assessed by the Customs
                           authority, except where actual entry is required;
                           and
                      (b) in the case of goods exported, be deemed to be
                           the time of the posting of such goods and this


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 269


           shall include the depositing of postal articles
           with an air courier company.
      345. The Customs authority may, for the purpose of         Issuance of
providing a consistent national interpretation and               guidelines and
                                                                 administrative
application of Customs legislative requirements, issue           instructions.
guidelines and administrative instructions relating to
application of provisions of this Act and other Customs
legislation.
      346. (1) Controls, other than Customs controls,            Cooperation
performed in respect of international goods by competent         between State
                                                                 agencies.
authorities other than the Customs authority shall be
performed in close co-operation with the Customs
authority and, wherever possible, at the same time and
place so as to create a one-stop-shop concept for the
processing of international goods.
      (2) The Customs authority, and other competent
authorities, may where necessary for the purposes of
minimising risk —
      (a) exchange with each other data received in the
           context of the entry, exit, transit, transfer and
           end-use of goods moved across the border of the
           Customs territory; and
      (b) exchange with the Customs authority or other
           competent authority of other countries or
           territories outside the Customs territory the data
           referred to in paragraph (a).
      347. (1) The Customs authority may disclose any            Disclosure of
information to an overseas Customs authority, public             information
                                                                 overseas.
agency, body, or person, whose functions include —
      (a) the      prevention,     detection,  investigation,
           prosecution, or punishment of offences that are
           or if committed in the Customs territory would
           be—
           (i) Customs offences of any kind; or
           (ii) other offences punishable by imprisonment;
      (b) the verification of proofs of origin issued in
           relation to the implementation of an
           international     trade    agreement    including
           preferential tariff provisions;
      (c) the processing of international passengers at the
           border by public authorities;
      (d) border security; or

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 270]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       (e) the protection of public revenue.
                       (2) The disclosure of information under subsection
                (1) shall be —
                       (a) in accordance with an agreement between the
                           Comptroller and the agency, body, or person
                           concerned that complies with subsections (3)
                           and (4);
                       (b) in accordance with provisions of an international
                           trade agreement providing for mutual assistance
                           between the Customs authority and foreign
                           Customs authorities; or
                       (c) in accordance with subsection (8).
                       (3) The Comptroller shall not enter into an
                agreement for the purpose of subsection (2)(a) unless
                satisfied that it is justified to help prevent, identify, or
                respond to violations of national laws or —
                       (a) in the case of an agreement with an international
                           agency or body, to help prevent, identify, or
                           respond to actions of a kind whose prevention,
                           identification or responding to is among the
                           functions of the agency or body; or
                       (b) in any other case, to help prevent, identify, or
                           respond to violations of the law of the country or
                           territory concerned.
                       (4) For the purposes of subsection (2)(a), an
                agreement —
                       (a) shall be in writing;
                       (b) shall state criteria for the disclosure of
                           information under it;
                       (c) shall state, in respect of information to be
                           disclosed —
                           (i) the use that the agency, body, or person
                                 may make of it;
                           (ii) that either the agency, body, or person shall
                                 not disclose it to any other agency, body, or
                                 person or the other agencies, bodies, or
                                 persons to which the agency, body, or
                                 person may disclose any of it and the extent
                                 and conditions subject to which, the
                                 agency, body, or person may do so;
                       (d) may state —



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 271


            (i) the form in which the information may be
                 disclosed;
            (ii) the method by which the information may
                 be disclosed; and
       (e) may be varied from time to time.
       (5) This section shall not limit the general powers
of the Comptroller to enter into agreements not related to
the disclosure of information with any foreign Customs
authority, public agency, body, or person.
       (6) The Customs authority may disclose
information to an overseas agency, body, or person without
a written agreement specified in subsection (2)(a) where —
       (a) the functions of the agency, body, or person
            include the prevention, detection, investigation,
            prosecution, or punishment of Customs offences
            of any kind or of other offences punishable by
            imprisonment; and
       (b) the information is disclosed subject to
            conditions stating the use that the agency, body,
            or person may make of it.
       (7) An agreement or arrangement shall continue and
have effect as if it had been made or entered into under this
section where —
       (a) the Government of The Bahamas or the
            Comptroller has before the commencement of
            this Act entered into such agreement or
            arrangement with any foreign Customs
            authority, public agency, body, or person; and
       (b) such agreement or arrangement could have been
            made or entered into under this section.
       (8) The Comptroller shall not disclose any
information under subsection (6) unless satisfied that it
relates to a suspected violation of the Customs legislation
of The Bahamas or to a suspected violation of the law of
the other country concerned.
       348. The Customs authority may, for the purposes of       Arrival and
monitoring the movement of means of transport and                departure
                                                                 information.
persons, passenger and crew processing and border
security collect and use information about means of
transport and persons arriving or departing the Customs
territory comprising —


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 272]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         (a) details of means of transport movements
                              including the —
                              (i) craft name,
                              (ii) means of transport registration number or
                                    identifier,
                              (iii) estimated date and time of arrival or
                                    departure,
                              (iv) place of origin and destination;
                         (b) personal information including the person’s —
                              (i) name,
                              (ii) date of birth,
                              (iii) gender,
                              (iv) passport number,
                              (v) nationality, and
                              (vi) travel movements.
Customs may              349. The Customs authority may collect, use, or
collect, use or
disclose certain
                   disclose information for any one or more of the following
information.       purposes —
                         (a) exercising or performing a power, function, or
                              duty under this Act;
                         (b) prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution,
                              and punishment of offences that are or if
                              committed in the Customs territory would be —
                              (i) Customs offences of any kind; or
                              (ii) other offences punishable by imprisonment;
                         (c) processing of international passengers at the
                              border by State authorities;
                         (d) protection of border security; or
                         (e) protection of the health and safety of members
                              of the public.
Exchange of data         350. (1) All   required    exchanges     of   data,
and data
protection.
                   accompanying documents, decisions and notifications
                   between economic operators and the Customs authority
                   shall, wherever possible, be made using electronic data
                   processing techniques.
                         (2) The Customs authority may adopt measures
                   laying down exceptions to subsection (1).
                         (3) Save where otherwise specifically provided, the
                   Customs authority shall adopt measures laying down —



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 273


      (a) rules defining and governing the messages to be
           exchanged between Customs offices as required
           for the application of this Act and other Customs
           legislation; and
      (b) a common data set and format of the data
           messages to be exchanged under provisions of
           this Act and other Customs legislation.
      (4) The data referred to in subsection (3)(b) shall
contain all particulars necessary for risk analysis and the
proper application of Customs controls using, where
appropriate, international standards and commercial
practices.
      (5) All information acquired by the Customs
authority in the course of performing its duties shall be
covered by appropriate confidentiality undertakings where
such information —
      (a) by its nature is confidential; or
      (b) is provided on a confidential basis.
      (6) Except for the purposes of Customs controls as
provided for under this Act or other Customs legislation,
information referred to in subsection (5) ––
      (a) subject to paragraph (b), shall not be disclosed
           by the Customs authority without the express
           permission of the person or authority that
           provided it;
      (b) may be disclosed without permission —
           (i) where the Customs authority is obliged or
                authorised to do so pursuant to this Act and
                other legislation in force, particularly in
                respect of data protection; or
           (ii) in connection with legal proceedings.
      (7) Communication of confidential data to Customs
authorities and other Government agencies of foreign
countries shall be permitted only in the framework of an
international agreement ensuring an equivalent level of
data protection and the disclosure or communication of
information shall take place in full compliance with data
protection provisions in force.
      (8) The Customs authority and economic operators
may exchange any information not specifically required
under provisions of this Act and other Customs
legislation —

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 274]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       (a) for purposes of mutual co-operation in the
                            identification and counteraction of risk; and
                       (b) such exchange may take place under a written
                            agreement and may include access by the
                            Customs authority to the computer systems of
                            economic operators.
                       (9) Any information provided by one party to the
                 other in the course of the co-operation referred to in
                 subsection (8) shall be confidential unless both parties
                 agree otherwise.
Provision of           351. (1) The Customs authority shall —
information by
and to the             (a) maintain a regular dialogue with economic
Customs                     operators and other agencies involved in
authority.                  international trade in goods; and
                       (b) promote transparency by making the legislation,
                            administrative rulings and application forms
                            pertaining to international trade in goods
                            available to economic operators free of charge
                            and, wherever practical, through the Internet.
                       (2) Any person directly or indirectly involved in the
                 accomplishment of Customs formalities shall provide the
                 Customs authority with —
                       (a) the requisite documentation and information,
                            irrespective of the medium used; and
                       (b) all assistance requested by the Customs
                            authority within the requisite time limits.
                       (3) Without prejudice to the possible application of
                 administrative or criminal penalties, the lodging of a
                 summary declaration or goods declaration including a
                 simplified declaration, notification, submission of an
                 application for an authorisation or any other decision, shall
                 render the person concerned responsible for —
                       (a) the accuracy of the information given in the
                            declaration, notification or application, or in any
                            other relevant form;
                       (b) the authenticity of any documents lodged or
                            made available; and
                       (c) where applicable, compliance with all
                            obligations relating to the placing of the goods
                            in question under the Customs procedure
                            concerned or to the conduct of the authorised
                            operations.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 275


      (4) Subsection (3)(a) shall apply also to the
provision of any information required by the Customs
authority.
      (5) A representative of the person concerned in
subsection (3) shall, where the representative lodges a
declaration or notification, submits an application or
provides requested information, also be responsible for the
accuracy of the information given in the declaration,
notification or application, or in any other relevant form.
      (6) Information received by the Customs authority
from other Government agencies of The Bahamas, or from
Customs authorities of foreign countries, shall be used only
for the purposes of accomplishing Customs functions.
      (7) All information provided to the Customs
authority, which is confidential by reason of its contents or
by reason of its way of provision, shall be stored securely.
      352. (1) A notice by the Customs authority to a            Giving of notice.
company may be given —
      (a) by delivery to a person named as a director;
      (b) by delivery to an employee of the company at
           the company’s head office or principal place of
           business;
      (c) by leaving it at the company’s registered office;
      (d) by posting it to the company’s registered office
           or delivering it to a box at a document exchange
           which the company is using at the time;
      (e) by sending it by facsimile machine to a
           telephone number used for the transmission of
           documents by facsimile at the company’s
           registered office or its head office or principal
           place of business; or
      (f) where the individual who is a director,
           employee, agent or representative of the
           company is a registered user of a Customs
           computerised system and uses the system for the
           purposes of the business of the company, by
           transmitting it by electronic means to the
           registered user —
           (i) at the company’s registered office, head
                office, or principal place of business; or
           (ii) in accordance with the normal procedures
                of operation of the relevant Customs

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 276]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                               computerised system in relation to that
                               registered user in respect of the business of
                               the company.
                     (2) A notice by the Customs authority to an
                overseas company may be given —
                     (a) by delivery to a person named in the overseas
                          register as a director of the overseas company
                          and who is resident in the Customs territory;
                     (b) by delivery to a person being authorised to
                          accept service in the Customs territory of
                          documents on behalf of the overseas company;
                     (c) by delivery to an employee of the overseas
                          company at the overseas company’s place of
                          business in the Customs territory;
                     (d) where the overseas company has more than one
                          place of business in the Customs territory, by
                          delivery at the overseas company’s principal
                          place of business in the Customs territory;
                     (e) by posting it to the address of the overseas
                          company’s principal place of business in the
                          Customs territory or delivering it to a box at a
                          document exchange which the overseas
                          company is then using at the time;
                     (f) by sending it by facsimile machine to a
                          telephone number used for the transmission of
                          documents by facsimile at the principal place of
                          business in the Customs territory of the overseas
                          company;
                     (g) where an individual who is a director, employee,
                          or agent of the overseas company is a registered
                          user of a Customs computerised system and uses
                          the system for the purposes of the business of
                          the overseas company, by transmitting it by
                          electronic means to the registered user —
                          (i) at the principal place of business in the
                               Customs territory of the overseas company;
                               or
                          (ii) in accordance with the normal procedure of
                               operation of the relevant Customs
                               computerised system in relation to that
                               registered user in respect of the business of
                               the overseas company.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 277


      (3) A notice by the Customs authority to a body
corporate, other than a company or an overseas company,
may be given —
      (a) by delivery to a person who is a principal officer
           of the body corporate;
      (b) by delivery to an employee of the body
           corporate at the principal office or principal
           place of business of the body corporate;
      (c) by posting it to the address of the principal
           office of the body corporate or delivering it to a
           box at a document exchange which the body
           corporate is using at the time;
      (d) by sending it by facsimile machine to a
           telephone number used for the transmission of
           documents by facsimile at the principal office or
           principal place of business of the body
           corporate; or
      (e) where an individual who is an employee or
           agent of the body corporate is a registered user
           of a Customs computerised system and uses the
           system for the purposes of the business of the
           body corporate, by transmitting it by electronic
           means to the registered user —
           (i) at the principal office or principal place of
                business of the body corporate; or
           (ii) in accordance with the normal procedures
                of operation of the relevant Customs
                computerised system in relation to that
                registered user in respect of the business of
                the body corporate.
      (4) A notice by the Customs authority to an
individual may be given —
      (a) by delivery to such person;
      (b) by posting it to such person’s address or
           delivering it to a box at a document exchange
           which such person is using at the time;
      (c) by sending it by facsimile machine to a
           telephone number used by such person for the
           transmission of documents by facsimile; or
      (d) where the individual is a registered user of a
           Customs computerised system, by transmitting it
           by electronic means to such individual in
           accordance with the normal procedure of

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 278]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                              operation of the relevant Customs computerised
                              system in relation to such individual.
                         (5) For the purposes of this Act, a notice shall be
                   deemed to have been given when it is deemed, in
                   accordance with subsection (6), to be received.
                         (6) For the purposes of this Act —
                         (a) a notice posted or delivered to a document
                              exchange shall be deemed to be received three
                              working days after it is posted by registered
                              mail;
                         (b) a notice sent by facsimile machine shall be
                              deemed to be received on the working day
                              following the day on which it was sent;
                         (c) a notice transmitted by electronic means shall be
                              deemed to be received on the working day
                              following the day on which it was transmitted;
                              and
                         (d) in proving the giving of notice by post or by
                              delivery to a document exchange, it shall be
                              sufficient to prove that —
                              (i) the document was properly addressed;
                              (ii) all postal or delivery charges were paid; and
                              (iii) the document was posted or was delivered
                                    to the document exchange.
                         (e) in proving the giving of notice by facsimile
                              machine, it shall be sufficient to prove that the
                              document was properly transmitted by facsimile
                              machine to the person concerned;
                         (f) in proving the transmitting of notice by
                              electronic means, it shall be sufficient to prove
                              that the notice was properly transmitted by
                              electronic means in accordance with the normal
                              operating procedure of the relevant Customs
                              computerised system.
                         (7) A notice shall not be deemed to have been given
                   to a person if the person proves that, through no fault on
                   the person’s part, the notice was not received within the
                   time specified.
Payment by               353. The Customs authority may, subject to
Customs
authority out of
                   prescribed regulations, incur expenses without further
public money.      appropriation than this section to pay all lawful —
                         (a) refunds of duty;


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 279


      (b) drawbacks of duty;
      (c) refunds of administrative penalties;
      (d) payments of interest pursuant to section 166(1).
      354. (1) The Minister may, from time to time, make         Regulations to be
regulations for all or any of the following purposes —           issued by the
                                                                 Minister.
      (a) prescribing the circumstances in and the
           conditions on which the powers conferred on
           Customs officers by Part IV may be exercised in
           relation to a member of the Security Forces,
           access to a Defence area or a means of transport
           and any conveyance under the control of the
           Defence Force;
      (b) appointing Customs places;
      (c) prescribing the fees to be paid for any licence
           issued under this Act and the fees for providing
           certificates, documents or other services to the
           public;
      (d) prescribing the classes of goods to be stores of
           means of transport and conditions under which
           such stores may be shipped free of duty;
      (e) granting a licence to a Customs broker, or
           suspending and revoking such a licence, for the
           purposes of section 99;
      (f) adopting measures governing the establishment
           of authorised economic operators;
      (g) prescribing the conditions under which an entry
           shall be deemed to have been made and passed
           under this Act for the purposes of sections 105
           and 114;
      (h) exempting        specified    goods    from    the
           requirements of section 104(2) or 113;
      (i) imposing safeguard measures for the purposes of
           section 142;
      (j) laying down measures for the uniform
           interpretation, application and administration of
           rules for the determination of origin for the
           purposes of sections 150 and 151;
      (k) determining the means of payment to be used for
           the payment of duties;
      (l) prescribing the minimum amount of duty
           refundable on goods for the purposes of section
           183;

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 280]                  CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     (m) prescribing the minimum amount of drawback
                         of duty on goods for the purposes of section
                         187;
                     (n) adopting measures for the prolongation or
                         reduction of the period allowed for the deposit
                         and keeping of goods in bonded warehouses;
                     (o) authorising the temporary admission of goods in
                         the Customs territory for the purposes of section
                         197 and the temporary exportation of goods
                         from the Customs territory for the purposes of
                         section 198;
                     (p) prescribing the maximum duration of the stay of
                         goods in a free zone;
                     (q) specifying the goods whose importation is
                         prohibited or restricted in the Customs territory
                         for the purposes of section 208 and amending
                         from time to time the First Schedule;
                     (r) specifying the goods whose exportation is
                         prohibited or restricted from the Customs
                         territory for the purposes of section 209 and
                         amending from time to time the Second
                         Schedule;
                     (s) establishing a Customs Appeal Commission and
                         appointing, suspending or removing the
                         members of the Commission for the purposes of
                         section 320;
                     (t) making any provision which may be necessary
                         or desirable to enable the Customs Appeal
                         Commission to publish its decisions;
                     (u) prescribing the conditions for the application of
                         this Act to postal articles for the purpose of
                         section 344;
                     (v) prescribing the fees or charges payable to the
                         Customs authority for the attendance of Customs
                         officers for the purposes of this Act.
23 of 2013, s. 30.   (w) prescribing the declarations, reports and other
                         forms to be used for the purposes of this Act and
                         the conditions of use of such forms;
23 of 2013, s. 30.   (x) prescribing the fees to be paid for the processing
                         of declarations, reports and other forms
                         prescribed in accordance with this Act;




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 281



      (y) providing for payment of an environmental levy
                                                                  23 of 2013, s. 30.
           on the import of specified goods deemed to have
           a negative impact on the environment.
      (2) The Minister may also, from time to time, make
regulations —
      (a) prescribing for the further, better or more
           convenient implementation of any of the
           provisions or purposes of this Act and the
           conduct of any business relating to the Customs;
      (b) conferring or providing for exemptions under
           this Act; and
      (c) providing for such matters as are contemplated
           by or necessary for giving full effect to this Act
           and for its due administration.
      (d) prescribing requirements for certain category of       19 of 2015, s.6.
           persons engaged in the facilitation of the import
           or export of goods.
      355. (1) Pursuant to section 354 the Minister may          Regulations for
from time to time, by Order, make regulations —                  fees and charges.

      (a) prescribing the amounts of fees and charges
           payable under this Act, or the method by which
           they are to be assessed, and the persons liable
           for payment of the fees and charges;
      (b) prescribing a rate or rates of charges for the
           attendance of Customs officers for the purposes
           of this Act or authorising the Comptroller to
           determine such rate or rates of charges;
      (c) providing for the liability of any person to pay
           any actual and reasonable expenses incurred by
           a Customs officer in respect of any attendance
           by such officer for the purposes of this Act;
      (d) prescribing the person or persons or classes of
           persons by whom the charges or expenses
           referred to in paragraphs (b) and (c) shall be
           paid or authorising the Comptroller to determine
           the person by whom they shall be paid.
      (2) Different rates of fees or charges, or both, may
be prescribed in accordance with subsection (1)(a) in
respect of different classes of persons or on any other
differential basis.
      (3) Different rates of charges may be prescribed in
accordance with subsection (1)(b) in respect of attendances

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 282]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                during the working hours of the Customs authority or on
                any other differential basis.
                      (4) Any regulation made under subsection (1)
                may —
                      (a) prescribe the circumstances in which any fee,
                           charge, or expense may be remitted or waived,
                           in whole or in part; and
                      (b) fix a date by which any fee or charge is to be
                           paid.
Witnessing of         356. A document or declaration in written or
signature.      electronic form required by a Customs enactment to be
                signed in the presence of the Comptroller or any particular
                officer shall be as valid as if it had been signed in the
                presence of the Comptroller or such officer where —
                      (a) such document or declaration is signed in the
                           presence of a witness known to and approved by
                           the Comptroller or such officer; and
                      (b) the signature of the witness is known to and
                           approved by the Comptroller or such officer.
Time limits.          357. A period or time limit laid down in this Act or in
                other Customs legislation shall not be extended or deferred
                unless otherwise specifically provided in this Act or in
                other Customs legislation.
                      358. Repealed.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                   [CH.293– 283


              FIRST SCHEDULE (Section 208)

       PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED IMPORTS                             23 of 2013, s. 32.

                     A - Prohibited Goods                            23 of 2013, s. 32.

      1. All goods the importation of which is prohibited
under the provisions of any law for the time being in force in
The Bahamas.
       2 . Repealed.                                                 23 of 2013, s. 32.

       3. Any article which bears a design in the imitation of
any currency or banknote or coin in current use in The Bahamas
or elsewhere.
      4.   Goods infringing intellectual property rights.
      5.   Dredges capable of being used for sponging.
       6. Indecent or obscene prints, paintings, photographs,
books, cards, lithographic or other engravings, or any other
indecent or obscene articles.
       7. Infected cattle, sheep or other animals and hides,
skins, horns and hoofs or anything which the Governor-General
may on sanitary grounds by Order prohibit to be imported.
       8. Meat, provisions, fruit and vegetables and any
articles intended for human food which are unfit for human
consumption.
       9. Oleomargarine, butterine, or other similar substitutes
for butter, if invoiced, described or labelled as butter.
       10. Sodium fluoracetate (a deadly poison commonly
referred to as “1080”).
       11. Lysergic acid diethylamide and any compound
declared by the Minister by Order to be a compound related to
lysergic acid diethylamide.
       12. Underwater gun being any manufacture or device
other than the device known as a Hawaiian sling whereby a
missile may be discharged under water.
       13. Motor cars and other motor vehicles with a non-           19 of 2015, s. 5.
rebuildable title, principally designed for the transport of goods
and people.
                     B - Restricted Goods                            23 of 2013, s. 32.

      1. All goods the importation of which is regulated
under the provisions of any law for the time being in force in
The Bahamas.
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 284]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      2. Firecrackers and impact flash salutes, save those
                which in the opinion of the Comptroller are not dangerous.
                      3. Rum, including taffia, unless imported as cargo and
                duly reported in aircraft or in ships of not less than thirty tons
                burden, and in casks or other liquid containers, of a content of
                not less than five gallons or in glass or stone bottles properly
                packed in cases or in demi-johns, each case or demi-john
                containing not less than one gallon.
                       4. Other spirits (not being cordials or perfumed or
                medicinal spirits) unless imported as cargo and duly reported on
                aircraft or in ships of not less than thirty tons burden, and in
                casks or other liquid containers, of a content of at least nine
                gallons or in glass or stone bottles, properly packed in cases, or
                in demi-johns, each case or demi-john containing not less than
                one gallon:
                       Provided that no whisky or brandy shall be so imported
                unless the importer produces in respect thereof a certificate of
                origin and evidence to the satisfaction of the Comptroller that
                such whisky or brandy has been kept in wood for at least three
                years since manufacture.
                       5. Wine, unless imported as cargo and duly reported in
                aircraft or in ships of not less than thirty tons burden and in
                casks or other liquid containers, of a content not less than fifteen
                gallons or bottled and packed in cases, each case containing not
                less than one and a half gallons:
                      Provided that packages of less capacity may be imported
                under such regulations as may be made by the Minister.
                      6. Trailers, being trailer caravans for use as living
                quarters, offices, workshops, or similar purposes, unless
                specially authorised by the Minister.
                       7. Mechanical games and devices set in operation
                wholly or partly by the insertion of a coin or token and so
                constructed as to return mechanically or otherwise to the person
                inserting the coin or token in certain circumstances,
                merchandise, a coin, or token, or coins or tokens of greater total
                value than that of the coin or token inserted; parts and
                accessories of such games or devices:
                       Provided that such games, devices and parts and
                accessories thereof may be imported by a person, club or
                organisation holding a valid licence issued under the Lotteries
Ch. 387.        and Gaming Act but only insofar as the conditions and terms of
                such licence permit.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                [CH.293– 285


      8. Mechanical games and devices, other than the games
and devices referred to in paragraph 7 above, which are set in
operation by the insertion of a coin or token and which by
manual, mechanical or electronic means provide a game for play
by one or more persons for amusement only unless specially
authorised by the Minister and subject to such conditions as the
Minister may direct.
      9. Goods imported for the purposes of any business
(within the meaning given thereto by section 2 of the Business     Ch. 329.
Licence Act) unless the importer of the goods produces for
inspection by the Comptroller —
      (a) a current business licence issued under the
            provisions of the Business Licence Act, and             Ch. 329.

      (b) proof that exchange control approval was obtained
            by the importer from The Central Bank of The
            Bahamas permitting the expenditure of foreign
            currency for the purchase of the goods.
      10.   The following —
      •     Acetic acid
      •     Acetic anhydride
      •     Acetone
      •     Ammonium
      •     Anthranilic acid and its salts
      •     Benzene
      •     Benzyl Chloride
      •     Benzyl cyanide
      •     Bromobenzyl cyanide
      •     Carbon sulphide
      •     Chloroform
      •     Ephedrin and its salts
      •     Ergometrine and its salts
      •     Ergotamine
      •     Ethyl alcohol
      •     Ethylamine and its salts
      •     Ethyl or sulphuric ether
      •     Hydriodic acid
      •     Hydrochloric acid
      •     Isosafrole
      •     Lysergic acid


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 286]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      •    Methylamine and its salts
                      •    Methylene Chloride
                      •    Methyl ethyl ketone
                      •    3, 4-Methylendedrioxphenyl-2Propanone
                      •    N-acetylanthranilic acid and its salts optical isomers
                           and salts of optical isomers
                      •    N-Ethylephedrine, its salts and optical isomers
                      •    N-Ethylpseudoephedrine, its salts, optical isomers,
                           and salts of optical isomers
                      •    N-Methylephedrine, its salts, optical isomers, and
                           salts of optical isomers
                      •    N-Methylpseudoephedrine, its salts, optical isomers
                           and salts of optical isomers
                      •    Phenylacetic acid and its salts
                      •    1-phenyl-2 propanone
                      •    Phenylpropanolamine and its salts
                      •    Piperidine
                      •    Piperonal
                      •    Potassium carbonate
                      •    Potassium hydroxide
                      •    Potassium permanganate
                      •    Propionic Anhydride
                      •    Pseudoephedrin and its sals
                      •    Safrole
                      •    Sodium carbonate
                      •    Sodium hydroxide
                      •    Sodium sulphate
                      •    Sulphuric acid
                      •    Toluene
                      •    Trichloroethylene
                      Unless the Comptroller is satisfied that the restricted
                goods are necessary for use in the manufacturing process of an
                undertaking licensed under the laws of The Bahamas or for sale
                as a product in the normal course of business of such an
                undertaking being a sale which is not otherwise prohibited by
                those Laws and subject to such conditions as to reporting of the
                use and disposal of the restricted goods as the Comptroller sees
                fit.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                          LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                 [CH.293– 287



       11. Benzaldehyde (Benzoic aldehyde), Nitroethane and
Norpseudoephedrine, unless the Comptroller is satisfied that the
aforesaid restricted goods are necessary for use in the
manufacturing process of an undertaking licensed under the laws
of The Bahamas or for sale as a product in the normal course of
business of such an undertaking being a sale which is not
otherwise prohibited by those laws and subject to such
conditions as to reporting of the use and disposal of such goods
as the Comptroller sees fit.
      12.   The following —                                        23 of 2013, s. 32.

       •    Trichlorofluoromethane (CFC - 11)
       •    Dichlorodifluoromethane (CFC - 12)
       •    Trichlorotrifluoroethanes (CFC - 113)
       •    Dichlorotetrafluoroethanes (CFC - 114)
       •    Chloropentafluoroethane (CFC - 115)
       •    Chlorotrifluoromethane (CFC - 13)
       •    Pentachlorofluoroethane (CFC - 111)
       •    Tetrachlorodifluoroethane (CFC - 112)
       •    Heptachlorofluoropropane (CFC -211)
       •    Hexachlorodifluoropropane (CFC - 212)
       •    Pentachlorotrifluoropropane (CFC -213)
       •    Tetrachlorotetrafluoropropane (CFC - 214)
       •    Trichloropentafluoropropane (CFC - 215)
       •    Dichlorohexafluoropropane (CFC - 216)
       •    Chloroheptafluoropropane (CFC - 217)
       •    Bromochlorodifluoromethane (Halon 1211)
       •    Bromotrifluoromethane (Halon 1301)
       •    Dibromotetrafluoroethanes (Halon 2402)
       •    Dichlorofluoromethane (HCFC -21)
       •    Chlorodifluoromethane (HCFC - 22)
       •    Chlorofluoromethane (HCFC -31)
       •    Tetrachlorofluoroethane (HCFC -121)
       •    Trichlorodifluoroethane (HCFC - 122)
       •    Dichlorotrifluoroethane (HCFC - 123)
       •    Chlorotetrafluoroethane (HCFC - 124)
       •    Trichlorofluoroethane (HCFC -131)
       •    Dichlorodifluoroethane (HCFC - 132)
       •    Chlorotrifluoroethane (HCFC - 13 3)


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
 CH.293 – 288]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         •    1, 1, 1 - Trifluoro - 2 - Chloro - ethane (HCFC -
                                 133a)
                         •    Dichlorofluoroethane (HCFC -141)
                         •    1,1- Dichloro - 1 - Fluoroethane (HCFC - 141b)
                         •    Chlorodifluoroethane (HCFC -142)
                         •    1 - Chloro - 1, 1 - Difluoroethane (HCFC - 142b)
                         •    Chlorofluoroethane (HCFC -151)
                         •    Hexachlorofluoropropane (HCFC - 221)
                         •    Pentachlorodifluoropropane (HCFC - 222)
                         •    Tetrachlorotrifluoropropane (HCFC - 223)
                         •    Trichlorotrifluoropropane (HCFC - 224)
                         •    Dichloropentafluoropropane (HCFC - 225)
                         •    1, 1 - Dichloro - 2, 2, 3, 3, 3 - Pentafluoropropane
                                 (HCFC - 225 CA)
                         •    1, 3 - Dichloro - 1, 2, 2, 3, 3 - Pentafluoropropane
                                 (HCFC-225 CB)
                         •    Chlorohexafluoropropane (HCFC - 226)
                         •    Pentachlorofluoropropane (HCFC - 231)
                         •    Tetrachlorodifluoropropane (HCFC - 232)
                         •    Trichlortrifluoropropane (HCFC - 233)
                         •    Dichlorotetrafluoropropane (HCFC - 234)
                         •    Chloropentafluoropropane (HCFC - 235)
                         •    Tetrachlorofluoropropane (HCFC -241)
                         •    Trichlorodifluoropropane (HCFC - 242)
                         •    Dichlorotrifluoropropane (HCFC - 243)
                         •    Chlorotetrafluoropropane (HCFC - 244)
                         •    Trichlorofluoropropane (HCFC - 251)
                         •    Dichlorodifluoropropane (HCFC - 252)
                         •    Chlorotrifluoropropane (HCFC - 253)
                         •    Fluorodichloropropane (HCFC -261)
                         •    Chlorodifluoropropane (HCFC - 262)
                         •    Chlorofluoropropane (HCFC -271),
                   unless authorised by the National Ozone Unit in accordance with
                   the Montreal Protocol.
19 of 2015, s.5.
                         13. Any motor vehicle or motor cycle that is ten
                   years or older, unless authorised by the Minister.
19 of 2015, s.5.         14. Drones.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                 [CH.293– 289


            SECOND SCHEDULE (Section 209)

      PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED EXPORTS                            23 of 2013, s. 33.

                     A - Prohibited Goods                          23 of 2013, s. 33.

      1. All goods the exportation of which is prohibited
under any law for the time being in force in The Bahamas.
      2.   Repealed.                                               23 of 2013, s. 33.

      3.   Goods infringing intellectual property rights.
                     B - Restricted Goods                          23 of 2013, s. 33.

      1. All goods the exportation of which is regulated
under any law for the time being in force in The Bahamas.
      2. Otherwise than pursuant to an authority and in
conformity with the terms of a certificate of permission of the
Minister of Finance, things manufactured or produced more than
100 years before the date of exportation and being —
      (a) so manufactured or produced by the indigenous
            people of the former Bahamas Islands; or
      (b) of zoological, botanical, mineralogical, anatomical,
            historical,    archaeological,    ethnographic    or
            numismatic interest to the people of The Bahamas.
      3.   The following—
      •    Acetic acid
      •    Acetic anhydride
      •    Acetone
      •    Ammonium
      •    Anthranilic acid and its salts
      •    Benzene
      •    Benzyl Chloride
      •    Benzyl cyanide
      •    Bromobenzyl cyanide
      •    Carbon sulphide
      •    Chloroform
      •    Ephedrin and its salts
      •    Ergometrine and its salts
      •    Ergotamine
      •    Ethyl alcohol
      •    Ethylamine and its salts

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 290]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT




                      •    Ethyl or sulphuric ether
                      •    Hydriodic acid
                      •    Hydrochloric acid
                      •    Isosafrole
                      •    Lysergic acid
                      •    Methylamine and its salts
                      •    Methylene Chrloride
                      •    Methyl ethyl ketone
                      •    3, 4-Methylenedrioxphenyl-2Propanone
                      •    N-acetylanthranilic acid and its salts optical isomers
                           and salts of optical isomers
                      •    N-Ethylephedrine, its salts and optical isomers
                      •    N-Ethylpseudoephedrine, its salts, optical isomers,
                           and salts of optical isomers
                      •    N-Methylephedrine, its salts, optical isomers, and
                           salts of optical isomers
                      •    N-Methylpseudoephedrine, its salts, optical isomers
                           and salts of optical isomers
                      •    Phenylacetic acid and its salts
                      •    1-phenyl-2 propanone
                      •    Phenylpropanolamine and its salts
                      •    Piperidine
                      •    Piperonal
                      •    Potassium carbonate
                      •    Potassium hydroxide
                      •    Potassium permanganate
                      •    Propionic Anhydride
                      •    Pseudoephedrin and its salts
                      •    Safrole
                      •    Sodium carbonate
                      •    Sodium hydroxide
                      •    Sodium sulphate
                      •    Sulphuric acid
                      •    Toluene
                      •    Trichloroethylene
                       Unless the Comptroller is satisfied that the intended
                recipient is in a country which has ratified the United Nations


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 291


Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances of 1988 and has provided the name,
address and telephone and telefax numbers of the national
authority responsible for implementing Article 12 of the 1988
Convention. Further than the Comptroller of Customs has
communicated with the national authority of the importing
country and is satisfied that the intended recipient is a legitimate
manufacturer and controls to prevent diversion to illegal drug
manufacture are in place in that country.
       4. Benzaldehyde (Benzoic aldehyde), Nitroethane and
Norpseudoephedrine, unless the Comptroller is satisfied that the
intended recipient is in a country which has ratified the United
Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances of 1988 and has provided the name,
address and telephone and telefax numbers of the national
authority responsible for communicated with the national
authority of the importing country and is satisfied that the
intended recipient is a legitimate manufacturer and that controls
to prevent diversion to illegal drug manufacturers are in place in
that country.
      5. Otherwise than in compliance and pursuant to                  23 of 2013, s. 33.
permission granted in accordance with the provisions of Part
VIIA, scrap metal and copper.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 292]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                               THIRD SCHEDULE (Section 146)

                             VALUATION OF GOODS FOR THE
                           PURPOSES OF THE CUSTOMS TARIFF
                        The value of goods which on importation are liable to ad
                  valorem rates of duty shall be appraised according to the
                  provisions set out in sections 1 to 9 of this Schedule.

Interpretation.         1. (1) In this Schedule —
                        “buyer” has the meaning assigned by the regulations;
                        “computed value” means the value determined in
                            accordance with section 8 of this Schedule;
                        “country of export”, or “the country from which any
                             goods are exported”, means the country from which
                             the goods are shipped directly to the Customs
                             territory, or, as the case may be, the country from
                             which the goods are deemed to be shipped pursuant
                             to this Act;
                        “deductive value” means the value determined in
                             accordance with section 7 of this Schedule.
                        “goods of the same class or kind”, means imported goods
                             that —
                                (a)     are within a group or range of imported
                                        goods produced by a particular industry or
                                        industry sector that includes identical
                                        goods or similar goods in relation to the
                                        goods being valued; and
                                (b)     for the purposes of—
                                        (i)   Section 7, were exported from any
                                              country; and
                                        (ii) Section 8, were produced in and
                                             exported from the country in and
                                             from which the goods being valued
                                             were produced and exported;
                        “identical goods” means imported goods that —
                                (a)     are the same in all respects, including
                                        physical characteristics, quality, and
                                        reputation, as the goods being valued,




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 293


                      except for minor differences in appearance
                      that do not affect the value of the goods;
              (b)     were produced in the country in which the
                      goods being valued were produced; and
              (c)     were produced by or on behalf of the
                      person who produced the goods being
                      valued,
               but does not include imported goods where
               engineering, development work, artwork, design
               work, plans, or sketches undertaken in the
               customs territory were supplied, directly, or
               indirectly, by the buyer of those imported goods
               free of charge or at a reduced cost for use in
               connection with the production and sale for
               export of those imported goods;
      “price paid or payable”, in relation to any goods, means
            the aggregate of all amounts paid or payable by the
            buyer to or for the benefit of the seller in respect of
            the goods;
      “to produce” includes to grow, to manufacture, to drill,
           and to mine;
      “similar goods” means imported goods that —
              (a)     closely resemble the goods being valued
                      in respect of component materials and
                      parts and characteristics and are
                      functionally      and      commercially
                      interchangeable with the goods being
                      valued having regard to the quality and
                      reputation of the goods and the goods
                      being valued;
              (b)     were produced in the country in which the
                      goods being valued were produced; and
              (c)     were produced by or on behalf of the
                      person who produced the goods being
                      valued,
               but does not include imported goods where
               engineering, development work, artwork, design
               work, plans, or sketches undertaken in the
               Customs territory were supplied, directly or
               indirectly by the buyer of those imported goods
               free of charge or at a reduced cost for use in


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 294]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                               connection with the production and sale for
                               export of those imported goods;
                      “sufficient information”, in respect of the determination of
                            any amount, difference, or adjustment, means
                            objective and quantifiable information that clearly
                            establishes the accuracy of the amount, difference,
                            or adjustment;
                      “transaction value” means the value determined in
                            accordance with sections 3 and 4 of this Schedule.
                     (2) For the purposes of this Schedule, persons shall be
                deemed to be related only if—
                     (a) they are officers or directors of one another’s
                          business;
                     (b) they are legally recognised partners in business;
                     (c) one is the employer of the other;
                     (d) any person directly or indirectly owns, controls, or
                          holds 5 percent or more of the outstanding voting
                          stock or shares of both of them;
                     (e) one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;
                     (f) both of them are directly or indirectly controlled by a
                          third person;
                     (g) together they directly or indirectly control a third
                          person; or
                     (h) they are members of the same family.
                     (3) For the purposes of this Schedule persons shall be
                deemed to be members of the same family if—
                     (a) they are connected by blood relationship within the
                          fourth degree of relationship;
                     (b) they are married to one another or if one is married
                          to a person who is connected within the fourth
                          degree of relationship to the other; or
                     (c) one has been adopted as the child of the other or as a
                          child of a person who is within the third degree of
                          relationship to the other.
                      (4) For the purposes of this Schedule, where there are no
                goods that were produced by or on behalf of the person who
                produced the goods being valued and that are otherwise identical
                goods or similar goods, goods that were produced by or on
                behalf of a different person and that are otherwise identical
                goods or similar goods shall be deemed to be identical goods or
                similar goods, as the case may be.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                   [CH.293– 295


       (5) For the purposes of this Schedule, charges for
interest under a financing arrangement entered into by the buyer
and relating to the purchase of imported goods shall not be
regarded as part of the Customs value in any case where —
       (a) the charges are distinguished from the price actually
            paid or payable for the goods;
       (b) such goods are actually sold at the price declared as
            the price actually paid or payable; and
       (c) the buyer, if required, can demonstrate that —
            (i) the financing arrangement was made in writing;
            (ii) the claimed rate of interest does not exceed the
                  level for such transactions prevailing in the
                  country where, and at the time when, the
                  finance was provided.
       2. (1) The value for duty of goods shall be appraised         Primary basis of
on the basis of the transaction value of the goods in accordance     appraisal of
                                                                     goods and
with the conditions set out in sections 3 and 4 of this Schedule.    subsidiary
                                                                     methods of
       (2) Where the Customs value of goods cannot be                Customs
determined in accordance with subsection (1) of this section, it     valuation.
shall be determined by proceeding sequentially through
paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) as laid down in subsection (3) of
this section to the first such paragraph of this subsection (3)
under which the Customs value can, in the opinion of the
Customs authority, be determined; It is only when such value
cannot be determined under a particular paragraph as set out in
subsection (3) of this section that the provisions of the next
paragraph in a sequence established by virtue of this subsection
shall be applied.
      (3) Pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, the
Customs value shall be, subject to the provision that the order of
paragraphs (c) and (d) shall be reversed if the importer so
request —
      (a) the transaction value of identical goods sold for the
          export to the Customs territory of The Bahamas and
          exported at or about the same time as the goods
          being valued;
      (b) the transaction value of similar goods sold for export
          to the Customs territory of The Bahamas and
          exported at or about the same time as the goods
          being valued;
      (c) the value based on the unit price at which the
          imported goods, or identical or similar goods are


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 296]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                             sold within the Customs territory of The Bahamas in
                             the greatest aggregate quantity to persons not related
                             to the sellers (deductive value); and
                         (d) the computed value of the goods consisting of the
                             sum of—
                             (i) the cost or value of materials and fabrication or
                                   other processing employed in producing the
                                   imported goods;
                             (ii) an amount for profit and general expenses equal
                                   to that usually reflected in sales of goods of the
                                   same class or kind as the goods being valued
                                   which are made by producers in the country of
                                   exportation for export to The Bahamas;
                             (iii) the cost or value of—
                                    1.     transport and insurance of the imported
                                           goods, and
                                    2.     loading and handling charges associated
                                           with the transport of the imported goods
                                           to the place of introduction into the
                                           Customs territory of the Bahamas.
                         (4) Where the Customs value of imported goods cannot
                   be determined under subsections (1) or (3) of this section, the
                   value for duty of those goods shall be determined as specified
                   under section 9 of this Schedule.
Transaction               3. (1) The Customs value of imported goods shall be
value as primary   their transaction value, that is, the price paid or payable for the
basis of
valuation.         goods when sold for export to the Customs territory, adjusted in
                   accordance with section 4 of this Schedule, if—
                          (a) there are no restrictions respecting the disposition or
                               use of the goods by the buyer, other than restrictions
                               that —
                               (i) are imposed by law;
                               (ii) limit the geographical area in which the goods
                                     may be resold; or
                               (iii) do not substantially affect the value of the
                                     goods;
                          (b) the sale of the goods or the price paid or payable for
                               the goods is not subject to some condition or
                               consideration in respect of which avalue cannot be
                               determined;
                          (c) where any part of the proceeds of any subsequent
                               resale, disposal, or use of the goods by the buyer is



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                   [CH.293– 297


          to accrue, directly or indirectly, to the seller, the
          price paid or payable for the goods includes the
          value of that part of the proceeds or can be adjusted
          in accordance with section 4 of this Schedule; or
      (d) the buyer and seller of the goods are not related at
          the time the goods are sold for export or, where the
          buyer and seller are related at that time —
          (i) their relationship did not influence the price
                paid or payable for the goods; or
          (ii) the importer demonstrates that the transaction
                value of the goods meets the requirements set
                out in subsection (2) of this section.
      (2) In a sale between related persons, for the purpose of
showing that the relationship did not influence the transaction
value, the importer shall produce evidence that the transaction
value of the goods being valued taking into consideration any
relevant factors including such factors and differences as may be
prescribed, closely approximates the Customs value of other
goods exported at the time or substantially at the same time as
the goods being valued, being —
      (a) the transaction value of identical goods or similar
            goods in respect of a sale of those goods for export
            to the Customs territory between a seller and buyer
            who are not related at the time of the sale; or
      (b) the deductive value of identical or similar goods
            determined in accordance with section 7 of this
            Schedule; or
      (c) the computed value of identical or similar goods
            determined in accordance with section 8 of this
            Schedule.
       (3) In any case where the Customs authority has
grounds to believe that the relationship between the buyer and
seller of any goods influenced the price paid or payable for the
goods, the Customs authority shall notify the importer of the
goods, in writing if so requested by the importer, of the grounds
on which the Customs authority formed that opinion, and shall
give the importer a reasonable opportunity to satisfy the
Customs authority that the relationship did not influence the
price.
      (4) Where subsection (2) of this section applies, the
importer shall, without limiting the generality of subsection (2),
provide the Customs authority with the following information —
      (a) the nature of the goods being valued;

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 298]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      (b) the nature of the industry that produces the goods
                          being valued;
                      (c) the season in which the goods being valued are
                          imported;
                      (d) whether a difference in values is commercially
                          significant;
                      (e) the trade levels at which the sales take place;
                      (f) the quantity levels of the sales;
                      (g) any of the amounts referred to in section 3 of this
                          Schedule;
                      (h) the costs, charges, or expenses incurred by a seller
                          when the seller sells to a buyer to whom the seller is
                          not related that are not incurred when the seller sells
                          to a buyer to whom the seller is related.
                      (5) Where —
                      (a) in the opinion of the Customs authority, there is not
                           sufficient information to determine any of the
                           amounts required to be added in accordance to
                           section 4 of this Schedule to the price paid or
                           payable in respect of the goods to be valued under
                           this section; or
                      (b) the Customs authority has reason to doubt the truth
                           or accuracy of the declared Customs value and, after
                           having sought further explanation or other evidence
                           that the declared Customs value represents the total
                           amount actually paid or payable for the imported
                           goods, the Customs authority is still not satisfied that
                           the Customs value can be determined under this
                           section,
                the Customs value shall not be determined under this section and
                the Customs authority may determine the Customs value of the
                goods by proceeding sequentially through articles 5 to 9 of this
                Schedule to the first such section of this Schedule under which
                the Customs value can, in the opinion of the Customs authority,
                be determined.
Adjustment of         4. (1) In determining the transaction value of goods
price paid or   under section 3 of this Schedule, the price paid or payable for
payable.
                the goods shall be adjusted —
                      (a) by adding thereto amounts, to the extent that each
                           such amount is not otherwise included in the price
                           paid or payable for the goods and is determined on
                           the basis of sufficient information, equal to —



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                  [CH.293– 299


           (i)   commissions and brokerage in respect of the
                 goods incurred by the buyer, other than fees
                 paid or payable by the buyer to the buyer’s
                 agent for the service of representing the buyer
                 overseas in respect of the purchase of the
                 goods;
           (ii) the packing costs and charges incurred by the
                 buyer in respect of the goods, including the cost
                 of cartons, cases, and other containers and
                 coverings that are treated for customs purposes
                 as being part of the imported goods and all
                 expenses of packing incidental to placing the
                 goods in the condition in which they are
                 shipped to the customs territory; and
           (iii) the value of any of the following goods and
                 services —
                  1.     Materials, component parts, and other
                         goods incorporated in the imported
                         goods;
                  2.     Tools, dies, moulds, and other goods
                         utilized in the production of the
                         imported goods;
                  3.     Materials consumed in the production of
                         the imported goods;
                  4.     Engineering,      development      work,
                         artwork, design work, plans, and
                         sketches undertaken elsewhere than in
                         the customs territory and necessary for
                         the production of the imported goods,
                   determined in accordance with subsection (2)
                   of this section, that are supplied, directly or
                   indirectly, by the buyer free of charge or at a
                   reduced cost for use in connection with the
                   production and sale for export of the imported
                   goods, apportioned to the imported goods in a
                   reasonable manner and in accordance with
                   generally accepted accounting principles;
           (iv) royalties and licence fees, including payments
                 for patents, trademarks, and copyrights in
                 respect of the imported goods that the buyer
                 must pay, directly or indirectly, as a condition
                 of the sale of the goods for export to the
                 Customs territory, exclusive to charges for the



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 300]                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            right to reproduce the imported goods within
                            the Customs territory;
                      (v) the value of any part of the proceeds of any
                            subsequent resale, disposal, or use of the goods
                            by the buyer that accrues or is to accrue,
                            directly or indirectly, to the seller;
                      (vi) the value of any materials, component parts,
                            and other goods incorporated in the imported
                            goods for the purpose of repair to, or
                            refurbishment of, those goods prior to export of
                            the goods to the Customs territory, and the price
                            paid for the service of repair or refurbishment,
                            as the case may be;
                      (vii) the costs of transportation and insurance of, and
                            the loading, unloading, and handling charges,
                            and other charges and expenses associated with
                            the transportation of, the imported goods until
                            the goods have left the country of export if such
                            costs, charges and expenses are paid or payable
                            by the buyer, directly or indirectly, to or for the
                            benefit of the seller as a condition of the
                            transaction;
                  (b) by deducting therefrom amounts, to the extent that
                      each such amount is otherwise included in the price
                      paid or payable for the goods, equal to —
                      (i) the costs of transportation and insurance of, and
                            the loading, unloading, and handling charges,
                            and other charges and expenses associated with
                            the transportation of, the imported goods from
                            the time the goods have left the country of
                            export, other than any cost, charge, or expense
                            referred to in sub-paragraph (ii) 2 of this
                            paragraph; and
                      (ii) any of the following costs, charges, or
                            expenses —
                              1.    Any reasonable cost, charge, or expense
                                    that is incurred for the construction,
                                    erection, assembly, or maintenance of,
                                    or technical assistance provided in
                                    respect of, the goods after the goods are
                                    imported;
                              2.    Any reasonable cost, charge, or expense
                                    that is incurred in respect of the
                                    transportation or insurance of the goods



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 301


                        within the Customs territory and any
                        reasonable cost, charge, or expense
                        associated therewith;
                 3.     Any Customs duties or other taxes
                        payable in the Customs territory by
                        reason of the importation of sale of the
                        goods,
                  if the cost, charge, or expense is identified
                  separately from the balance of the price paid
                  or payable for the goods;
      (c) by disregarding any rebate of, or other decrease in,
          the price paid or payable for the goods that is
          effected after the goods are imported;
      (d) in respect of carrier media bearing data or
          instructions, by deducting the value of the data or
          instructions from the price paid or payable for the
          goods if—
          (i) the value of the data or instructions is
                distinguished from the cost or value of the
                carrier media; and
          (ii) the data or instructions are not incorporated in
                data processing equipment.
      (2) The value of the goods and services described in
subsection (1) (a)(iii) of this section shall be determined —
      (a) in the case of materials, components, parts and other
           goods incorporated in the goods being valued or any
           materials consumed in the production of the goods
           being valued —
           (i) by ascertaining —
                   1.     their cost of acquisition where they were
                          acquired by the buyer from a person who
                          was not related to him at the time of
                          their acquisition;
                   2.     their cost of acquisition incurred by the
                          person related to the buyer, where the
                          goods were acquired by the buyer from a
                          person who was related to the buyer at
                          the time of their acquisition but who did
                          not produce them; or
                   3.     their cost of production where they were
                          produced by the buyer or a person
                          related to the buyer at the time of their
                          production; and

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 302]                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      (ii) by adding thereto —
                             1.    the cost of their transportation to the
                                   place of production of the goods being
                                   valued; and
                             2.    the value added to them by any repairs
                                   or modification made to them after they
                                   were so acquired or produced;
                  (b) in the case of tools, dies, moulds, and other goods,
                      utilised in the production of the goods being
                      valued —
                      (i) by ascertaining —
                             1.    their cost of acquisition where they were
                                   acquired by the buyer from a person who
                                   was not related to the buyer at the time
                                   they were so acquired;
                             2.    their cost of acquisition incurred by the
                                   person related to the buyer, where they
                                   were acquired by the buyer from a
                                   person related to the buyer at the time
                                   they were so acquired but who did not
                                   produce them; or
                             3.    their cost of production where they were
                                   produced by the buyer or a person
                                   related to the buyer at the time of their
                                   production; and
                      (ii) by adding thereto —
                             1.    the cost of their transportation to the
                                   place of production of the goods being
                                   valued;
                             2.    the value added to them by any repairs
                                   or modification made to them after they
                                   were so acquired or produced; and
                      (iii) by deducting therefrom an amount to account
                            for any previous use of the goods made after the
                            goods were so acquired or produced;
                  (c) in the case of engineering, development work, art
                      work, design work, plans and sketches, undertaken
                      elsewhere than within the Customs territory and
                      necessary for the production of the goods being
                      valued by ascertaining —
                      (i) their cost of acquisition or of the lease thereof,
                            where they were acquired or leased by the
                            buyer from a person who was not related to the


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 303


                 buyer at the time they were so acquired or
                 leased and are not generally available to the
                 public;
           (ii) their cost of acquisition or of the lease thereof
                 incurred by the person related to the buyer,
                 where they were acquired or leased by the
                 buyer from a person related to the buyer at the
                 time they were so acquired or leased, but who
                 did not produce them and are not generally
                 available to the public;
           (iii) the cost to the public of obtaining them where
                 they are available generally to the public; or
           (iv) the cost of production thereof where they were
                 produced by the buyer or a person related to the
                 buyer at the time of their production.
       (3) For the purposes of paragraph (d) of subsection (1)
of this section, the expression “carrier media” does not include
integrated circuits, semi-conductors and similar devices, or
articles incorporating such circuits or devices; and the
expression “data or instructions” does not include sound,
cinematic, or video recordings.
       (4) Where any adjustment in terms of the forgoing
clause cannot, in the opinion of the Customs authority, be made
because there is not sufficient information, the transaction value
of the goods being valued cannot be determined under section 3
of this Schedule.
       5. (1) Subject to subsections (2) to (4) of this section,      Transaction
where the Customs value of imported goods cannot, in the              value of identical
                                                                      goods as
opinion of the Commissioner General, be determined under              Customs value.
section 3 of this Schedule, the Customs value of the goods shall
be the transaction value of identical goods in respect of a sale of
those goods for export to the Customs territory if that transaction
value is the Customs value of the identical goods and the
identical goods were exported at the same or substantially the
same time as the goods being valued and were sold under the
following conditions —
       (a) to a buyer at the same or substantially the same trade
            level as the buyer of the goods being valued; and
       (b) in the same or substantially the same quantities as
            the goods being valued.
       (2) Where the Customs value of imported goods cannot
be determined under subsection (1) of this section because
identical goods were not sold under the conditions described in

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 304]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                subsection (1)(a) and (b) of this section, there shall be
                substituted therefor identical goods sold under any of the
                following conditions —
                       (a) to a buyer at the same or substantially the same trade
                           level as the buyer of the goods being valued but in
                           quantities different from the quantities in which
                           those goods were sold;
                       (b) to a buyer at a trade level different from that of the
                           buyer of the goods being valued but in the same or
                           substantially the same quantities as the quantities in
                           which those good were sold; or
                       (c) to a buyer at a trade level different from that of the
                           buyer of the goods being valued and in quantities
                           different from the quantities in which those goods
                           were sold.
                       (3) For the purposes of determining the Customs value
                of imported goods under subsection (1) of this section, the
                transaction value of identical goods shall be adjusted by adding
                thereto or deducting therefrom, as the case may be, amounts to
                account for —
                       (a) commercially significant differences between the
                            costs, charges, and expenses referred to in section
                            4(1)(a)(vii) of this Schedule in respect of the
                            identical goods and those costs, charges, and
                            expenses in respect of the goods being valued that
                            are attributable to differences in distances and modes
                            of transport;
                       (b) where the transaction value is in respect of identical
                            goods sold under the conditions described in any of
                            paragraphs (a) to (c) of subsection (2) of         this
                            section, differences in the trade levels of the buyers
                            of the identical goods and the goods being valued or
                            the quantities in which the identical goods and the
                            goods being valued were sold or both, as the case
                            may be,
                if each amount can, in the opinion of the Customs authority, be
                determined on the basis of sufficient information.
                       (4) Where there is not sufficient information to
                determine any amount referred to in subsection (3) or the
                adjustment therefor in relation to the transaction value of
                identical goods, and the Customs value of goods cannot be so
                determined, the Customs value of the goods being valued shall
                not be determined on the basis of the transaction value of those
                identical goods under this article.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 305


       (5) Where, in relation to imported goods being valued,
there are two or more transaction values of identical goods that
meet all the requirements set out in subsections (1) and (3) of
this section or where there is no such transaction value but there
are two or more transaction values of identical goods sold under
the conditions described in any of paragraphs (a) to (c) of
subsection (2) of this section that meet all the requirements set
out in this section that are applicable by virtue of subsection (2)
of this section, the Customs value of the goods being valued
shall be determined on the basis of the lowest such transaction
value.
      6. (1) Subject to subsection (2) of this section and            Transaction
subsections (2) to (4) of section 5 of this Schedule, where the       value of similar
                                                                      goods as
Customs value of imported goods cannot, in the opinion of the         Customs value.
Customs authority, be determined under section 5 of this
Schedule, the Customs value of the goods shall be the
transaction value of similar goods in respect of a sale of those
goods for export to the Customs territory if that transaction
value is the Customs value of the similar goods and the similar
goods were exported at the same or substantially the same time
as the goods being valued and were sold under the following
conditions —
      (a) to a buyer at the same or substantially the same trade
            level as the buyer of the goods being valued; and .
      (b) in the same or substantially the same quantities as
            the goods being valued.
       (2) Subsections (2) to (5) of section 5 of this Schedule        23 of 2013, s. 34.
shall apply to this clause in respect of similar goods as if every
reference in those clauses to “identical goods” were a reference
to “similar goods”.
       7. (1) Subject to subsections (4) and (5) of section 3 of      Deductive value
this Schedule, where the Customs value cannot be determined           as Customs
                                                                      value.
under section 6 of this Schedule, the Customs value of the goods
shall be deductive value in respect of the goods.
      (2) Where the goods being valued or identical goods or
similar goods are sold in the Customs territory in the condition
in which they were imported at the same or substantially the
same time as the time of importation of the goods being valued,
the deductive value of the goods being valued shall be the price
per unit in respect of sales described in subsection (5) of this
section, determined in accordance with that clause and adjusted
in accordance with section (6) of this section, at which the



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 306]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                greatest number of units of the goods being valued or identical
                goods or similar goods are so sold.
                       (3) Where the goods being valued or identical goods or
                similar goods are sold in the Customs territory in the condition
                in which they were imported before the expiration of ninety days
                after the importation of the goods being valued but are not so
                sold at the same or substantially the same time as the time of that
                importation, the deductive value of the goods being valued shall
                be the price per unit in respect of sales described in subsection
                (5) of this section, determined in accordance with that clause and
                adjusted in accordance with subsection (6) of this section, at
                which the greatest number of units of the goods being valued or
                identical goods or similar goods are so sold at the earliest date
                after the importation of the goods being valued.
                       (4) Where the goods being valued or identical goods or
                similar goods are not sold in the Customs territory in the
                circumstances described in subsection (2) or subsection (3) of
                this section, but the goods being valued, after being assembled,
                packages, or further processed in the Customs territory, are sold
                in the Customs territory before the expiration of ninety days
                after the importation thereof and the importer of the goods being
                valued requests that this section be applied in the determination
                of the Customs value of those goods, the deductive value of the
                goods being valued shall be the price per unit, in respect of sales
                described in subsection (5) of this section, determined in
                accordance with that clause and adjusted in accordance with
                subsection (6) of this section, at which the greatest number of
                units of the goods being valued are so sold.
                        (5) For the purposes of subsections (2) to (4) of this
                article, the price per unit in respect of any goods being valued or
                identical goods or similar goods, shall be determined by
                ascertaining the unit price in respect of sales of the goods at the
                first trade level after their importation to persons who —
                        (a) are not related to the person from whom they buy the
                              goods at the time the goods are sold to them; and
                        (b) have not supplied, directly or indirectly, free of
                              charge or at a reduced cost for use in connection with
                              the production and sale for export of the goods, any
                              of the goods or services referred to in section
                              4(1)(a)(iii) of this Schedule,
                        at which the greatest number of units of the goods is sold
                        where, in the opinion of the Customs authority, a
                        sufficient number of such sales have been made to permit
                        a determination of the price per unit of the goods.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                              LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 307


       (6) For the purposes of subsections (2) to (4) of this
section, the price per unit in respect of any goods being valued,
identical goods or similar goods, shall be adjusted by deducting
therefrom amount equal to the aggregate of—
       (a) an amount, determined in accordance with
            subsection (7) of this section, equal to —
            (i) the amount of commission generally earned on
                  a unit basis; or
            (ii) the amount of profit and general expenses,
                  including all costs of marketing the goods,
                  considered together as a whole, that is generally
                  reflected on a unit basis,
            in connection with sales in the Customs territory of
            goods of the same class or kind as those goods;
       (b) reasonable costs, charges, and expenses that are
            incurred in respect of the transportation and
            insurance of the goods within the Customs territory
            and reasonable costs, charges, and expenses
            associated therewith to the extent that an amount for
            such costs, charges, and expenses is not deducted in
            respect of general expenses under paragraph (a) of
            this clause;
       (c) the costs, charges, and expenses referred to in section    23 of 2013, s. 34.
            4(1)(b)(i) of this Schedule incurred in respect of the
            goods, to the extent that an amount for such costs,
            charges, and expenses is not deducted in respect of
            general expenses under paragraph (a) of this clause;
       (d) any Customs duties or other taxes payable in the
            Customs territory by reason of the importation or
            sale of the goods, to the extent that an amount for
            such duties and taxes is not deducted in respect of
            general expenses under paragraph (a) of this clause;
       (e) where subsection (4) of this section applies, the
            amount of the value added to the good that is
            attributable to the assembly, packaging, or further
            processing in the Customs territory of the goods, if
            the amount is determined, in the opinion of the
            Collector, on the basis of sufficient information.
       (7) The amount considered to be equal to the amount of
commission or the amount for profit and general expenses
referred to in subsection (6)(a) shall be calculated on a
percentage basis and determined of the basis of information



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 308]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                 prepared in a manner consistent with generally accepted account
                 principles that is supplied —
                       (a) by or on behalf of the importer of the goods being
                             valued; or
                       (b) where the information supplied by or on behalf of
                             the importer of the goods being valued is not
                             sufficient information, but an examination of sales
                             within the Customs territory of the narrowest group
                             or range of goods of the same class or kind as the
                             goods being valued from which sufficient
                             information can be obtained.
                        (8) Where an amount referred to in subsection (6)(e) of
                 this section in respect of any goods being valued cannot, in the
                 opinion of the Customs authority, be determined on the basis of
                 sufficient information, the Customs value of the goods cannot
                 be determined on the basis of the deductive value under
                 subsection (4) of this section.
Computed value          8. (1) Subject to subsections (3) and (5) of section 3 of
as Customs       this Schedule, where the Customs value of imported goods
value.
                 cannot, in the opinion of the Customs authority, be determined
                 under section 7 of this Schedule, the Customs value of the goods
                 shall be the computed value in respect of those goods.
                       (2) The computed value of the goods being valued is the
                 aggregate of amounts equal to —
                       (a) the costs, charges, and expenses incurred in respect
                            of, or the value of —
                            (i) materials employed in producing the goods
                                  being valued; and
                            (ii) the production or other processing of the goods,
                                  being values determined on the basis of—
                                    1.    the commercial accounts of the producer
                                          of the goods being valued; or
                                    2.    any other sufficient information relating
                                          to the production of the goods being
                                          valued,
                                    that are supplied by or on behalf of the
                                    producer of the goods and prepared in a
                                    manner consistent with the generally accepted
                                    accounting principles of the country of
                                    production of the goods being valued,
                                    including, without limiting the generality of
                                    the foregoing.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                     [CH.293– 309


          (iii) the costs, charges, and expenses referred to in
                section 4(1)(a)(ii) of this Schedule;
          (iv) the value of any of the goods and services
                referred to in section 4(1)(a)(iii) and (vi) of this
                Schedule, determined and apportioned to the
                goods being valued are referred to in that
                article, whether or not such goods and services
                have been supplied free of charge or at a
                reduced cost;
          (v) the costs, charges, and expenses incurred by the
                producer      in    respect     of    engineering,
                development work, artwork, design work,
                plans, or sketches undertaken within the
                Customs territory that were supplies, directly or
                indirectly, by the buyer of the goods being
                valued of use in connection with the production
                and sale for export of those goods to the extent
                that such elements are charged to the producer
                of the goods, apportioned to the goods being
                valued as referred to in section 4(1)(a)(iii) of
                this Schedule;
      (b) the amount, determined in accordance with
          subsection (4) of this section, for profit and general
          expenses, considered together as a whole, generally
          reflected in sales for export to the Customs territory
          of goods of the same class or kind as the goods being
          valued, made by the producers of the goods to buyers
          within the Customs territory who are not related to
          the produces from whom they buy the goods at the
          time the goods are sold to them.
       (3) For the purposes of this section the expression
“general expenses” means the direct and indirect costs, charges,
and expenses of producing and selling goods for export, other
than the costs, charges, and expenses referred to in subsection
(2) (a) of this section.
       (4) The amount of profit and general expenses referred
to in subsection (2)(b) of this section shall be calculated on a
percentage basis and determined on the basis of information
prepared in a manner consistent with generally acceptable
accounting principles of the country of production of the goods
being valued and that is supplied —
       (a) by or on behalf of the producer of the goods being
           valued; or



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 310]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          (b) where the information supplied by or on behalf of
                          the producer of the goods being valued is not sufficient
                          information, by an examination of sales for export to the
                          Customs territory of the narrowest group or range of
                          goods of the same class or kind from which sufficient
                          information can be obtained.
Residual basis of          9. (1) Where the Customs value of imported goods
valuation.          cannot be determined under sections 1 to 8 of this Schedule, it
                    shall be determined on information available in the Customs
                    territory on the basis of a value derived from the methods of
                    valuation set out in articles 2 to 7 of this Schedule interpreted in
                    a flexible manner and reasonably adjusted to the extent
                    necessary to arrive at a Customs value of the goods.
                          (2) A Customs value shall not be determined under this
                    section on the basis of —
                          (a) the selling price in the Customs territory of goods
                                produced in the Customs territory;
                          (b) a system which provides for the acceptance for
                                Customs purposes of the higher of two alternative
                                values;
                          (c) the price of goods on the domestic market of the
                                country of exportation;
                          (d) the cost of production, other than computed vales
                                that have been determined for identical or similar
                                goods in accordance with section 8 of this Schedule;
                          (e) the price of goods for export to a country other than
                                the Customs territory, unless the goods were
                                imported into the Customs territory of The Bahamas;
                          (f) minimum Customs values; or
                          (g) arbitrary or fictitious values.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                  LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                   [CH.293– 311



  FOURTH SCHEDULE (Sections 150(5), 151(2) and 153)

 RULES AND CRITERIA USED FOR DETERMINING
 THE ORIGIN OF GOODS IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
     ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT

                            PART I
                  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   1. For the purposes of this schedule —                            Interpretation.

      “added value” means the ex-works price minus the
           customs value of third country materials;
      “Agreement” means          the    Economic      Partnership
           Agreement;
      “CARIFORUM States” means the territories of Antigua
          and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize,
          Dominica, The Dominican Republic, Grenada,
          Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
          Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname
          and Trinidad and Tobago;
      “chapters” and “headings” mean the chapters and the
           four-digit headings used in the nomenclature which
           makes up the Harmonised Commodity Description
           and Coding System, referred to in this Schedule as
           ‘the Harmonised System’ or ‘HS’;
      “classified” refers to the classification of a product or
            material under a particular heading;
      “consignment” means products which are either sent
           simultaneously from one exporter to one consignee
           or covered by a single transport document covering
           their shipment from the exporter to the consignee or,
           in the absence of such a document, by a single
           invoice;
      “customs value” means the value as determined in
            accordance with Section 146 of the Customs Act
            and its Third Schedule;
      “ex-works price” means the price paid for the product ex-
           works to the manufacturer in whose undertaking the
           last working or processing is carried out, provided
           the price includes the value of all the materials used,



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 312]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       minus any internal taxes paid which are, or may be,
                       repaid when the product obtained is exported;
                  “goods” means both materials and products;
                  “manufacture” means any kind of working or processing
                      including assembly or specific operations;
                  “material” means any ingredient, raw material, component
                       or part used in the manufacture of the product;
                  “OCT” means the Overseas Countries and Territories as
                      defined in Annex IX to this Schedule;
                  “other ACP States” means the countries listed in Annex
                       XI to this Schedule;
                  “product” means the product being manufactured, even if
                       it is intended for later use in another manufacturing
                       operation;
                  “Special Committee on Customs Cooperation and Trade
                       Facilitation” means the body established in the
                       framework of the Economic Partnership Agreement,
                       which has the following functions —
                          (a)     monitoring the implementation of and
                                  administration of the; provisions of the
                                  Chapter 4 of Part II, Title I of the
                                  Economic Partnership Agreement;
                          (b)     carrying out the tasks and functions set
                                  down in the Protocol I on Rules of origin
                                  of the Economic Partnership Agreement;
                          (c)     providing a forum for consultation
                                  between the Parties to the Agreement with
                                  regard to the obligations provided under
                                  the Protocol I on mutual administrative
                                  assistance in Customs matters;
                          (d)     enhancing cooperation and dialogue
                                  between the Parties on tariff matters,
                                  Customs legislation and procedures,
                                  mutual administrative assistance in
                                  Customs matters rules of origin and
                                  administrative cooperation; and
                          (e)     discussing issues relating to technical
                                  assistance activities.
                  “territory” or “territories” means a country or a group of
                         countries including their territorial waters with


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 313


            whom The Bahamas have entered into an
            arrangement on preferential treatment of goods or
            granted such preferential treatment;
      “value of materials” means the customs value at the time
           of importation of the non-originating materials used,
           or, if this is not known and cannot be ascertained,
           the first ascertainable price paid for the materials in
           the territory concerned;
      “value of originating materials” means the value of such
           materials as defined in subparagraph (g) applied
           mutatis mutandis;
                            TITLE II
             DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPT OF
               “ORIGINATING PRODUCTS”
      2. (1) For the purposes of this Schedule the following          General
products shall be considered as originating in a territory Party to   requirements.
the Economic Partnership Agreement or in The Bahamas —
      (a) products wholly obtained in the territory within the
           meaning of Section 6 of this Schedule; and
      (b) products obtained in a territory incorporating
           materials which have not been wholly obtained there,
           provided that such materials have undergone
           sufficient working or processing in the territory
           within the meaning of Section 7 of this Schedule.
       (2) For the purpose of implementing this Schedule, the
territories of the CARIFORUM States shall be considered as
being one territory. Originating products made up of materials
wholly obtained or sufficiently worked or processed in two or
more CARIFORUM States shall be considered as products
originating in the CARIFORUM State where the last working or
processing took place, provided the working or processing
carried out there goes beyond that referred in section 8 of this
Schedule.
      3. (1) For the purpose of section 2 of this Schedule,           Cumulation in
materials originating in The Bahamas, in the other                    the EC Party.
CARIFORUM States, in the OCT or in the other ACP States
shall be considered as materials originating in the EC Party
when incorporated into a product obtained there. It shall not be
necessary that such materials have undergone sufficient working
or processing, provided they have undergone working or
processing going beyond that referred to in section 8 of this
Schedule.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 314]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       (2) For the purpose of section 2 of this Schedule,
                working and processing carried out in the Bahamas, in the other
                CARIFORUM States, in the OCT or in the other ACP States
                shall be considered as having been carried out in the EC Party,
                when the materials undergo subsequent working or processing in
                the EC Party going beyond that referred to in section 8 of this
                Schedule.
                       (3) The cumulation provided for in subsections 1 and 2
                of this section may only be applied with respect to the OCT and
                the other ACP States provided that —
                       (a) the countries involved in the acquisition of the
                             originating status and the country of destination have
                             concluded an agreement on administrative co-
                             operation which ensures a correct implementation of
                             this section;
                       (b) materials and products have acquired originating
                             status by the application of the rules of origin
                             identical to those given in this Schedule;
                       (c) the EC Party provides The Bahamas, through the
                             European Commission, with details of agreements
                             on administrative co-operation with the other
                             countries or territories referred to in this section. The
                             European Commission shall publish in the Official
                             Journal of the European Union (C series) and The
                             Bahamas shall publish according to their own
                             procedures the date on which the cumulation
                             provided for in this section may be applied with
                             those countries or territories listed in this section
                             which have fulfilled the necessary requirements.
Cumulation in          4. (1) For the purpose of section 2 of this Schedule,
The Bahamas.    materials originating in the EC Party, in other CARIFORUM
                States, in the OCT or in the other ACP States shall be considered
                as materials originating in The Bahamas when incorporated into
                a product obtained there. It shall not be necessary that such
                materials have undergone sufficient working or processing,
                provided they have undergone working or processing going
                beyond that referred to in section 8.
                       (2) For the purpose of section 2 of this Schedule,
                working, and processing carried out in the EC Party, in other
                CARIFORUM States, in the OCT or in the other ACP States
                shall be considered as having been carried out in The Bahamas,
                when the materials undergo subsequent working or processing in
                The Bahamas going beyond that referred to in section 8.



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                      [CH.293– 315


       (3) The cumulation provided for in subsections 1 and 2
of this section may only be applied with respect to the OCT and
the other ACP States provided that —
       (a) the countries involved in the acquisition of the
             originating status and the country of destination have
             concluded an agreement on administrative co-
             operation which ensures a correct implementation of
             this section;
       (b) materials and products have acquired originating
             status by the application of the rules of origin
             identical to those given in this Schedule;
       (c) The Bahamas will provide the EC Party, through the
             European Commission, with details of agreements
             on administrative co-operation with the other
             countries or territories referred to in this section. The
             European Commission shall publish in the Official
             Journal of the European Union (C series) and the
             Bahamas shall publish according to their own
             procedures the date on which the cumulation
             provided for in this section may be applied with
             those countries or territories listed in this section
             which have fulfilled the necessary requirements.
      5. (1) At the request of The Bahamas, materials                    Cumulation with
originating in a neighbouring developing country listed in               neighbouring
                                                                         developing
Annex VIII of this Schedule shall be considered as materials             countries.
originating in The Bahamas when incorporated into a product
obtained there.
      (2) It shall not be necessary that such materials have
undergone sufficient working or processing, provided that —
      (a) the working or processing carried out in The
          Bahamas exceeds the operations listed in section 8;
      (b) The Bahamas, the other CARIFORUM States, the
          EC Party and the neighbouring developing countries
          concerned have concluded an agreement on adequate
          administrative co-operation procedures which will
          ensure correct implementation of this paragraph.
       (3) For the purpose of determining whether the products
originate in the neighbouring developing country as defined in
Annex VIII of this Schedule, the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply.
      6. (1) The following shall be considered as wholly                 Wholly obtained
obtained in a territory Party to the Agreement or in the territory       products.
of The Bahamas —

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 316]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      (a) mineral products extracted from their soil or from
                          their seabed;
                      (b) fruit and vegetable products harvested there;
                      (c) live animals born and raised there;
                      (d) products from live animals raised there;
                      (e) products —
                          (i) obtained by hunting or fishing conducted there;
                          (ii) of aquaculture, including mariculture, where the
                                fish are born and raised there;
                      (f) products of sea fishing and other products taken from
                          the sea outside the territorial waters of the EC Party
                          or of the territory of The Bahamas by their vessels;
                      (g) products made aboard their factory ships exclusively
                          from products referred to in (f);
                      (h) used articles collected there fit only for the recovery
                          of raw materials, including used tyres fit only for
                          retreading or for use as waste;
                      (i) waste and scrap resulting from manufacturing
                          operations conducted there;
                      (j) products extracted from marine soil or subsoil
                          outside their territorial waters provided that they
                          have sole rights to work that soil or subsoil;
                      (k) goods produced there exclusively from the products
                          specified in (a) to (j).
                      (2) The terms “their vessels” and “their factory ships” in
                subsection 1(f) and (g) shall apply only to vessels and factory
                ships —
                      (a) which are registered in an EC Member State or in
                           The Bahamas;
                      (b) which sail under the flag of an EC Member State or
                           of The Bahamas;
                      (c) which meet one of the following conditions —
                           (i) they are at least 50% owned by nationals of an
                                EC Member State or of The Bahamas; or
                           (ii) they are owned by companies,
                                  1.   which have their head office and their
                                       main place of business in an EC Member
                                       State or in The Bahamas; and
                                  2.   which are at least 50% owned by an EC
                                       Member State or by The Bahamas,



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                     [CH.293– 317


                         public entities or nationals of The
                         Bahamas or of that state.
        (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2, the
EC Party shall recognize, upon request of The Bahamas, that
vessels chartered or leased by operators of The Bahamas be
treated as "their vessels" in order to undertake fisheries activities
in its exclusive economic zone, provided that the charter or lease
agreement, for which operators of the EC Party have been
offered the right of first refusal, has been accepted by the
Special Committee on Customs Cooperation and Trade
Facilitation as providing adequate opportunities for developing
the fishing capacity of the The Bahamas and in particular as
conferring to The Bahamas the nautical and commercial
responsibility for the chartered or leased vessels.
       7. (1) For the purposes of section 2 of this Schedule,           Sufficiently
products which are not wholly obtained are considered to be             worked or
                                                                        processed
sufficiently worked or processed when the conditions set out in         products.
the List in Annex II of this Schedule are fulfilled.
        (2) The conditions referred to in subsection 1 of this
section indicate the working or processing which must be carried
out on non-originating materials used in manufacturing and
apply only in relation to such materials. Accordingly, it follows
that if a product, which has acquired originating status by
fulfilling the conditions set out in the List referred to in
subsection 1 above is used in the manufacture of another
product, the conditions applicable to the product in which it is
incorporated do not apply to it, and no account shall be taken of
the non-originating materials which may have been used in its
manufacture.
      (3) Notwithstanding subsection 1 of this section, non-
originating materials which, according to the conditions set out
in Annex II to this Schedule should not be used in the
manufacture of a given product may nevertheless be used,
provided that —
      (a) their total value does not exceed 15 per cent of the
            ex-works price of the product;
      (b) any of the percentages given in the List for the
            maximum value of non-originating materials are not
            exceeded through the application of this subsection.
      (4) Subsection 1 to 3 shall apply except as provided in
section 8 of this Schedule.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 318]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



Insufficient          8. (1) Without prejudice to subsection 2 of this section,
working or
processing.
                the following operations shall be considered as insufficient
                working or processing to confer the status of originating
                products, whether or not the requirements of section 7 of this
                Schedule are satisfied —
                        (a) operations to ensure the preservation of products in
                            good condition during transport and storage;
                        (b) breaking-up and assembly of packages;
                        (c) washing, cleaning; removal of dust, oxide, oil, paint
                            or other coverings;
                        (d) ironing or pressing of textiles;
                        (e) painting and polishing operations;
                        (f) husking, partial or total bleaching, polishing, and
                            glazing of cereals and rice;
                        (g) operations to colour sugar or form sugar lumps;
                            partial or total milling of crystal sugar;
                        (h) peeling, stoning and shelling of fruits, nuts and
                            vegetables;
                        (i) sharpening, simple grinding or simple cutting;
                        (j) sifting, screening, sorting, classifying, grading,
                            matching (including the making-up of sets of
                            articles);
                        (k) simple placing in bottles, cans, flasks, bags, cases,
                            boxes, fixing on cards or boards and all other
                            simple packaging operations;
                        (1) affixing or printing marks, labels, logos and other
                            like distinguishing signs on products or their
                            packaging;
                        (m) simple mixing of products, whether or not of
                            different kinds; mixing of sugar with any other
                            material;
                        (n) simple assembly of parts of articles to constitute a
                            complete article or disassembly of products into
                            parts;
                        (o) a combination of two or more operations specified
                            in (a) to (n);
                        (p) slaughter of animals.
                      (2) All operations carried out in the EC Party, in The
                Bahamas or in another CARIFORUM State on a given product
                shall be considered together when determining whether the
                working or processing undergone by that product is to be


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                  [CH.293– 319


regarded as insufficient within the meaning of subsection 1 of
this section.
       9. (1) The unit of qualification for the application of      Unit of
the provisions of this Schedule shall be the particular product     qualification.
which is considered as the basic unit when determining
classification using the nomenclature of the Harmonised System.
Accordingly, it follows that —
     (a) when a product composed of a group or assembly of
          articles is classified under the terms of the
          Harmonised System in a single heading, the whole
          constitutes the unit of qualification;
     (b) when a consignment consists of a number of
          identical products classified under the same heading
          of the Harmonised System, each product must be
          taken individually when applying the provisions of
          this Schedule.
       (2) Where, under General Rule 5 of the Harmonised
System, packaging is included with the product for classification
purposes, it shall be included for the purposes of determining
origin.
       10. Accessories, spare parts and tools dispatched with a     Accessories,
piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle, which are        parts and tools.
part of the normal equipment and included in the price thereof or
which are not separately invoiced, shall be regarded as one with
the piece of equipment, machine, apparatus or vehicle in
question.
       11. Sets, as defined in General Rule 3 of the Harmonised     Sets.
System, shall be regarded as originating when all component
products are originating. Nevertheless, when a set is composed
of originating and non-originating products, the set as a whole
shall be regarded as originating, provided that the value of the
non-originating products does not exceed 15% of the ex-works
price of the set.
       12. In order to determine whether a product is               Neutral elements.
originating, it shall not be necessary to determine the origin of
the following which might be used in its manufacture —
       (a) energy and fuel;
       (b) plant and equipment;
       (c) machines and tools;
       (d) goods which do not enter and which are not intended
            to enter into the final composition of the product.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 320]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                                               TITLE III
                                  TERRITORIAL REQUIREMENTS
Principle of              13. (1) The conditions for acquiring originating status
territoriality.     set out in Title II must be fulfilled without interruption in The
                    Bahamas, in another CARIFORUM Sate or the EC Party, except
                    as provided for in section 3 of this Schedule.
                           (2) Where originating goods exported from The
                    Bahamas to another country are returned they must be
                    considered as non-originating, unless it can be demonstrated to
                    the satisfaction of the Customs authority that —
                           (a) the returned goods are the same goods as those
                                 exported; and
                           (b) they have not undergone any operation beyond that
                                 necessary to preserve them in good condition while
                                 in that country or while being exported.
Direct transport.          14. (1) The preferential treatment applies only to
                    products which satisfy the requirements of this Schedule and
                    which are transported directly between the territory of the
                    Bahamas and the EC Party or another CARIFORUM State
                    without entering any other territory. However, products
                    constituting one single consignment may be transported through
                    other territories with, should the occasion arise, trans-shipment
                    or temporary warehousing in such territories, provided that they
                    remain under the surveillance of the Customs authorities in the
                    country of transit or warehousing and do not undergo operations
                    other than unloading, reloading or any operation designed to
                    preserve them in good condition.
                          (2) Evidence that the conditions set out in subsection 1
                    of this section have been fulfilled shall be supplied to the
                    Customs authority of the importing country by the production
                    of —
                          (a) a single transport document covering the passage
                               from the exporting country through the country of
                               transit; or
                          (b) a certificate issued by the Customs authority of the
                               country of transit —
                               (i) giving an exact description of the products;
                               (ii) stating the dates of unloading and reloading of
                                    the products and, where applicable, the names
                                    of the ships, or the other means of transport
                                    used; and




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                     [CH.293– 321


          (iii) certifying the conditions under which the
                products remained in the transit country; or
      (c) failing these, any substantiating documents.
       15. (1) Originating products sent from a territory Party         Exhibitions.
to the Agreement for exhibition in The Bahamas and sold after
the exhibition for importation in The Bahamas shall benefit from
the provisions of the Agreement provided it is shown to the
satisfaction of the Customs authority that —
       (a) an exporter has consigned these products from a
            territory Party to the Agreement to The Bahamas
            where the exhibition is held and has exhibited them
            there;
       (b) the products have been sold or otherwise disposed of
            by the exporter to a person in The Bahamas;
       (c) the products have been consigned during the
            exhibition or immediately thereafter in The
            Bahamas;
       (d) the products have not, since they were consigned for
            exhibition, been used for any purpose other than
            demonstration and exhibition.
      (2) A proof of origin must be issued or made out in
accordance with the provisions of Title IV and submitted to the
Customs authority of The Bahamas in the normal manner. The
name and address of the exhibition must be indicated thereon.
Where necessary, additional documentary evidence of the
conditions under which they have been exhibited may be
required.
      (3) Subsection 1 of this section shall apply to any trade,
industrial, agricultural or crafts exhibition, fair or similar public
show or display which is not organised for private purposes in
shops or business premises with a view to the sale of foreign
products, and during which the products remain under Customs
control.
                             TITLE IV
                       PROOF OF ORIGIN
      16. (1) Products originating in a territory Party to the          General
Agreement shall, on importation into The Bahamas and products           requirements.
originating in The Bahamas shall, on importation into a territory
Party to the Agreement, benefit from a prescribed preferential
treatment upon submission of either —



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 322]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          (a) a movement certificate EUR.1, a specimen of which
                              appears in Annex III to this Schedule; or
                          (b) in the cases specified in section 21(1) of this
                              Schedule, a declaration, subsequently referred to as
                              the ‘invoice declaration’, given by the exporter in
                              accordance with section 21(4) of this Schedule.
                           (2) Notwithstanding subsection 1 of this section,
                    originating products within the meaning of this Schedule shall,
                    in the cases specified in section 26 of this Schedule, benefit from
                    preferential treatment without it being necessary to submit any
                    of the documents referred to above.
                         (3) For the purpose of applying the provisions of this
                    Schedule, the exporters shall endeavour to use a language
                    common to both The Bahamas and the territory Party to the
                    Agreement.
Procedure for the         17. (1) A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued
issuance of a       by the Customs authority of the exporting country on application
movement
certificate         having been made in writing by the exporter or, under the
EUR.1.              exporter’s responsibility, by his authorised representative.
                          (2) For this purpose, the exporter or his authorised
                    representative shall fill out both the movement certificate EUR.1
                    and the application form, specimens of which appear in Annex
                    III to this Schedule. These forms shall be completed in
                    accordance with the provisions of this Schedule. If they are
                    handwritten, they shall be completed in ink in printed characters.
                    The description of the products must be given in the box
                    reserved for this purpose without leaving any blank lines. Where
                    the box is not completely filled, a horizontal line must be drawn
                    below the last line of the description, the empty space being
                    crossed through.
                           (3) The exporter applying for the issue of a movement
                    certificate EUR.1 shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the
                    request of the Customs authority of the exporting country where
                    the movement certificate EUR.1 is issued, all appropriate
                    documents proving the originating status of the products
                    concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of
                    this Schedule.
                           (4) A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the
                    Customs authority of the Bahamas or the territory Party to this
                    Agreement if the products concerned can be considered as
                    products originating in The Bahamas or the territory or in one of
                    the other countries or territories referred to in sections 3,4 and 5
                    and fulfil the other requirements of this Schedule.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                  LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 323


       (5) The issuing Customs authority shall take any steps
necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the
fulfilment of the other requirements of this Schedule. For this
purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to
carry out any inspection of the exporter’s accounts or any other
check considered appropriate. The issuing Customs authority
shall also ensure that the forms referred to in subsection 2 of this
section are duly completed. In particular they shall check
whether the space reserved for the description of the products
has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all
possibility of fraudulent additions.
       (6) The date of issue of the movement certificate EUR.1
shall be indicated in Box 11 of the certificate.
       (7) A movement certificate EUR.1 shall be issued by the
Customs authority and made available to the exporter as soon as
actual exportation has been effected or ensured.
      18. (1) Notwithstanding section 17(7) of this Schedule,          Movement
a movement certificate EUR.1 may exceptionally be issued after         certificates
                                                                       EUR.1 issued
exportation of the products to which it relates if—                    retrospectively.
      (a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because
           of errors or involuntary omissions or special
           circumstances; or
      (b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Customs
           authority that a movement certificate EUR.1 was
           issued but was not accepted at importation for
           technical reasons.
       (2) For the implementation of subsection 1, the exporter
must indicate in his application the place and date of exportation
of the products to which the movement certificate EUR.1 relates,
and state the reasons for his request.
       (3) The Customs authority may issue a movement
certificate EUR.1 retrospectively only after verifying that the
information supplied in the exporter’s application agrees with
that in the corresponding file.
     (4) Movement certificates EUR.1 issued retrospectively
must be endorsed with the following phrase in English:
‘ISSUED RETROSPECTIVELY’.
       (5) The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 shall be
inserted in the ‘Remarks’ box of the movement certificate
EUR.1.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 324]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


Issuance of a            19. (1) The endorsement referred to in paragraph 4 of
duplicate
movement           section 18 shall be inserted in the ‘Remarks’ box of the
certificate        movement certificate EUR.1.
EUR.1.
                          (2) The duplicate issued in this way must be endorsed
                   with the following word in English: ‘DUPLICATE’.
                          (3) The endorsement referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
                   inserted in the ‘Remarks’ box of the duplicate movement
                   certificate EUR.1.
                         (4) The duplicate, which must bear the date of issue of
                   the original movement certificate EUR.1, shall take effect as
                   from that date.
Issuance of               20. When originating products are placed under the
movement           control of a Customs office, it shall be possible to replace the
certificates
EUR.1 on the       original proof of origin by one or more movement certificates
basis of a proof   EUR.1 for the purpose of sending all or some of these products
of origin issued   elsewhere. The replacement movement certificate(s) EUR.1
or made out
previously.        shall be issued by the Customs office under whose control the
                   products are placed.
Conditions for            21. (1) An invoice declaration as referred to in Section
making out an      13(l)(b) of this Schedule may be made out —
invoice
declaration.              (a) by an approved exporter within the meaning of
                                section 22 of this Schedule; or
                          (b) by any exporter for any consignment consisting of
                                one or more packages containing originating
                                products whose total value does not exceed EUR
                                6,000.
                          (2) Invoice declaration may be made out if the products
                   concerned can be considered as products originating in a
                   territory Party to the Agreement or The Bahamas and fulfil the
                   other requirements of this Schedule.
                          (3) The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall
                   be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the Customs
                   authority, all appropriate documents proving the originating
                   status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the
                   other requirements of this Schedule.
                         (4) An invoice declaration shall be made out by the
                   exporter by typing, stamping or printing the declaration on the
                   invoice, the delivery note or another commercial document,
                   which describes the products concerned in sufficient detail to
                   enable them to be identified. The text of the invoice declaration
                   appears in Annex IV to this Schedule. The languages in which it
                   may be accepted shall be prescribed by the Minister of Finance


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                               LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 325


if not prescribed by international agreements to which The
Bahamas is a party. If the declaration is handwritten, it shall be
written in ink in printed characters.
       (5) Invoice declarations shall bear the original signature
of the exporter in manuscript. However, an approved exporter
within the meaning of Section 22 of this Schedule shall not be
required to sign such declarations provided that he gives the
Customs authority of The Bahamas a written undertaking that he
accepts full responsibility for any invoice declaration which
identifies him as if it had been signed in manuscript by him.
       (6) An invoice declaration may be made out by the
exporter when the products to which it relates are exported, or
after exportation on condition that it is presented in the
importing country no longer than two years after the importation
of the products to which it relates.
       22. (1) The Customs authority may authorise any                Approved
exporter who makes frequent shipments of products under trade         exporter.
cooperation provisions to make out invoice declarations
irrespective of the value of the products concerned. An exporter
seeking such authorisation must offer to the satisfaction of the
Customs authority all guarantees necessary to verify the
originating status of the products as well as the fulfilment of the
other requirements of this Schedule.
      (2) The Customs authority may grant the status of
approved exporter subject to any conditions which they consider
appropriate.
       (3) The Customs authority shall grant to the approved
exporter a Customs authorisation number which shall appear on
the invoice declaration.
      (4) The Customs authority shall monitor the use of the
authorisation by the approved exporter.
      (5) The Customs authority may withdraw the
authorisation at any time. They shall do so where the approved
exporter no longer offers the guarantees referred to in subsection
1 of this section, does not fulfil the conditions referred to in
subsection 2 or otherwise makes an incorrect use of the
authorisation.
       23. (1) A proof of origin shall be valid for the period        Validity of proof
                                                                      of origin.
specified in the agreements to which The Bahamas is a party or
otherwise for ten months from the date of issue, and must be
submitted within the said period to the Customs authority of the
importing country.


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 326]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                         (2) Proof of origin which are submitted to the Customs
                   authority of the importing country after the final date for
                   presentation specified in subsection 1 may be accepted for the
                   purpose of applying preferential treatment, where the failure to
                   submit these documents by the final date set is due to
                   exceptional circumstances.
                          (3) In other cases of belated presentation, the Customs
                   authority of the importing country may accept the proofs of
                   origin where the products have been submitted before the said
                   final date.
Submission of            24. Proof of origin shall be submitted to the Customs
proof of origin.   authority of the importing country in accordance with the
                   procedures applicable in that country. The said authorities may
                   require a translation of a proof of origin and may also require the
                   import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the
                   importer to the effect that the products meet the conditions
                   required for the implementation of an agreement.
Importation by           25. Where, at the request of the importer and on the
instalments.       conditions laid down by the Customs authority of the importing
                   country, dismantled or non-assembled products within the
                   meaning of General Rule 2(a) of the Harmonized System falling
                   within Sections XVI and XVII or Heading 73.08 and 94.06 of
                   the Harmonized System are imported by installments, a single
                   proof of origin for such products shall be submitted to the
                   Customs authority upon importation of the first installment.
Exemptions from           26. (1) Products sent as small packages from private
proof of origin.   persons to private persons or forming part of travellers’ personal
                   luggage shall be admitted as originating products without
                   requiring the submission of a proof of origin, provided that such
                   products are not imported by way of trade and have been
                   declared as meeting the requirements of this Schedule and where
                   there is no doubt as to the veracity of such a declaration. In the
                   case of products sent by post, this declaration can be made on
                   customs declaration CN22/CN23 or on a sheet of paper Ced to
                   that document.
                           (2) Imports which are occasional and consist solely of
                   products for the personal use of the recipients or travellers or
                   their families shall not be considered as imports by way of trade
                   if it is evident from the nature and quantity of the products that
                   no commercial purpose is in view.
                         (3) Furthermore, the total value of these products shall
                   not exceed EUR.500 in the case of small packages or EUR.1 200




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 327


in the case of products forming part of travellers’ personal
luggage.
      27. (1) When Section 3(1) of this Schedule is applied,          Information
the evidence of originating status within the meaning of this         procedure for
                                                                      cumulation
Schedule of the materials coming from a territory or The              purposes.
Bahamas shall be given by a movement certificate EUR.1 or by
the supplier’s declaration given by the exporter in the territory
from which the materials came.
      (2) When section 3(2) of this Schedule is applied, the
evidence of the working or processing carried out in a territory
or The Bahamas shall be given by the supplier’s declaration
given by the exporter in the territory from which the materials
came.
       (3) A separate supplier’s declaration shall be made up
by the supplier for each consignment of material on the
commercial invoice related to that shipment or in an annex to
that invoice, or on a delivery note or other commercial document
related to that shipment which describes the materials concerned
in sufficient detail to enable them to be identified.
      (4) The supplier’s declaration may be made out on a
pre-printed form.
       (5) The suppliers’ declarations shall bear the original
signature of the supplier in manuscript. However, where the
invoice and the supplier’s declaration are established using
electronic data processing methods, the supplier‘s declaration
need not be signed in manuscript provided the responsible
official in the supplying company is identified to the satisfaction
of the customs authorities in the State where the suppliers‘
declarations are established. The said Customs authority may lay
down conditions for the implementation of this subsection.
      (6) The supplier’s declarations shall be submitted to the
Customs authority in the exporting country requested to issue
the movement certificate EUR.1.
       (7) The supplier making out a declaration must be
prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the Customs
authority of the country where the declaration is made out, all
appropriate documents proving that the information given on
this declaration is correct.
      28. The documents referred to in sections 17(3) and             Supporting
                                                                      documents.
21(3) of this Schedule used for the purpose of proving that
products covered by a movement certificate EUR.1 or an invoice
declaration can be considered as products originating in a


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 328]                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                  territory Party to the Agreement or The Bahamas and fulfil the
                  requirements of this Schedule for preferential treatment may
                  consist inter alia of the following —
                         (a) direct evidence of the processes carried out by the
                              exporter or supplier to obtain the goods concerned,
                              contained for example in his accounts or internal
                              bookkeeping;
                         (b) documents proving the originating status of materials
                              used, issued or made out in a territory Party or The
                              Bahamas in the cases referred to in sections 3, 4 or 5
                              of this Schedule where these documents are used in
                              accordance with domestic law;
                         (c) documents proving the working or processing of
                              materials in The Bahamas or in a territory Party or in
                              one of the other countries or territories referred to in
                              sections 3 and 4 issued or made out in The Bahamas
                              or in a territory Party or in one of the other countries
                              or territories referred to in sections 3 and 4 where
                              these documents are used in accordance with
                              domestic law;
                         (d) movement certificates EUR.1 or invoices
                              declarations proving the originating status of
                              materials used, issued or made out in The Bahamas,
                              in a territory Party or in one of the other countries or
                              territories referred to in sections 3, 4 and 5 of this
                              Schedule and in accordance with this Schedule.
Preservation of         29. (1) The exporter applying for the issue of a
proof of origin   movement certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years
and supporting
documents.        the documents referred to in section 17(3) of this Schedule.
                        (2) The exporter making out an invoice declaration shall
                  keep for at least three years a copy of this invoice declaration as
                  well as the documents referred to in Section 21(3) of this
                  Schedule.
                         (3) The supplier making out a supplier’s declaration
                  shall keep for at least three years copies of the declaration and of
                  the invoice, delivery notes or other commercial document to
                  which this declaration is annexed as well as the documents
                  referred to in Section 27(7) of this Schedule.
                         (4) The Customs authority issuing a movement
                  certificate EUR.1 shall keep for at least three years the
                  application form referred to in Section 17(2) of this Schedule.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                   [CH.293– 329


      (5) The Customs authority of the importing country
shall keep for at least three years the movement certificates
EUR.1 and the invoice declarations submitted to them.
       30. (1) The discovery of slight discrepancies between         Discrepancies
the statements made in the proof of origin and those made in the     and formal
                                                                     errors.
documents submitted to the Customs office for the purpose of
carrying out the formalities for importing the products shall not
ipso facto render the proof of origin null and void if it is duly
established that this document does correspond to the products
submitted.
       (2) Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on a proof
of origin should not cause this document to be rejected if these
errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness
of the statements made in this document.
                            TITLE V
                ARRANGEMENTS FOR
            ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION
       31. Products originating within the meaning of this           Administrative
Schedule shall benefit from preferences only on condition that       conditions for
                                                                     products to
the necessary arrangements, structures and systems required for      benefit from the
the implementation and enforcement of the rules and procedures       Agreement.
laid down in this Schedule are in place.
       32. (1) A country or a territory Party to the Agreement       Notification of
and The Bahamas shall provide each other with the addresses of       information
                                                                     related to
the Customs authority responsible for issuing and verifying of       Customs
movement certificates EUR.1 and invoice declarations or              authorities.
supplier’s declarations, and with specimen impressions of the
stamps used in their Customs offices for the issue of these
certificates. Movement certificates EUR.1 and invoice
declarations or supplier’s declarations shall be accepted for the
purpose of applying preferential treatment from the date the
information is exchanged.
       (2) A country or a territory Party and The Bahamas shall
inform each other immediately whenever there are any changes
to the information referred to in subsection 1 of this section.
       33. In order to ensure the proper application of this         Mutual
Schedule, a country or a territory Party and The Bahamas shall       assistance.
assist each other, through the competent Customs
administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement
certificates EUR.1, the invoice declarations or the supplier’s
declarations and the correctness of the information given in
these documents. The authorities consulted shall furnish the

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 330]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   relevant information concerning the conditions under which the
                   product has been made, indicating especially the conditions in
                   which the rules of origin have been respected in the territory
                   party and The Bahamas.
Verification of           34. (1) Subsequent verifications of proof of origin shall
proof of origin.   be carried out at random or based on risk analysis or whenever
                   the Customs authority of the importing country have reasonable
                   doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating
                   status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other
                   requirements of this Schedule.
                          (2) For the purposes of implementing the provisions of
                   subsection 1 of this section, the Customs authority of the
                   importing country shall return the movement certificate EUR.1
                   and the invoice, if it has been submitted, the invoice declaration,
                   or a copy of these documents, to the Customs authority of the
                   exporting country giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the
                   request for verification. Any documents and information
                   obtained suggesting that the information given on the proof of
                   origin is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request
                   for verification.
                         (3) The verification shall be carried out by the Customs
                   authority of the exporting country. For this purpose, they shall
                   have the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any
                   inspection of the exporter’s accounts or any other check
                   considered appropriate.
                          (4) If the Customs authorities of the importing country
                   decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the
                   products concerned while awaiting the results of the verification,
                   release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to
                   any precautionary measures judged necessary.
                          (5) The Customs authority requesting the verification
                   shall be informed of the results of this verification as soon as
                   possible. These results must indicate clearly whether the
                   documents are authentic and whether the products concerned
                   can be considered as products originating in a territory Party or
                   The Bahamas or in one of the other countries or territories
                   referred to in section 3, 4 and 5 and fulfil the other requirements
                   of this Schedule.
                         (6) If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply
                   within ten months of the date of the verification request or if the
                   reply does not contain sufficients information to determine the
                   authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                   [CH.293– 331


products, the requesting Customs authority shall, except in
exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.
       (7) Where the verification procedure or any other
available information appears to indicate that the provisions of
this Schedule are being contravened, the exporting country on its
own initiative or at the request of the importing country shall
carry out appropriate enquires or arrange for such enquiries to be
carried out with due urgency to identify and prevent such
contraventions and for this purpose the exporting country
concerned may invite the participation of the importing country
in these enquiries.
       35. (1) Verification of suppliers’ declarations shall be      Verification of
carried out at random or based on risk analysis or whenever the      supplier’s
                                                                     declaration.
Customs authority of the importing State have reasonable doubt
as to the authenticity of the document or the accuracy or
completeness of the information concerning the true origin of
the materials in question.
       (2) The Customs authority to which a supplier’s
declaration is submitted may request the Customs authority of
the State where the declaration was made to issue an information
certificate, a specimen of which appears in Annex VI to this
Schedule. Alternatively, the Customs authority to which a
supplier’s declaration is submitted may request the exporter to
produce an information certificate issued by the Customs
authority of the State where the declaration was made. A copy of
the information certificate shall be preserved by the office which
has issued it for at least three years.
       (3) The Customs authority requesting the verification
shall be informed of the results thereof as soon as possible. The
results must indicate clearly whether the information given in
the supplier’s declaration is correct and make it possible for the
Customs authority to determine whether and to what extent this
supplier’s declaration could be taken into account for issuing a
movement certificate EUR.l or for making out an invoice
declaration.
       (4) The verification shall be carried out by the Customs
authority of the country where the supplier’s declaration was
made out. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for
any evidence or to carry out any inspection of the supplier’s
account or any other check which they consider appropriate in
order to verify the correctness of any supplier’s declaration.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 332]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                      (5) Any movement certificate EUR.1 or invoice
                declaration issued or made out on the basis of an incorrect
                supplier’s declaration shall be considered null and void.
Dispute                36. Where disputes arise in relation to the verification
settlement.     procedures referred to in sections 34 and 35 of this Schedule
                which cannot be settled between the customs authority
                requesting a verification and the Customs authority responsible
                for carrying out this verification or where they raise a question
                as to the interpretation of this Schedule, they shall be submitted
                to the competent authorities and prescribed procedure for
                resolution. In all cases the settlement of disputes between the
                importer and the customs authorities of the importing country
                shall take place under the legislation of that country.
Penalties.            37. Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws
                up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains
                incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining a preferential
                treatment for products.
Free zones.            38. (1) All necessary steps shall be taken to ensure that
                products traded under cover of a proof of origin or a supplier’s
                declaration and which in the course of transport use a free zone
                situated in The Bahamas or in any territory Party, are not
                substituted by other goods and do not undergo handling other
                than normal operations designed to prevent their deterioration.
                       (2) By means of an exemption to the provisions
                contained in subsection 1, when originating products are
                imported into a free zone under cover of a proof of origin and
                undergo treatment or processing, the authorities concerned shall
                issue a new movement certificate EUR.1 at the exporter’s
                request, if the treatment or processing undergone complies with
                the provisions of this Schedule.
Derogations.          39. (1) Regulations relating to derogations from this
                Schedule may be made by the Minister after adoption of these
                derogations by the Special Committee on Customs Cooperation
                and Trade Facilitation, in favour of products exported from The
                Bahamas.
                      (2) Derogations from this Schedule may be adopted
                where the development of existing industries or the creation of
                new industries in The Bahamas justifies the adoption of such
                derogations.
                      (3) In order to facilitate the examination by the Special
                Committee on Customs Cooperation and Trade Facilitation of
                requests for derogation, The Bahamas shall, by means of the
                form given in Annex VII to this Schedule, furnish in support of


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                  [CH.293– 333


their request the fullest possible information covering in
particular the following —
       (a) description of the finished product;
       (b) nature and quantity of materials originating in third
             countries, nature and quantity of materials
             originating in The Bahamas or the countries or
             territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4, or the
             materials which have been processed in these
             countries or territories;
       (c) manufacturing processes;
       (d) added value achieved;
       (e) number of employees in the enterprise concerned;
       (f) anticipated volume of exports from The Bahamas;
       (g) other possible sources of supply for raw material;
       (h) reasons for the duration requested in light of efforts
             made to find new sources of supply;
       (i) other observations.
                           TITLE VI
                     FINAL PROVISIONS
       40. The Minister may make regulations for the                Amendment to
modification of this Schedule following amendments made by          this Schedule.
the Joint CARIFORUM-EC Council and the Special Committee
on Customs Cooperation and Trade Facilitation established in
the context of the Economic Partnership Agreement.
      41. The Annexes form an integral part of this Schedule.       Annexes.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 334]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            ANNEX I TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

                Introductory notes to the list in Annex II
                (All examples are given for the purpose of explanation only.
                They are not legally binding)
                Note 1
                The list sets out the conditions required for all products to be
                considered as sufficiently worked or processed within the
                meaning of section 7 of this Schedule.
                Note 2
                1. First two columns in the list describe the product obtained.
                   The first column gives the heading number or chapter
                   number used in the Harmonized System and the second
                   column gives the description of goods used in that system
                   for that heading or chapter. For each entry in the first two
                   columns a rule is specified in columns 3 or 4. Where, in
                   some cases, the entry in the first column is preceded by an
                   “ex”, this signifies that the rules in columns 3 or 4 apply
                   only to the part of that heading as described in column 2.
                2. Where several heading numbers are grouped together in
                   column 1 or a chapter number is given and the description of
                   products in column 2 is therefore given in general terms, the
                   adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4 apply to all products which,
                   under the Harmonized System, are classified in headings of
                   the chapter or in any of the headings grouped together in
                   column 1.
                3. Where there are different rules in the list applying to
                   different products within a heading, each indent contains the
                   description of that part of the heading covered by the
                   adjacent rules in columns 3 or 4.
                4. Where, for an entry in the first two columns, a rule is
                   specified in both columns 3 and 4, the exporter may opt, as
                   an alternative, to apply either the rule set out in column 3 or
                   that set out in column 4. If no origin rule is given in column
                   4, the rule set out in column 3 has to be applied.
                Note 3
                1. The provisions of section 7 of the Fourth Schedule
                   concerning products having acquired originating status
                   which are used in the manufacture of other products apply




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                   [CH.293– 335


    regardless of whether this status has been acquired inside the
    factory where these products are used or in another factory.
    Example
    An engine of heading No 8407, for which the rule states that
    the value of the non-originating materials which may be
    incorporated may not exceed 40 per cent of the ex-works
    price, is made from “other alloy steel roughly shaped by
    forging” of heading No ex 7224.

1  If this forging has been forged in the EC Party from a non-
   originating ingot, it has already acquired originating status
   by virtue of the rule for heading No ex 7224 in the list. The
   forging can then count as originating in the value calculation
   for the engine regardless of whether it was produced in the
   same factory or in another factory in the EC Party. The value
   of the non-originating ingot is thus not taken into account
   when adding up the value of the non-originating materials
   used.
2 The rule in the list represents the minimum amount of
   working or processing required and the carrying out of more
   working or processing also confers originating status;
   conversely, the carrying out of less working or processing
   cannot confer originating status. Therefore, if a rule provides
   that non-originating material at a certain level of
   manufacture may be used, the use of such material at an
   earlier stage of manufacture is allowed and the use of such
   material at a later stage is not.
3. Without prejudice to Note 3.2 of this Annex where a rule
   states that “materials of any heading” may be used, materials
   of the same heading as the product may also be used,
   subject, however, to any specific limitations which may also
   be contained in the rule. However, the expression
   “manufacture from materials of any heading, including other
   materials of heading No ...” means that only materials
   classified in the same heading as the product of a different
   description than that of the product as given in column 2 of
   the list may be used.
4. When a rule in the list specifies that a product may be
   manufactured from more than one material, this means that
   any one or more materials may be used. It does not require
   that all be used.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 336]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    Example
                   The rule for fabrics of heading Nos 5208 to 5212 provides
                   that natural fibres may be used and that chemical materials,
                   among other materials, may also be used. This does not
                   mean that both have to be used; it is possible to use one or
                   the other or both.
                5. Where a rule in the list specifies that a product must be
                   manufactured from a particular material, the condition
                   obviously does not prevent the use of other materials which,
                   because of their inherent nature, cannot satisfy the rule. (See
                   also Note 6.3 below in relation to textiles).
                    Examples
                    The rule for prepared foods of heading No 1904 which
                    specifically excludes the use of cereals and their derivatives
                    does not prevent the use of mineral salts, chemicals and
                    other additives which are not products from cereals.
                    However, this does not apply to products which, although
                    they cannot be manufactured from the particular materials
                    specified in the list, can be produced from a material of the
                    same nature at an earlier stage of manufacture.
                    Example
                   In the case of an article of apparel of ex Chapter 62 made
                   from non-woven materials, if the use of only non-originating
                   yarn is allowed for this class of article, it is not possible to
                   start from non-woven cloth - even if non-woven cloth cannot
                   normally be made from yarn. In such cases, the starting
                   material would normally be at the stage before yarn - that is
                   the fibre stage.
                6. Where, in a rule in the list, two percentages are given for the
                   maximum value of non-originating materials that can be
                   used, then these percentages may not be added together. In
                   other words, the maximum value of all the non-originating
                   materials used may never exceed the highest of the
                   percentages given. Furthermore, the individual percentages
                   must not be exceeded in relation to the particular materials
                   they apply to.
                Note 4
                1. The term “natural fibres” is used in the list to refer to fibres
                   other than artificial or synthetic fibres. It is restricted to the
                   stages before spinning takes place, including waste, and,



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                               LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 337


   unless otherwise specified, includes fibres that have been
   carded, combed or otherwise processed but not spun.
2. The term "natural fibres" includes horsehair of heading No
   0503, silk of heading Nos 5002 and 5003 as well as the wool
   fibres, fine or coarse animal hair of heading Nos 5101 to
   5105, the cotton fibres of heading Nos 5201 to 5203 and the
   other vegetable fibres of heading Nos 5301 to 5305.
3. The terms “textile pulp”, “chemical materials” and “paper-
   making materials” are used in the list to describe the
   materials not classified in Chapters 50 to 63, which can be
   used to manufacture artificial, synthetic or paper fibres or
   yams.
4. The term "man-made staple fibres" is used in the list to refer
   to synthetic or artificial filament tow, staple fibres or waste,
   of heading Nos 5501 to 5507.
Note 5
1. Where for a given product in the list a reference is made to
   this note, the conditions set out in column 3 shall not be
   applied to any basic textile materials, used in the
   manufacture of this product, which, taken together, represent
   10 per cent or less of the total weight of all the basic textile
   materials used. (See also Notes 5.3 and 5.4 below).
2. However, the tolerance mentioned in Note 5.1 may only be
   applied to mixed products which have been made from two
   or more basic textile materials.
   The following are the basic textile materials —
       (1)     silk,
       (2)     wool,
       (3)     coarse animal hair,
       (4)     fine animal hair,
       (5)     horsehair,
       (6)     cotton,
       (7)     paper-making materials and paper,
       (8)     flax,
       (9)     true hemp,
       (10)    jute and other textile bast fibres,
       (11)    sisal and other textile fibres of the genus Agave,
       (12) coconut, abaca, ramie and other vegetable textile
               fibres,
       (13)    synthetic man-made filaments,
       (14)    artificial man-made filaments,
       (15)    current conducting filaments


–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 338]                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   (16)    synthetic     man-made      staple     fibres  of
                           polypropylene,
                   (17)    synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyester,
                   (18)    synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyamide,
                   (19)    synthetic     man-made      staple     fibres  of
                           polyacrylonitrile,
                   (20)    synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyimide,
                   (21)    synthetic     man-made      staple     fibres  of
                           polytetrafluoroethylene,
                   (22)    synthetic     man-made      staple     fibres  of
                           polyphenylene sulphide,
                   (23)    synthetic man-made staple fibres of polyvinyl
                           chloride,
                   (24)    other synthetic man-made staple fibres,
                   (25)    artificial man-made staple fibres of viscose,
                   (26)    other artificial man-made staple fibres,
                   (27)    yarn made of polyurethane segmented with
                           flexible segments of polyether whether or not
                           gimped,
                   (28)    yarn made of polyurethane segmented with
                           flexible segments of polyester whether or not
                           gimped,
                   (29)    products of heading No 5605 (metallied yarn)
                           incorporating strip consisting of a core of
                           aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film
                           whether or not coated with aluminium powder,
                           of a width not exceeding 5 mm, sandwiched by
                           means of a transparent or coloured adhesive
                           between two layers of plastic film,
                   (30)    other products of heading No 5605.
                Example
                A yarn of heading No 5205 made from cotton fibres of
                heading No 5203 and synthetic staple fibres of heading No
                5506 is a mixed yarn. Therefore, non-originating synthetic
                staple fibres that do not satisfy the origin rules (which
                require manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp)
                may be used up to a weight of 10 per cent of the yarn.
                Example
                A woollen fabric of heading No 5112 made from woollen
                yarn of heading No 5107 and synthetic yarn of staple fibres
                of heading No 5509 is a mixed fabric. Therefore synthetic
                yarn which does not satisfy the origin rules (which require


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 339


    manufacture from chemical materials or textile pulp) or
    woollen yarn that does not satisfy the origin rules (which
    require manufacture from natural fibres, not carded or
    combed or otherwise prepared for spinning) or a
    combination of the two may be used provided their total
    weight does not exceed 10 per cent of the weight of the
    fabric.
    Example
    Tufted textile fabric of heading No 5802 made from cotton
    yarn of heading No 5205 and cotton fabric of heading No
    5210 is only a mixed product if the cotton fabric is itself a
    mixed fabric being made from yarns classified in two
    separate headings or if the cotton yarns used are themselves
    mixtures.
    Example
   If the tufted textile fabric concerned had been made from
   cotton yam of heading No 5205 and synthetic fabric of
   heading No 5407, then, obviously, the yams used are two
   separate basic textile materials and the tufted textile fabric is
   accordingly a mixed product.
3. In the case of products incorporating “yarn made of
   polyurethane segmented with flexible segments of polyether
   whether or not gimped” this tolerance is 20 per cent in
   respect of this yarn.
4. In the case of products incorporating “strip consisting of a
   core of aluminium foil or of a core of plastic film whether or
   not coated with aluminium powder, of a width not exceeding
   5 mm, sandwiched by means of an adhesive between two
   layers of plastic film”, this tolerance is 30 per cent in respect
   of this strip.
Note 6
1. In the case of those textile products, which are marked in the
   list by a footnote referring to this Introductory Note, textile
   trimmings and accessories which do not satisfy the rule set
   out in the list in column 3 for the made up products
   concerned may be used provided that their weight does not
   exceed 10% of the total weight of all the textile materials
   incorporated.
   Textile trimmings and accessories are those classified in
   Chapters 50 to 63. Linings and interlinings are not be
   regarded as trimmings or accessories.

–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 340]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                2. Any non-textile trimmings and accessories or other materials
                   used which contain textiles do not have to satisfy the
                   conditions set out in column 3 even though they fall outside
                   the scope of Note 3.5.
                3. In accordance with Note 3.5, any non-originating non-textile
                   trimmings and accessories or other product, which do not
                   contain any textiles, may, anyway, be used freely where they
                   cannot be made from the materials listed in column 3.
                   Example
                   XXXI. For example, if a rule in the list says that for a
                   particular textile item, such as a blouse, yarn must be used,
                   this does not prevent the use of metal items, such as buttons,
                   because they cannot be made from textile materials.
                4. Where a percentage rule applies, the value of trimmings and
                   accessories must be taken into account when calculating the
                   value of the non-originating materials incorporated.
                Note 7
                1. For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex
                   2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, the “specific processes” are the
                   following —
                   (a) vacuum distillation;
                   (b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process
                       (For the purpose of subheadings 2712 90 31 to 2712 90
                       39, the term ‘crude’ shall be taken to apply to products
                       of a natural colour higher than 3 by the ASTM D 1500
                       method, if their viscosity at 100 °C is 9 x 10-6 m2 s-1 or
                       higher by ASTM D 445 method);
                   (c) cracking;
                   (d) reforming;
                   (e) extraction by means of selective solvents;
                   (f) the process comprising all the following operations:
                       processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or
                       sulphuric anhydride; neutralisation with alkaline agents;
                       decolorisation and purification with naturally active
                       earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;
                   (g) polymerisation;
                   (h) alkylation;
                   (i) isomerisation.
                2. For the purposes of heading Nos 2710, 2711 and 2712, the
                   “specific processes” are the following —
                   (a) vacuum distillation;
                   (b) redistillation by a very thorough fractionation process;


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                            LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                    [CH.293– 341


    (c) cracking;
    (d) reforming;
    (e) extraction by means of selective solvents;
    (f) the process comprising all the following operations:
        processing with concentrated sulphuric acid, oleum or
        sulphuric anhydride; neutralization with alkaline agents;
        decolorisation and purification with naturally active
        earth, activated earth, activated charcoal or bauxite;
    (g) polymerisation;
    (h) alkylation;
    (i) isomerisation;
    (j) in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex
        2710 only, desulphurisation with hydrogen resulting in a
        reduction of at least 85 per cent of the sulphur content of
        the products processed (ASTM D 1266-59 T method);
    (k) in respect of products falling within heading No 2710
        only, deparaffining by a process other than filtering;
    (l) in respect of heavy oils falling within heading No ex
        2710 only, treatment with hydrogen at a pressure of
        more than 20 bar and a temperature of more than 250°C
        with the use of a catalyst, other than to effect
        desulphurisation, when the hydrogen constitutes an
        active element in a chemical reaction. The further
        treatment with hydrogen of lubricating oils of heading
        No ex 2710 (e.g. hydrofinishing or decolorisation) in
        order, more especially, to improve colour or stability
        shall not, however, be deemed to be a specific process;
   (m) in respect of fuel oils falling within heading No ex 2710
        only, atmospheric distillation, on condition that less than
        30 per cent of these products distils, by volume,
        including losses, at 300°C by the ASTM D 86 method;
    (n) in respect of heavy oils other than gas oils and fuel oils
        falling within heading No. ex 2710 only, treatment by
        means of a high-frequency electrical brush-discharge.
3. For the purposes of heading Nos ex 2707, 2713 to 2715, ex
    2901, ex 2902 and ex 3403, simple operations such as
    cleaning, decanting, desalting, water separation, filtering,
    colouring, marking, obtaining a sulphur content as a result of
    mixing products with different sulphur contents, any
    combination of these operations or like operations do not
    confer origin.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 342]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                                ANNEX II TO FOURTH SCHEDULE
                 List of working or processing required to be carried out On
                     non-originating materials in order that the product
                          Manufactured can obtain originating status

                    HS Heading      Description of product         Working or Processing
                        no                                           carried out on non-
                                                                  originating materials that
                                                                  confers originating status
                          (1)                    (2)                    (3)     or      (4)
                Chapter 01          Live animals                  All the animals of Chapter 1
                                                                  used must be wholly obtained
                Chapter 02          Meat and edible meat          Manufacture in which all the
                                    offal                         materials of Chapters 1 and 2
                                                                  used must be wholly obtained
                ex Chapter 03       Fish and crustaceans,         All the materials of Chapter 3
                                    molluscs and other            used must be wholly obtained
                                    aquatic invertebrates;
                                    except for:
                0304                Fish fillets and other fish   Manufacture in which the
                                    meat (whether or not          value of any materials of
                                    minced), fresh, chilled or    Chapter 3 used does not
                                    frozen                        exceed 15 % of the ex-works
                                                                  price of the product
                0305                Fish, dried, salted or in     Manufacture in which the
                                    brine; smoked fish,           value of any materials of
                                    whether or not cooked         chapter 3 used does not exceed
                                    before or during the          15% of the ex-works price of
                                    smoking process; flours,      the product
                                    meals and pellets of fish,
                                    fit for human
                                    consumption
                ex 0306             Crustaceans, whether in       Manufacture in which the
                                    shell or not, dried, salted   value of any materials of
                                    or in brine; crustaceans;     Chapter 3 used does not
                                    in shell, cooked by           exceed 15% of the ex-works
                                    steaming or by boiling in     price of the product
                                    water, whether or not
                                    chilled, frozen, dried,
                                    salted or in brine; flours,
                                    meals and pellets of
                                    crustaceans, fit for human
                                    consumption
                ex 0307             Molluscs, whether in shell    Manufacture in which the
                                    or not, dried, salted or in   value of any materials of
                                    brine; aquatic                Chapter 3 used does not
                                    invertebrates other than      exceed 15% of ex-works price
                                    crustaceans and molluscs,     of the product
                                    dried, salted or in brine;
                                    flours, meals and pellets
                                    of crustaceans, fit for
                                    human consumption




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                        LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 343


    HS Heading     Description of product         Working or Processing
        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
          (1)                  (2)                     (3)      or      (4)

ex Chapter 04      Dairy produce; birds’         Manufacture in which all the
                   eggs; natural honey;          materials of Chapter 4 used
                   edible products of animal     must be wholly obtained
                   origin, not elsewhere
                   specified or included;
                   except for:
0403               Buttermilk, curdled milk      Manufacture in which:
                   and cream, yoghurt,
                   kephir and other              -     all the materials of
                   fermented or acidified        Chapter 4 used must be wholly
                   milk and cream, whether       obtained;
                   or not concentrated or        -     any fruit juice (except
                   containing added sugar or     those of pineapple, lime or
                   other sweetening matter       grapefruit) of heading No 2009
                   or flavoured or               used must already be
                   containing added fruit,       originating;
                   nuts or cocoa                 -     the value of any materials
                                                 of Chapter 17 used does not
                                                 exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product
ex Chapter 05      Products of animal origin,    Manufacture in which all the
                   not elsewhere specified or    materials of Chapter 5 used
                   included; except for:         must be wholly obtained
ex 0502            Prepared pigs’, hogs’ or      Cleaning, disinfecting, sorting
                   boars’ bristles and hair      and straightening of bristles
                                                 and hair
Chapter 06         Live trees and other          Manufacture in which:
                   plants; bulbs, roots and
                   the like; cut flowers and     -     all the materials of
                   ornamental foliage            Chapter 6 used must be wholly
                                                 obtained;
                                                 -     the value of all the
                                                 materials used does not exceed
                                                 50 % of the ex-works price of
                                                 the product
Chapter 07         Edible vegetables and         Manufacture in which all the
                   certain roots and tubers      materials of Chapter 7 used
                                                 must be wholly obtained;
Chapter 08         Edible fruit and nuts; peel   Manufacture in which:
                   of citrus fruits or melons
                                                 -    all the fruit and nuts used
                                                 must be wholly obtained;
                                                 -    the value of any materials
                                                 of Chapter 17 used does not
                                                 exceed 30 % of the value of
                                                 the ex-works price of the
                                                 product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 344]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                          (1)                (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

                ex Chapter 09    Coffee, tea, maté and        Manufacture in which all the
                                 spices; except for:          materials of Chapter 9 used
                                                              must be wholly obtained
                0901             Coffee, whether or not       Manufacture from materials of
                                 roasted or decaffeinated;    any heading
                                 coffee husks and skins;
                                 coffee substitutes
                                 containing coffee in any
                                 proportion
                0902             Tea, whether or not          Manufacture from materials of
                                 flavoured                    any heading
                ex 0910          Mixtures of spices           Manufacture from materials of
                                                              any heading
                Chapter 10       Cereals                      Manufacture in which all the
                                                              materials of Chapter 10 used
                                                              must be wholly obtained
                ex Chapter 11    Products of the milling      Manufacture in which all the
                                 industry; malt; starches;    cereals edible vegetables, roots
                                 insulin; wheat gluten;       and tubers of heading No 0714
                                 except for:                  or fruit used must be wholly
                                                              obtained
                ex 1106          Flour, meal and powder       Drying and milling of
                                 of the dried, shelled        leguminous vegetables of
                                 leguminous vegetables of     heading No 0708
                                 heading No 0713
                1101             Wheat or meslin flour        Manufacture from materials of
                                                              any heading except that of the
                                                              product
                Chapter 12       Oil seeds and oleaginous     Manufacture in which all the
                                 fruits; miscellaneous        materials of Chapter 12 used
                                 grains, seeds and fruit;     must be wholly obtained
                                 industrial or medicinal
                                 plants; straw and fodder
                1301             Lac; natural gums; resins,   Manufacture in which the
                                 gum-resins and oleoresins    value of any materials of
                                 (for example, balsams)       heading No 1301 used may not
                                                              exceed 50% of the ex-works
                                                              price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                     LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 345



    HS Heading     Description of product         Working or Processing
        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
         (1)                   (2)                     (3)      or      (4)

1302               Vegetable saps and
                   extracts; pectic
                   substances, pectinates and
                   pectates; agar- agar and
                   other mucilages and
                   thickeners, whether or not
                   modified, derived from
                   vegetable products;
                        -Mucilages and
                   thickeners, modified,
                   derived from vegetable
                   products
                        - Other                  Manufacture from non-
                                                 modified mucilages and
                                                 thickeners
                                                 Manufacture in which the
                                                 value of all the materials used
                                                 does not exceed 50 % of the
                                                 ex-works price of the product
Chapter 14         Vegetable plaiting            Manufacture in which all the
                   materials; vegetable          materials of Chapter 14 used
                   products not elsewhere        must be wholly obtained
                   specified or    included
ex Chapter 15      Animal or vegetable fats      Manufacture in which all the
                   and oils and their            materials used are classified
                   cleavage products;            within a heading other than
                   prepared edible fats;         that of the product
                   animals or vegetable
                   waxes; except for:
1501               Pig fat (including lard)
                   and poultry fat, other than
                   that of heading no. 0209
                   or 1503:
                   - Fats from bones or          Manufacture from materials of
                   waste                         any heading except those of
                                                 heading Nos 0203; 0206 or
                                                 0207 or bones of heading No
                                                 0506
                                                 Manufacture from meat or
                   - Other                       edible offal of swine of
                                                 heading No 0203 or 0206 or of
                                                 meat and edible offal of
                                                 poultry of heading No 0207




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 346]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                       no                                       carried out on non-
                                                             originating materials that
                                                             confers originating status
                         (1)                 (2)                   (3)     or     (4)

                1502            Fats of bovine animals,
                                sheep or goats, other than
                                those of heading No.
                                1503
                                - Fats from bones or         Manufacture from materials of
                                waste                        any heading except those of
                                                             heading Nos 0201, 0202, 0204
                                                             or 0206 or bones of heading
                                                             No 0506
                                - Other                      Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials of Chapter 2 used
                                                             must be wholly obtained
                1504            Fats and oils and their
                                fractions, of fish or
                                marine mammals,
                                whether or not refined,
                                but not chemically
                                modified:
                                - Solid fractions            Manufacture from materials of
                                                             any heading including other
                                                             materials of heading No 1504
                                - Other                      Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials of Chapters 2 and 3
                                                             used must be wholly obtained
                ex1505          Refined lanolin              Manufacture from crude wool
                                                             grease of heading No 1505

                1506            Other animals fats and
                                oils and their fractions,
                                whether or not refined,
                                but not chemically
                                modified:
                                - Solid fractions            Manufacture from materials of
                                                             any heading including other
                                                             materials of heading No 1506
                                - Other                      Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials of Chapter 2 used
                                                             must be wholly obtained




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                   LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                   [CH.293– 347



    HS Heading     Description of product          Working or Processing
        no                                           carried out on non-
                                                  originating materials that
                                                  confers originating status
         (1)                    (2)                     (3)      or      (4)

1507 to 1515       Vegetable oils and their
                   fractions:


                   Soya, ground nut, palm,        Manufacture in which all the
                   copra, kernel, babassu,        materials used are classified
                   tung and oiticica oil,         within a heading other than
                   myrtle wax and Japan           that of the product
                   wax, fractions of jojoba
                   oil and oils for technical
                   or industrial uses other
                   than the manufacture of
                   foodstuffs for human
                   consumption
                   - Solid fractions, except      Manufacture from other
                   for that of jojoba oil         materials of heading Nos. 1507
                                                  to 1515
                   - Other                        Manufacture in which all the
                                                  vegetable materials used must
                                                  be wholly obtained
1516               Animal or vegetable fats       Manufacture in which:
                   and oils and their             -    all the materials of
                   fractions, partly or wholly    Chapter 2 used must be wholly
                   hydrogenated,                  obtained;
                   interesterified, re-
                   esterified or elaidinized,     -    all the vegetable
                   whether or not refined,        materials used must be wholly
                   but not further prepared       obtained. However, materials
                                                  of headings 1507, 1508, 1511
                                                  and 1513 may be used
1517               Margarine; edible              Manufacture in which:
                   mixtures or preparations       - all the materials of Chapters 2
                   of animal or vegetable         and 4 used must be wholly
                   fats or oils or of fractions   obtained;
                   of different fats or oils of
                   this Chapter, other than       - all the vegetable materials
                   edible fats or oils or their   used must be wholly obtained.
                   fractions of heading No        However, materials of
                   1516                           headings 1507,1508, 1511 and
                                                  1513 may be used
ex Chapter 16      Preparations of meat, of       Manufacture from animals of
                   fish or of crustaceans,        Chapter 1
                   molluscs or other aquatic
                   invertebrates; except for:




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 348]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                          (1)                 (2)                   (3)     or      (4)

                1604 and 1605    Prepared or preserved        Manufacture in which the
                                 fish; caviar and caviar      value of any materials of
                                 substitutes prepared from    Chapter 3 used does not
                                 fish eggs; Crustaceans,      exceed 15% of the ex-works
                                 molluscs and other           price of the product
                                 aquatic invertebrates,
                                 prepared or preserved
                ex Chapter 17    Sugars and sugar             Manufacture in which all the
                                 confectionery; except for:   materials used are classified
                                                              within a heading other than
                                                              that of the product
                ex 1701          Cane or beet sugar and       Manufacture in which the
                                 chemically pure sucrose,     value of any materials of
                                 in solid form, flavoured     Chapter 17 used does not
                                 or coloured                  exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                              price of the product
                1702             Other sugars, including
                                 chemically pure lactose,
                                 maltose, glucose and
                                 fructose, in solid form;
                                 sugar syrups not
                                 containing added
                                 flavouring or colouring
                                 matter; artificial honey,
                                 whether or not mixed
                                 with natural honey;
                                 caramel:
                                 -    Chemically pure
                                 maltose and fructose
                                 -    Other sugars in solid   Manufacture from materials of
                                 form, flavoured or           any heading including other
                                 coloured                     materials of heading No 1702
                                 -    Other                   Manufacture in which the
                                                              value of any materials of
                                                              Chapter 17 used does not
                                                              exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                              price of the product
                                                              Manufacture in which all the
                                                              materials used must already be
                                                              originating
                ex 1703          Molasses resulting from      Manufacture in which the
                                 the extraction or refining   value of any materials of
                                 of sugar, flavoured or       Chapter 17 used does not
                                 coloured                     exceed 30% o the ex-works
                                                              price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 349



    HS Heading     Description of product         Working or Processing
        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
          (1)                   (2)                    (3)      or      (4)
1704               Sugar confectionery           Manufacture in which:
                   (including white              -     all the materials used are
                   chocolate), not containing    classified within a heading o
                   cocoa                         ther than that of the product;
                                                 -     the value of any materials
                                                 of Chapter 17 used does not
                                                 exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product
ex Chapter 18      Cocoa and cocoa               Manufacture in which:
                   preparations; except for:     -     all the materials used are
                                                 classified within a heading
                                                 other than that of the product;
                                                 -     the value of any materials
                                                 of Chapter 17 used does not
                                                 exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product
ex 1806            Chocolate and other food      Manufacture in which all the
                   preparations containing       materials used are classified
                   cocoa:                        within a heading other than
                   - containing 20% or less      that of the product
                   by weight of materials of
                   Chapter 17
1901               Malt extract; food
                   preparations of flour,
                   meal, starch or malt
                   extract, not containing
                   cocoa or containing less
                   than 40% by weight of
                   cocoa calculated on a
                   totally defatted basis, not
                   elsewhere specified or
                   included; food
                   preparations of goods of
                   heading Nos 0401 to
                   0404, not containing
                   cocoa or containing less
                   than 5% by weight of
                   cocoa calculated on a
                   totally defatted basis, not
                   elsewhere specified or
                   included:
                                                 Manufacture from cereals of
                   - Malt extract
                                                 Chapter 10
                   - Other                       Manufacture in which:
                                                 -     all the materials used are
                                                 classified within a heading
                                                 other than that of the product;
                                                 -     the value of any materials
                                                 of Chapter 17 used does not
                                                 exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 350]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                   HS Heading    Description of product        Working or Processing
                       no                                        carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                       (1)                  (2)                     (3)      or     (4)

                1902            Pasta, whether or not
                                cooked or stuffed (with
                                meat or other substances)
                                or otherwise prepared,
                                such as spaghetti,
                                macaroni, noodles,
                                lasagna, gnocchi, ravioli,
                                cannelloni; couscous,
                                whether or not prepared:
                                -     Containing 20% less     Manufacture in which all the
                                by weight of meat, meat       cereals and derivatives (except
                                offal, fish, crustaceans or   durum wheat and its
                                molluscs                      derivatives) used must be
                                                              wholly obtained
                                -    Containing more          Manufacture in which:
                                than 20% by weight of         -    all cereals and derivatives
                                meat, meat offal, fish,       (except durum wheat and its
                                crustaceans or molluscs       derivatives) used must be
                                                              wholly obtained;
                                                              -    all the materials of
                                                              Chapters 2 and 3 used must be
                                                              wholly obtained
                1903            Tapioca and substitutes       Manufacture from materials of
                                therefor prepared from        any heading except potato
                                starch, in the form of        starch of heading No. 1108
                                flakes, grains, pearls,
                                siftings or in similar
                                forms
                1904            Prepared foods obtained       Manufacture:
                                by the swelling or
                                roasting of cereals or        -     from materials not
                                cereal products (for          classified within heading No
                                example, com flakes);         1806;
                                cereals (other than maize     -     in which all the cereals
                                (corn)) in grain from or in   and flour (except durum wheat
                                the form of flakes or other   and its derivates and Zea
                                worked grains (except         indurate maize) used must be
                                flour and meal),              wholly obtained;
                                precooked, or otherwise
                                prepared, not elsewhere       - in which the value of any
                                specified or included         materials of Chapter 17 used
                                                              does not exceed 30% of the ex-
                                                              works price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 351



    HS Heading         Description of product        Working or Processing
          no                                           carried out on non-
                                                    originating materials that
                                                    confers originating status
          (1)                       (2)                   (3)      or      (4)
1905                   Bread, pastry, cakes         Manufacture in which all the
                       biscuits and other bakers’   products of Chapter 11 used
                       wares, whether or not        are originating
                       containing cocoa;
                       communion wafers,
                       empty cachets of a kind
                       suitable for
                       pharmaceutical use,
                       sealing wafers, rice paper
                       and similar products
ex Chapter 20          Preparations of              Manufacture in which all the
                       vegetables, fruit, nuts or   fruit, nuts or vegetables used
                       other parts of plants;       must be wholly obtained
                       except for:
ex 2001                Yams, sweet potatoes and     Manufacture in which all the
                       similar edible parts of      materials used are classified
                       plants containing 5% or      within a heading other than
                       more by weight of starch     that of the product
                       prepared or preserved by
                       vinegar or acetic acid
ex 2004 and ex 2005    Potatoes in the form of      Manufacture in which all the
                       flour, meal or flakes,       materials used are classified
                       prepared or preserved        within a heading other than
                       otherwise than by vinegar    that of the product
                       or acetic acid
2006                   Vegetables, fruit, nuts,     Manufacture in which the
                       fruit-peel and other parts   value of any materials of
                       of plants, preserved by      Chapter 17 used does not
                       sugar (drained, glace or     exceed 30% of the ex-works
                       crystallized)                price of the product
2007                   Jams, fruit jellies,
                       marmalades, fruit or nut
                       puree and fruit or nut
                       pastes, being cooked
                       preparations, whether or
                       not containing added
                       sugar or other sweetening
                       matter:
                                                    Manufacture in which all the
                       - Containing 20% or less     materials used are classified
                       by weight of added sugar     within a heading other than
                       or other sweetening          that of the product
                       matter
                                                    Manufacture in which:
                                                    -     all the materials used are
                       - Containing more than       classified within a heading
                       20% by weight of added       other than that of the product;
                       sugar or other sweetening
                       matter                       -     the value of any materials
                                                    of Chapter 17 used does not
                                                    exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                    price of the product



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 352]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                    HS Heading     Description of product        Working or Processing
                        no                                         carried out on non-
                                                                originating materials that
                                                                confers originating status
                          (1)                  (2)                    (3)      or      (4)
                ex 2008          - Nuts, not containing         Manufacture in which the
                                 added sugar or spirit          value of the originating nuts
                                                                and oil seeds of heading Nos
                                                                0801,0802 and 1202 to 1207
                                                                used exceeds 60% of the ex-
                                                                works price of the product
                                 - Peanut butter; mixtures      Manufacture in which all the
                                 based on cereals; palm         materials used are classified
                                 hearts; maize (corn)           within a heading other than
                                                                that of the product
                                 - Other except for fruit and   Manufacture in which:
                                 nuts cooked otherwise than     -     all the materials used are
                                 by steaming or boiling in      classified within a heading
                                 water, not containing added    other than that of the product;
                                 sugar, frozen
                                                                -     the value of any materials
                                                                of Chapter 17 used does not
                                                                exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                                price of the product
                2009             Fruit juices (including
                                 grape must) and vegetable
                                 juices, unfermented and not
                                 containing added spirit,
                                 whether or not containing
                                 added sugar or other
                                 sweetening matter:
                                 - Containing 20% or less by    Manufacture in which all the
                                 weight of added sugar or       materials used are classified
                                 other sweetening matter        within a heading other than
                                                                that of the product
                                 - Containing more than         Manufacture in which:
                                 20% by weight of added         -     all the materials used are
                                 sugar or other sweetening      classified within a heading
                                 matter                         other than that of the product;
                                                                -     the value of any materials
                                                                of Chapter 17 used does not
                                                                exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                                price of the product
                ex Chapter 21    Miscellaneous edible           Manufacture in which all the
                                 preparations; except for:      materials used are classified
                                                                within a heading other than
                                                                that of the product
                2101             Extracts, essences and         Manufacture in which:
                                 concentrates, of coffee, tea   -     all the materials used are
                                 or mate and preparations       classified within a heading
                                 with a basis of these          other than that of the product;
                                 products or with a basis of
                                 coffee, tea or mate; roasted   -    all the chicory used must
                                 chicory and other roasted      be wholly obtained
                                 coffee substitutes, and
                                 extracts, essences and
                                 concentrates thereof




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                       LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 353



    HS Heading     Description of product       Working or Processing
        no                                        carried out on non-
                                               originating materials that
                                               confers originating status
          (1)                  (2)                   (3)      or      (4)

2103               Sauces and preparations     Manufacture in which all the
                   therefor; mixed             materials used are classified
                   condiments and mixed        within a heading other than
                   seasonings; mustard flour   that of the product. However,
                   and meal and prepared       mustard flour or meal or
                   mustard:                    prepared mustard may be used
                   - Sauces and preparations   Manufacture from materials of
                                               any heading
                   therefor, mixed
                   condiments and mixed
                   seasonings
                   - Mustard flour and meal    Manufacture from materials of
                   and prepared mustard        any heading


ex 2104            Soups and broths and        Manufacture from materials of
                   preparations therefor       any heading except prepared or
                                               preserved vegetables of
                                               heading Nos 2002 to 2005

2106               Food preparations not
                   elsewhere specified or
                   included:
                   - Containing 20% or less    Manufacture in which all the
                   by weight of materials of   materials used are classified
                   Chapters 4 and 17           within a heading other than
                                               that of the product

                   - Containing more than      Manufacture in which:
                   20% by weight of
                                               -     all the materials used are
                   materials of chapters 4
                                               classified within a heading
                   and 17
                                               other than that of the product;
                                               -     the value of any materials
                                               of Chapter 17 used does not
                                               exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                               price of the product
Chapter 22         Beverages, spirits and      Manufacture in which:
                   vinegar; except for:
                                               -     all the materials used are
                                               classified within a heading
                                               other than that of the product;
                                               -    all the grapes or any
                                               material derived from grapes
                                               used must be wholly obtained




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 354]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                         (1)                  (2)                   (3)      or      (4)
                2202             Waters, including mineral    Manufacture in which:
                                 waters and aerated waters,
                                                              - all the materials used are
                                 containing added sugar or
                                                              classified within a heading
                                 other sweetening matter
                                                              other than that of the product;
                                 or flavoured, and other
                                 non-alcoholic beverages,     -     the value of any materials
                                 not including fruit or       of Chapter 17 used does not
                                 vegetable juices of          exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                 heading No 2009              price of the product;
                                                              -     any fruit juice used
                                                              (except for orange, grape,
                                                              pineapple, lime and grapefruit
                                                              juices) must already be
                                                              originating
                2207             Undenatured ethyl            Manufacture:
                                 alcohol of an alcoholic
                                                              -     using materials not
                                 strength by volume of
                                                              classified in headings 2207 or
                                 80% vol or higher;
                                                              2208,
                                 ethyl alcohol and
                                 other spirits, denatured,    -     in which all the grapes or
                                 of any strength              any materials derived from
                                                              grapes used must be wholly
                                                              obtained or if all the other
                                                              materials used are already
                                                              originating, arrack may be
                                                              used up to a limit of 5% by
                                                              volume
                2208             Undenatured ethyl            Manufacture:
                                 alcohol of an alcoholic
                                 strength by volume of        -     from materials not
                                 less than 80% vol;           classified within heading Nos
                                 spirits, liqueurs and        2207 or 2208,
                                 other spirituous             -     in which all the grapes or
                                 beverages                    any material derived from
                                                              grapes used must be wholly
                                                              obtained or if all the other
                                                              materials used are already
                                                              originating, arrack may be
                                                              used up to a limit of 5% by
                                                              volume
                ex Chapter 23    Residues and waste           Manufacture in which all the
                                 from the food industries;    materials used are classified
                                 prepared animal fodder;      within a heading other than
                                 except for:                  that of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                     LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 355



    HS Heading     Description of product          Working or Processing
        no                                           carried out on non-
                                                  originating materials that
                                                  confers originating status
          (1)                   (2)                     (3)      or      (4)

ex 2301            Whale meal; flours, meals      Manufacture in which all the
                   and pellets of fish or of      materials of Chapters 2 and 3
                   crustaceans, molluscs or       used must be wholly obtained
                   other aquatic
                   invertebrates, unfit for
                   human consumption
ex 2303            Residues from the              Manufacture in which all the
                   manufacture of starch          maize used must be wholly
                   from maize (excluding          obtained
                   concentrated steeping
                   liquors), of a protein
                   content, calculated on the
                   dry product, exceeding
                   40% by weight
2306               Oil cake and other solid       Manufacture in which all the
                   residues resulting from        olives used must be wholly
                   the extraction of olive oil,   obtained
                   containing more than 3%
                   of olive oil
2309               Preparations of a kind         Manufacture in which:
                   used in animal feeding         -    all the cereals, sugar or
                                                  molasses, meat or milk used
                                                  must already be originating;
                                                  -    all the materials of
                                                  Chapter 3 used must be wholly
                                                  obtained
ex Chapter 24      Tobacco and                    Manufacture in which all the
                   manufactured tobacco           materials of Chapter 24 used
                   substitutes; except for:       must be wholly obtained
2402               Cigars, cheroots,              Manufacture in which at least
                   cigarillos and cigarettes,     60% by weight of the
                   of tobacco or of tobacco       unmanufactured tobacco or
                   substitutes                    tobacco refuse of heading No
                                                  2401 used must already be
                                                  originating
ex 2403            Smoking tobacco                Manufacture in which at least
                                                  60% by weight of the
                                                  unmanufactured tobacco or
                                                  tobacco refuse of heading No
                                                  2401 used must already be
                                                  originating
ex Chapter 25      Salt; sulphur; earths and      Manufacture in which all the
                   stone; plastering              materials used are classified
                   materials, lime and            within a heading other than
                   cement; except for:            that of the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 356]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                          (1)                (2)                    (3)     or      (4)
                ex 2504          Natural crystalline          Enriching of the carbon
                                 graphite, with enriched      content, purifying and grinding
                                 carbon content, purified     of crude crystalline graphite
                                 and ground
                ex 2515          Marble, merely cut, by       Cutting, by sawing or
                                 sawing or otherwise, into    otherwise, of marble (even if
                                 blocks or slabs of a         already sawn) of a thickness
                                 rectangular (including       exceeding 25 cm
                                 square) shape, of a
                                 thickness not exceeding
                                 25 cm
                ex 2516          Granite, porphyry, basalt,   Cutting, by sawing or
                                 sandstone and other          otherwise, of stone (even if
                                 monumental and building      already sawn) of a thickness
                                 stone, merely cut, by        exceeding 25 cm
                                 sawing or otherwise, into
                                 blocks or slabs of a
                                 rectangular (including
                                 square) shape, of
                                 thickness not exceeding
                                 25 cm
                ex 2518          Calcined dolomite            Calcination of dolomite not
                                                              calcined
                ex 2519          Crushed natural              Manufacture in which all the
                                 magnesium carbonate          materials used are classified
                                 (magnesite), in              within a heading other than
                                 hermetically-sealed          that of the product. However,
                                 containers, and              natural magnesium carbonate
                                 magnesium oxide,             (magnesite) may be used
                                 whether or not pure, other
                                 than fused magnesia or
                                 dead-burned (sintered)
                                 magnesia
                ex 2520          Plasters specially           Manufacture in which the
                                 prepared for dentistry       value of all the materials used
                                                              does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                                              works price of the product
                ex 2524          Natural asbestos fibres      Manufacture from asbestos
                                                              concentrate
                ex 2525          Mica powder                  Grinding of mica or mica
                                                              waste
                ex 2530          Earth colours, calcined or   Calcination or grinding of
                                 powdered                     earth colours
                Chapter 26       Ores, slag and ash           Manufacture in which all the
                                                              materials used are classified
                                                              within a heading other than
                                                              that of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 357



    HS Heading     Description of product         Working or Processing
        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
          (1)                  (2)                     (3)      or      (4)

ex Chapter 27      Mineral fuels, mineral        Manufacture in which all the
                   oils and products of their    materials used are classified
                   distillation; bituminous      within a heading other than
                   substances; mineral           that of the product
                   waxes; except for:
ex 2707            Oils in which the weight      Operations of refining and/or
                   of the aromatic               one or more specific
                   constituents exceeds that     process(es)1
                   of the nonaromatic
                   constituents, being oils
                   similar to mineral oils       1
                                                  For the special conditions
                   obtained by distillation of   relating to “specific processes”
                   high temperature coal tar,    see Introductory Notes 7.1 and
                   of which more than 65%        7.3
                   by volume distils at a
                   temperature of up to
                   250°C (including
                   mixtures of petroleum
                   spirit and benzole), for
                   use as power or heating
                   fuels
ex 2709            Crude oils obtained from      Destructive distillation of
                   bituminous minerals           bituminous materials
2710               Petroleum oils and oils       Operations of refining and/or
                   obtained from bituminous      one or more specific
                   materials, other than         process(es)1
                   crude; preparations not
                   elsewhere specified or
                   included, containing by       1
                                                  For the special conditions
                   weight 70% or more of         relating to “specific processes”
                   petroleum oils or of oils     see Introductory Note 7.2
                   obtained from bituminous
                   materials, these oils being
                   the basic constituents of
                   the preparations
2711               Petroleum gases and other     Operations of refining and/or
                   gaseous hydrocarbons          one or more specific
                                                 process(es)1
                                                 1
                                                  For the special conditions
                                                 relating to “specific processes”
                                                 see Introductory Note 7.2




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 358]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                         (1)                 (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

                2712             Petroleum jelly; paraffin    Operations of refining and/or
                                 wax, microcrystalline        one or more specifc
                                 petroleum wax, slack         process(es)1
                                 wax, ozokerite, lignite      1
                                 wax, peat wax, other          For the special conditions
                                 mineral waxes and similar    relating to “specific processes”
                                 products obtained by         see Introductory Note 7.2
                                 synthesis or by other
                                 processes, whether or not
                                 coloured
                2713             Petroleum coke,              Operations of refining and/or
                                 petroleum bitumen and        one or more specific
                                 other residues of            process(es)1
                                 petroleum oils or of oils    1
                                 obtained from bituminous      For the special conditions
                                 materials                    relating to “specific processes”
                                                              see Introductory Notes 7.1 and
                                                              7.3
                2714             Bitumen and asphalt,         Operations of refining and/or
                                 natural; bituminous or oil   one or more specific
                                 shale and tar sands;         process(es)1
                                 asphaltites and asphaltic    1
                                 rocks                         For the special conditions
                                                              relating to “specific processes”
                                                              see Introductory Notes 7.1 and
                                                              7.3
                2715             Bituminous mixtures          Operations of refining and/or
                                 based on natural asphalt,    one or more specific
                                 on natural bitumen, on       process(es)1
                                 petroleum bitumen, on        1
                                                               For the special conditions
                                 mineral tar or on mineral    relating to “specific processes”
                                 tar pitch (for example,      see Introductory Notes 7,1 and
                                 bituminous mastics,          7.3
                                 cutbacks)
                ex Chapter 28    Inorganic chemicals;         Manufacture in which all the
                                 organic or inorganic         materials used are classified
                                 compounds of precious        within a heading other than
                                 metals, of rare- earth       that of the product. However,
                                 metals, of radioactive       materials classified within the
                                 elements or of isotopes;     same heading may be used
                                 except for:                  provided their value does not
                                                              exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                              price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                     LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 359



    HS Heading     Description of product        Working or Processing
        no                                         carried out on non-
                                                originating materials that
                                                confers originating status
          (1)                  (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

ex 2805            “Mischmetall”                Manufacture by electrolytic or
                                                thermal treatment in which the
                                                value of all the materials used
                                                does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                                works price of the product
ex 2811            Sulphur trioxide             Manufacture from sulphur
                                                dioxide
ex 2833            Aluminium sulphate           Manufacture in which the
                                                value of all the materials used
                                                does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                                works price of the product
ex 2840            Sodium perborate             Manufacture from disodium
                                                tetraborate pentahydrate
ex Chapter 29      Organic chemicals;           Manufacture in which all the
                   except for:                  materials used are classified
                                                within a heading other than
                                                that of the product. However,
                                                materials classified within the
                                                same heading may be used
                                                provided their value does not
                                                exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                price of the product
ex 2901            Acyclic hydrocarbons for     Operations of refining and/or
                   use as power or heating      one or more specific
                   fuels                        process(es)1
                                                1
                                                 For the special conditions
                                                relating to “specific processes”
                                                see Introductory Notes 7.1 and
                                                7.3
ex 2902            Cyclanes and cyclones        Operations of refining and/or
                   (other than azulenes),       one or more specific
                   benzene, toluene, xylenes,   process(es)1.
                   for use as power or          1
                                                 For the special conditions
                   heating fuels
                                                relating to “specific processes”
                                                see Introductory Notes 7.1 and
                                                7.3
ex 2905            Metal alcoholates of         Manufacture from materials of
                   alcohols of this heading     any heading, including other
                   and of ethanol               materials of heading No 2905.
                                                However, metal alcoholates of
                                                this heading may be used,
                                                provided their value does not
                                                exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                price of the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 360]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                          (1)                (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

                2915             Saturated acyclic            Manufacture from materials of
                                 monocarboxylic acids and     any heading. However, the
                                 their anhydrides, halides,   value of all the materials of
                                 peroxides and                headings Nos 2915 and 2916
                                 peroxyacids; their           used may not exceed 20% of
                                 halogenated, sulphonated,    the ex-works price of the
                                 nitrated or nitrosated       product
                                 derivatives
                ex 2932          -     Internal ethers and    Manufacture from materials of
                                 their halogenated,           any heading. However, the
                                 sulphonated, nitrated or     value of all the materials of
                                 nitrosated derivatives       heading No 2909 used may not
                                                              exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                              price of the product
                                 -     Cyclic aceals and      Manufacture from materials of
                                 internal hemiacetals and     any heading
                                 their halogenated,
                                 sulphonated, nitrated or
                                 nitrosated derivatives
                2933             Heterocyclic compounds       Manufacture from materials of
                                 with nitrogen                any heading. However, the
                                 hetroatom(s) only            value of all the materials of
                                                              headings Nos 2932 and 2933
                                                              used may not exceed 20% of
                                                              the ex-works price of the
                                                              product
                2934             Nucleic acids and their      Manufacture from materials of
                                 salts; other heterocyclic    any heading. However, the
                                 compounds                    value of all the materials of
                                                              headings Nos 2932, 2933 and
                                                              2934 used may not exceed
                                                              20% of the ex-works price of
                                                              the product
                ex Chapter 30    Pharmaceutical products;     Manufacture in which all the
                                 except for:                  materials used are classified
                                                              within a heading other than
                                                              that of the product However,
                                                              materials classified within the
                                                              same heading may be used
                                                              provided their value does not
                                                              exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                              price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                     LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 361



   HS Heading      Description of product         Working or Processing
       no                                           carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
       (1)                     (2)                    (3)     or      (4)

3002               Human blood; animal
                   blood prepared for
                   therapeutic, prophylactic
                   or diagnostic uses;
                   antisera and other blood
                   fractions and modified
                   immunological products,
                   whether or not obtained
                   by means of
                   biotechnological
                   processes; vaccines,
                   toxins, cultures of micro-
                   organisms (excluding
                   yeasts) and similar
                   products:
                   - Products consisting of
                   two or more constituents
                   which have been mixed         Manufacture from materials of
                   together for therapeutic or   any heading, including other
                   prophylactic uses or          materials of heading No 3002.
                   unmixed products for          The materials of this
                   these uses, put up in         description may also be used,
                   measured doses or in          provided their value does not
                   forms or packings for         exceed 20% of the ex-works
                   retail sale                   price of the product

                   -Other
                                                 Manufacture from materials of
                   ■ human blood
                                                 any heading, including other
                   ■ animal blood prepared       materials of heading No 3002.
                   for therapeutic or            The materials of this
                   prophylactic uses             description may also be used,
                                                 provided their value does not
                   ■ blood fractions other       exceed 20% of the ex-works
                   than antisera,                price of the product
                   haemoglobin, blood            Manufacture from materials of
                   globulins and serum           any heading, including other
                   globulins                     materials of heading No 3002.
                                                 The materials of this
                   ■ haemoglobin, blood          description may also be used,
                   globulins and serum           provided their value does not
                   globulins                     exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product
                   ■ other
                                                 Manufacture from materials of
                                                 any heading, including other
                                                 materials of heading No 3002.
                                                 The materials of this
                                                 description may also be used,
                                                 provided their value does not
                                                 exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 362]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                    HS Heading    Description of product     Working or Processing
                        no                                     carried out on non-
                                                            originating materials that
                                                            confers originating status
                         (1)                  (2)                 (3)      or      (4)
                                                            Manufacture from materials of
                                                            any heading, including other
                                                            materials of heading No 3002.
                                                            The materials of this
                                                            description may also be used,
                                                            provided their value does not
                                                            exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                            price of the product
                                                            Manufacture from materials of
                                                            any heading, including other
                                                            materials of heading No 3002.
                                                            The materials of this
                                                            description may also be used,
                                                            provided their value does not
                                                            exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                            price of the product
                3003 and 3004    Medicaments (excluding
                                 goods of heading No
                                 3002, 3005 or 3006);
                                 - Obtained from amikacin   Manufacture in which all the
                                 of heading No 2941         materials used are classified
                                                            within a heading other than
                                                            that of the product. However,
                                                            materials of heading 3003 or
                                                            3004 may be used, provided
                                                            their value, taken together,
                                                            does not exceed 20% of the ex-
                                                            works price of the product
                                 ■ Other                    Manufacture in which:
                                                            -     all the materials used are
                                                            classified within a heading
                                                            other than that of the product.
                                                            However, materials of heading
                                                            No 3003 or 3004 may be used
                                                            provided their value, taken
                                                            together, does not exceed 20%
                                                            of the ex-works price of the
                                                            product;
                                                            -     the value of all the
                                                            materials used does not exceed
                                                            50% of the ex-works price of
                                                            the product
                ex Chapter 31    Fertilizers; except for:   Manufacture in which all the
                                                            materials used are classified
                                                            within a heading other than
                                                            that of the product. However,
                                                            materials classified within the
                                                            same heading may be used,
                                                            provided their value does not
                                                            exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                            price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                   LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 363



    HS Heading     Description of product         Working or Processing
        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
          (1)                   (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

ex 3105            Mineral or chemical           Manufacture in which:
                   fertilizers containing two    -     all the materials used are
                   or three of the fertilizing   classified within a heading
                   elements nitrogen,            other than that of the product.
                   phosphorous and               However, materials classified
                   potassium; other              within the same heading may
                   fertilizers; goods of this    be used, provided their value
                   Chapter, in tablets or        does not exceed 20% of the ex-
                   similar forms or in           works price of the product;
                   packages of a gross
                   weight not exceeding 10
                   kg, except for:
                   -    Sodium nitrate
                   -    Calcium cyanamide
                   -    Potassium sulphate
                   -    Magnesium                -     the value of all the
                   potassium sulphate            materials used does not exceed
                                                 50% of the ex-works price of
                                                 the product
ex Chapter 32      Tanning or dyeing             Manufacture in which all the
                   extracts; tannins and their   materials used are classified
                   derivatives; dyes,            within a heading other than
                   pigments and other            that of the product. However,
                   colouring matter; paints      materials classified within the
                   and varnishes; putty and      same heading may be used,
                   other mastics; inks;          provided their value does not
                   except for:                   exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product
ex 3201            Tannins and their salts,      Manufacture from tanning
                   ethers, esters and other      extracts of vegetable origin
                   derivatives
3205               Colour lakes; preparations    Manufacture from materials of
                   as specified in Note 3 to     any heading, except headings
                   this Chapter based on         Nos 3203, 3204 and 3205.
                   colour lakes1                 However, materials from
                   1
                                                 heading No 3205 may be used
                    Note 3 to chapter 32 says    provided their value does not
                   that these preparations are   exceed 20% of the ex-works
                   those of a kind used for      price of the product
                   colouring any material or
                   used as ingredients in the
                   manufacturing of
                   colouring preparations,
                   provided they are not
                   classified in another
                   heading in Chapter 32




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 364]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product          Working or Processing
                        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                                 originating materials that
                                                                 confers originating status
                          (1)                 (2)                      (3)      or      (4)
                ex Chapter 33    Essential oils and              Manufacture in which all the
                                 resinoids; perfumery,           materials used are classified
                                 cosmetic or toilet              within a heading other than
                                 preparations; except for:       that of the product However,
                                                                 materials classified within the
                                                                 same heading may be used,
                                                                 provided their value does not
                                                                 exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                                 price of the product
                3301             Essential oils (terpeneless     Manufacture from materials of
                                 or not), including              any heading, including
                                 concretes and absolutes;        materials of a different
                                 resinoids; extracted            “group”1 in this heading.
                                 oleoresins; concentrates        However, materials of the
                                 of essential oils in fats, in   same group may be used,
                                 fixed oils, in waxes or the     provided their value does not
                                 like, obtained by               exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                 enfleurage or maceration;       price of the product
                                 terpenic byproducts of the      1
                                 deterpenation of essential       A “group” is regarded as any
                                 oils; aqueous distillates       part of the heading separated
                                 and aqueous solutions of        from the rest by a semi-colon.
                                 essential oils
                ex Chapter 34    Soap, organic surface-          Manufacture in which all the
                                 active agents, washing          materials used are classified
                                 preparations, lubricating       within a heading other than
                                 preparations, artificial        that of the product However,
                                 waxes, prepared waxes,          materials classified within the
                                 polishing or scouring           same heading may be used,
                                 preparations, candles and       provided their value does not
                                 similar articles, modeling      exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                 pastes, “dental waxes”          price of the product
                                 and dental preparations
                                 with a basis of plaster;
                                 except for:
                ex 3403          Lubricating preparations        Operations of refining and/or
                                 containing petroleum oils       one or more specific
                                 or oils obtained from           process(es)1
                                 bituminous minerals,            1
                                 provided they represent          For the special conditions
                                 less than 70% by weight         relating to “specific processes”
                                                                 see Introductory
                                                                 Notes 7.1 and 7.3




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                        LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 365



    HS Heading     Description of product        Working or Processing
        no                                         carried out on non-
                                                originating materials that
                                                confers originating status
         (1)                    (2)                   (3)      or      (4)

3404               Artificial waxes and         Manufacture in which all the
                   prepared waxes:              materials used are classified
                                                within a heading other than
                   -     With a basis of
                                                that of the product. However,
                   paraffin, petroleum
                                                materials classified within the
                   waxes, waxes obtained
                                                same heading may be used
                   from bituminous
                                                provided their value does not
                   minerals, slack wax or
                                                exceed 50% of the ex-works
                   scale wax
                                                price of the product
                                                Manufacture from materials of
                   -    Other                   any heading, except:
                                                -    hydrogenated oils having
                                                the character of waxes of
                                                heading No 1516;
                                                -    fatty acids not chemically
                                                defined or industrial fatty
                                                alcohols having the character
                                                of waxes of heading No 3823;
                                                -    materials of heading No
                                                3404
                                                However, these materials may
                                                be used provided their value
                                                does not exceed 20% of the ex-
                                                works price of the product
ex Chapter 35      Albuminoidal substances;     Manufacture in which all the
                   modified starches; glues;    materials used are classified
                   enzymes; except for:         within a heading other than
                                                that of the product However,
                                                materials classified within the
                                                same heading may be used
                                                provided their value does not
                                                exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                price of the product
3505               Dextrins and other
                   modified starches (for
                   example, pregelatinised
                   or esterified starches);
                   glues based on starches,
                   or on dextrins or other
                   modified starches:
                   - Starch ethers and esters   Manufacture from materials of
                                                any heading, including other
                                                materials of heading No 3505
                   - Other                      Manufacture from materials of
                                                any heading, except those of
                                                heading No 1108




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 366]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product          Working or Processing
                        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                                 originating materials that
                                                                 confers originating status
                          (1)                 (2)                      (3)      or      (4)

                ex 3507          Prepared enzymes not            Manufacture in which the
                                 elsewhere specified or          value of all the materials used
                                 included                        does not exceed 50 % of the
                                                                 ex-works price of the product
                Chapter 36       Explosives; pyrotechnic         Manufacture in which all the
                                 products; matches;              materials used are classified
                                 pyrophoric alloys; certain      within a heading other than
                                 combustible preparations        that of the product. However,
                                                                 materials classified within the
                                                                 same heading may be used
                                                                 provided their value does not
                                                                 exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                                 price of the product
                ex Chapter 37    Photographic or                 Manufacture in which all the
                                 cinematographic goods;          materials used are classified
                                 except for:                     within a heading other than
                                                                 that of the product. However,
                                                                 materials classified within the
                                                                 same heading may be used
                                                                 provided their value does not
                                                                 exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                                 price of the product
                3701             Photographic plates and
                                 film in the flat, sensitized,
                                 unexposed, of any
                                 material other than paper,
                                 paperboard or textiles;
                                 instant print film in the
                                 flat, sensitized,
                                 unexposed, whether or
                                 not in packs:
                                 - Instant print film for        Manufacture in which all the
                                 colour photography, in          materials used are classified
                                 packs                           within a heading other than
                                                                 heading Nos 3701 or 3702.
                                                                 However, materials From
                                                                 heading No 3702 may be used
                                                                 provided their value does not
                                                                 exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                                 price of the product
                                 - Other                         Manufacture in which all the
                                                                 materials used are classified
                                                                 within a heading other than
                                                                 heading No 3701 or 3702.
                                                                 However, materials from
                                                                 heading Nos 3701 and 3702
                                                                 may be used provided their
                                                                 value taken together, does not
                                                                 exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                                 price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                        LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 367



    HS Heading     Description of product          Working or Processing
        no                                           carried out on non-
                                                  originating materials that
                                                  confers originating status
          (1)                   (2)                     (3)      or       (4)
3702               Photographic film in rolls,    Manufacture in which all the
                   sensitized,                    materials used are classified
                   unexposed, of any              within a heading other than
                   material other than paper,     heading No 3701 or 3702
                   paperboard or textiles;
                   instant print film in rolls,
                   sensitized, unexposed
3704               Photographic plates, film      Manufacture in which all the
                   paper, paperboard and          materials used are classified
                   textiles, exposed but not      within a heading other than
                   developed                      heading No 3701 or 3704.
ex Chapter 38      Miscellaneous chemical         Manufacture in which all the
                   products; except for:          materials used are classified
                                                  within a heading other than
                                                  that of the product. However,
                                                  materials classified within the
                                                  same heading may be used
                                                  provided their value does not
                                                  exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                  price of the product
ex 3801            - Colloidal graphite in        Manufacture in which the
                   suspension in oil and          value of all the materials used
                   semi-colloidal graphite;       does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   carbonaceous pastes for        works price of the product
                   electrodes
                   - Graphite in paste form,      Manufacture in which the
                   being a mixture of more        value of all the materials of
                   than 30% by weight of          heading No 3403 used does not
                   graphite with mineral oils     exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                  price of the product
ex 3803            Refined tall oil               Refining of crude tall oil
ex 3805            Spirits of sulphate            Purification by distillation or
                   turpentine, purified           refining of raw spirits of
                                                  sulphate turpentine
ex 3806            Ester gums                     Manufacture from resin acids
ex 3807            Wood pitch (wood tar           Distillation of wood tar
                   pitch)
3808               Insecticides, rodenticides,    Manufacture in which the
                   fungicides, herbicides,        value of all the materials used
                   anti-sprouting products        does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   and plant-growth               works price of the products
                   regulators, disinfectants
                   and similar products, put
                   up in forms or packings
                   for retail sale or as
                   preparations or articles
                   (for example, sulphur-
                   treated bands, wicks and
                   candles, and fly-papers)




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 368]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   HS Heading    Description of product        Working or Processing
                       no                                        carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                       (1)                  (2)                     (3)     or      (4)
                3809            Finishing agents, dye         Manufacture in which the
                                carriers to accelerate the    value of all the materials used
                                dyeing or fixing of           does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                dyestuffs and other           works price of the products
                                products and preparations
                                (for example, dressings
                                and mordants), of a kind
                                used in the textile, paper,
                                leather or like industries,
                                not elsewhere specified or
                                included
                3810            Pickling preparations for     Manufacture in which the
                                metal surfaces; fluxes and    value of all the materials used
                                other auxiliary               does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                preparations for              works price of the product
                                soldering, brazing or
                                welding; soldering,
                                brazing or welding
                                powders and pastes
                                consisting of metal and
                                other materials;
                                preparations of a kind
                                used as cores or coatings
                                for wielding electrodes or
                                rods
                3811            Anti-knock preparations,
                                oxidation inhibitors, gum
                                inhibitors, viscosity
                                improvers, anti-corrosive
                                preparations and other
                                prepared additives, for
                                mineral oils (including
                                gasoline) or for other
                                liquids used for the same
                                purposes as mineral oils:
                                - Prepared additives for
                                lubricating oil, containing
                                petroleum oils or oils
                                obtained from bituminous
                                minerals
                                - Other                       Manufacture in which the
                                                              value of all the materials of
                                                              heading No 3811 used does not
                                                              exceed 50% of the ex-works
                                                              price of the product
                                                              Manufacture in which the
                                                              value of all the materials used
                                                              does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                                              works price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 369



   HS Heading      Description of product        Working or Processing
       no                                          carried out on non-
                                                originating materials that
                                                confers originating status
       (1)                     (2)                    (3)     or      (4)

3812               Prepared rubber              Manufacture in which the
                   accelerators; compound       value of all the materials used
                   plasticizers for rubber or   does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   plastics, not elsewhere      works price of the product
                   specified or included;
                   antioxidizing preparations
                   and other compound
                   stabilizers for rubber or
                   plastics
3813               Preparations and charges     Manufacture in which the
                   for fire- extinguishers;     value of all the materials used
                   charged fire-                does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   extinguishing grenades       works price of the product
3814               Organic composite            Manufacture in which the
                   solvents and thinners, not   value of all the materials used
                   elsewhere specified or       does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   included; prepared paint     works price of the product
                   or vanish removers
3818               Chemical elements doped      Manufacture in which the
                   for use in electronics, in   value of all the materials used
                   the form of discs, wafers    does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   or similar forms;            works price of the product
                   chemical compounds
                   doped for use in
                   electronics
3819               Hydraulic brake fluids       Manufacture in which the
                   and other prepared liquids   value of all the materials used
                   for hydraulic                does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   transmission, not            works price of the product
                   containing or containing
                   less than 70% by weight
                   of petroleum oils or oils
                   obtained from bituminous
                   minerals
3820               Anti-freezing                Manufacture in which the
                   preparations and prepared    value of all the materials used
                   de-icing fluids              does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                                works price of the product
3822               Diagnostic or laboratory     Manufacture in which the
                   reagents on a backing and    value of all the materials used
                   prepared diagnostic or       does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   laboratory reagents,         works price of the product
                   whether or not on a
                   backing, other than those
                   of heading No 3002 or
                   3006




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 370]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   HS Heading    Description of product        Working or Processing
                       no                                        carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                       (1)                   (2)                    (3)      or      (4)
                3823            Industrial
                                monocarboxylic fatty
                                acids; acid oils from
                                refining; industrial fatty
                                alcohols
                                - Industrial                  Manufacture in which all the
                                monocarboxylic fatty          materials used are classified
                                acids, acid oils from         within a heading other than
                                refining                      that of the product
                                - Industrial fatty alcohols   Manufacture from materials of
                                                              any heading including other
                                                              materials of heading No 3823
                3824            Prepared binders for
                                foundry moulds or cores;
                                chemical products and
                                preparations of the
                                chemical or allied
                                industries (including
                                those consisting of
                                mixtures of natural
                                products), not elsewhere
                                specified or included;
                                residual products of the
                                chemical or allied
                                industries, not elsewhere
                                specified or included:

                                - The following of this
                                heading:
                                Prepared binders for          Manufacture in which all the
                                foundry moulds or cores       materials used are classified
                                based on natural resinous     within a heading other than
                                products                      that of the product. However,
                                Naphthenic acids, their       materials classified within the
                                water insoluble salts and     same heading may be used
                                their esters                  provided their value does not
                                Sorbitol other than that of   exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                heading No 2905               price of the product
                                Petroleum sulphonates,
                                excluding petroleum
                                sulphonates of alkali
                                metals, of ammonium or
                                of ethanolamines;
                                thiophenated sulphonic
                                acids of oils obtained
                                from bituminous
                                minerals, and their salts
                                Ion exchangers
                                Getters for vacuum tubes
                                Alkaline iron oxide for
                                the purification of gas




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                     LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 371


   HS Heading      Description of product         Working or Processing
       no                                           carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
       (1)                     (2)                     (3)     or      (4)
                   Ammoniacal gas liquors
                   and spent oxide produced
                   in coal gas purification
                   Sulphonaphthenic acids,
                   their water insoluble salts
                   and their esters
                   Fusel oil and Dippel’s oil
                   Mixtures of salts having
                   different anions
                   Copying pastes with a
                   basis of gelatin, whether
                   or not on a paper or
                   textile backing
                   - Other                       Manufacture in which the
                                                 value of all the materials used
                                                 does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                                 works price of the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 372]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                         (1)                 (2)                    (3)      or      (4)
                3901 to 3915     Plastics in primary forms,
                                 waste, parings and scrap,
                                 of plastic; except for
                                 heading Nos ex 3907 and
                                 3912 for which the rules
                                 are set out below:

                                 -     Addition               Manufacture in which:
                                 homopolymerization           -     the value of all the
                                 -     products in which a    materials used does not exceed
                                 single                       50% of the ex-works price of
                                 -     monomer contributes    the product;
                                 more than                    -     the value of any materials
                                 -     99% by weight to the   of Chapter 39 used does not
                                 total                        exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                 -     polymer content        price of the product1
                                                              1
                                                               In the case of the products
                                                              composed of materials
                                                              classified within both heading
                                                              Nos. 3901 to 3906, on the one
                                                              hand, and within heading Nos
                                                              3907 to 3911, on the other
                                                              hand, this restriction only
                                                              applies to that group of
                                                              materials which predominates
                                                              by weight in the product

                                 -   Other                    Manufacture in which the
                                                              value of the materials of
                                                              Chapter 39 used does not
                                                              exceed 20% the ex-works price
                                                              of the product1
                                                              1
                                                               In the case of the products
                                                              composed of materials
                                                              classified within both heading
                                                              Nos. 3901 to 3906, on the one
                                                              hand, and within heading Nos
                                                              3907 to 3911, on the other
                                                              hand, this restriction only
                                                              applies to that group of
                                                              materials which predominates
                                                              by weight in the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                     LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 373



    HS Heading     Description of product          Working or Processing
        no                                           carried out on non-
                                                  originating materials that
                                                  confers originating status
          (1)                    (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

Ex 3907            -    Copolymer, made           Manufacture in which all the
                   from polycarbonate and         materials used are classified
                   acrylonitrile-                 within a heading other than
                   butadienestyrene               that of the product. However,
                   copolymer (ABS)                materials classified within the
                                                  same heading may be used
                                                  provided their value does not
                                                  exceed 50% of the ex-works
                                                  price of the product1
                                                  1
                                                   In the case of the products
                                                  composed of materials
                                                  classified within both heading
                                                  Nos. 3901 to 3906, on the one
                                                  hand, and within heading Nos
                                                  3907 to 3911, on the other
                                                  hand, this restriction only
                                                  applies to that group of
                                                  materials which predominates
                                                  by weight in the product
                   -    Polyester                 Manufacture in which the
                                                  value of any materials of
                                                  Chapter 39 used does not
                                                  exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                  price of the product and/or
                                                  manufacture from
                                                  polycarbonate of tetrabromo-
                                                  (bisphenol A)
3912               Cellulose and its chemical     Manufacture in which the
                   derivatives, not elsewhere     value of the materials
                   specified or included, in      classified in the same heading
                   primary forms                  as the product does not exceed
                                                  20% the ex-works price of the
                                                  product
3916 to 3921       Semi-manufactures and
                   articles of plastic; except
                   for headings Nos ex 3916,
                   ex 3917, ex 3920 and ex
                   3921, for which the rules
                   are set out below:
                   -     Flat products, further   Manufacture in which the
                   worked than only surface-      value of any materials of
                   worked or cut into forms       Chapter 39 used does not
                   other than rectangular         exceed 50% of the ex-works
                   (including square); other      price of the product
                   products, further worked
                   than only surface-worked

                   -    Other:




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 374]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                    HS Heading         Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                            carried out on non-
                                                                   originating materials that
                                                                   confers originating status
                         (1)                      (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

                                      ■ Addition
                                      homopolymerization
                                      products in which a single
                                      monomer contributes
                                      more than 99% by weight
                                      to the total polymer         Manufacture in which:
                                      content                      -     the value of all the
                                                                   materials used does not exceed
                                                                   50% of the ex-works price of
                                                                   the product;
                                                                   -     the value of any materials
                                                                   of Chapter 39 used does not
                                                                   exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                                   price of the product1
                                                                   1
                                                                    In the case of the products
                                                                   composed of materials
                                                                   classified within both heading
                                                                   Nos. 3901 to 3906, on the one
                                                                   hand, and within heading Nos
                                                                   3907 to 3911, on the other
                                                                   hand, this restriction only
                                                                   applies to that group of
                                                                   materials which predominates
                                                                   by weight in the product”
                                      ■ other                      Manufacture in which the
                                                                   value of any materials of
                                                                   Chapter 39 used does not
                                                                   exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                                   price of the product1
                                                                   1
                                                                    In the case of the products
                                                                   composed of materials
                                                                   classified within both heading
                                                                   Nos. 3901 to 3906, on the one
                                                                   hand, and within heading Nos
                                                                   3907 to 3911, on the other
                                                                   hand, this restriction only
                                                                   applies to that group of
                                                                   materials which predominates
                                                                   by weight in the product
                ex 3916 and ex 3917   Profile shapes and tubes     Manufacture in which:
                                                                   -     the value of all the
                                                                   materials used does not exceed
                                                                   50% of the ex-works price of
                                                                   the product;
                                                                   -     the value of any materials
                                                                   of classified within the same
                                                                   heading as the product does
                                                                   not exceed 20% of the ex-
                                                                   works price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                          LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 375



    HS Heading     Description of product         Working or Processing
        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
          (1)                   (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

ex 3920            - Ionomer sheet or film       Manufacture from a
                                                 thermoplastic partial salt which
                                                 is a copolymer of ethylene and
                                                 metacrylic acid party
                                                 neutralized with metal ions,
                                                 mainly zinc and sodium

                   - Sheets of regenerated       The value of any materials of
                   cellulose, polyamides or      classified within the same
                   polyethylene                  heading as the product does
                                                 not exceed 20% of the ex-
                                                 works price of the product
ex 3921            Foils of plastic, metalized   Manufacture from highly
                                                 transparent polyester foils with
                                                 a thickness of less than 23
                                                 micron1
                                                 1
                                                  The following foils shall be
                                                 considered as highly
                                                 transparent: foils, the optical
                                                 dimming of which —
                                                 measured according to ASTM-
                                                 D 1003-16 by Gardner
                                                 Hazemeter (i.e. Hazefactor) - is
                                                 less than 2 percent.”
3922 to 3926       Articles of plastics          Manufacture in which the
                                                 value of all the materials used
                                                 does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                                 works price of the product
ex Chapter 40      Rubber and articles           Manufacture in which all the
                   thereof; except for:          materials used are classified
                                                 within a heading other than
                                                 that of the product
ex 4001            Laminated slabs of crepe      Lamination of sheets of natural
                   rubber for shoes              rubber
4005               Compounded rubber,            Manufacture in which the
                   unvulcanised, in primary      value of all the materials used,
                   forms or in plates, sheets    except natural rubber, does not
                   or strip                      exceed 50% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product
4012               Retreaded or used
                   pneumatic tyres of
                   rubber; solid or cushion
                   tyres, interchangeable
                   tyre treads and tyre flaps,
                   of rubber:
                   - Retreaded pneumatic,        Retreading of used tyres
                   solid or cushion tyres, of
                   rubber



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 376]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product         Working or Processing
                        no                                         carried out on non-
                                                                originating materials that
                                                                confers originating status
                          (1)                 (2)                     (3)     or      (4)
                                 - Other                        Manufacture from materials of
                                                                any heading, except those of
                                                                heading Nos 4011 or 4012
                ex 4017          Articles of hard rubber        Manufacture from hard rubber

                ex Chapter 41    Raw hides and skins            Manufacture in which all the
                                 (other than furskins) and      materials used are classified
                                 leather; except for:           within a heading other than
                                                                that of the product
                ex 4102          Raw skins of sheep or          Removal of wool from sheep
                                 lambs, without wool on         or lamb skins, with wool on
                4104 to 4107     Leather, without hair or       Retanning of pre-tanned
                                 wool, other than leather       leather
                                 of heading Nos 4108 or
                                 4109
                4109             Patent leather and patent      Manufacture from leather of
                                 laminated leather;             heading Nos 4104 to 4107
                                 metalized leather              provided its value does not
                                                                exceed 50% of the ex- works
                                                                price of the product
                Chapter 42       Articles of leather;           Manufacture in which all the
                                 saddlery and harness;          materials used are classified
                                 travel goods, handbags         within a heading other than
                                 and similar containers;        that of the product
                                 articles of animal gut
                                 (other than silk worm gut)
                ex Chapter 43    Furskins and artificial fur;   Manufacture in which all the
                                 manufactures thereof;          materials used are classified
                                 except for:                    within a heading other than
                                                                that of the product
                ex 4302          Tanned or dressed
                                 furskins, assembled:
                                 Plates, crosses and similar    Bleaching or dyeing, in
                                 forms                          addition to cutting and
                                                                assembly of non-assembled
                                                                tanned or dressed furskins
                                 Other                          Manufacture from non-
                                                                assembled, tanned or dressed
                                                                furskins
                4303             Articles of apparel,           Manufacture from non-
                                 clothing accessories and       assembled tanned or dressed
                                 other articles of furskin      furskins of heading No 4302

                ex Chapter 44    Wood and articles of           Manufacture in which all the
                                 wood; wood charcoal;           materials used are classified
                                 except for:                    within a heading other than
                                                                that of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                      LRO 1/2017
                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                             [CH.293– 377



    HS Heading        Description of product        Working or Processing
        no                                            carried out on non-
                                                   originating materials that
                                                   confers originating status
          (1)                     (2)                    (3)     or      (4)

ex 4403               Wood roughly squared         Manufacture from wood in the
                                                   rough, whether or not stripped
                                                   of its bark or merely roughed
                                                   down
ex 4407               Wood sawn or chipped         Planning, sanding or finger-
                      lengthwise, sliced or        jointing
                      peeled, of a thickness
                      exceeding 6 mm, planed,
                      sanded or finger-jointed
ex 4408               Veneer sheets and sheets     Splicing, planning, sanding or
                      for plywood, of a            finger-jointng
                      thickness not exceeding 6
                      mm, sliced, and other
                      wood sawn lengthwise,
                      sliced or peeled of a
                      thickness not exceeding 6
                      mm, planned sanded or
                      finger-jointed
ex 4409               Wood continuously
                      shaped along any of its
                      edges or faces, whether or
                      not planned, sanded or
                      finger-jointed:
                      -sanded or finger-jointed    Sanding or finger-jointing
                      -beadings and mouldings      Beading or moulding
ex 4410 to ex 4413    Beadings and mouldings,      Beading or moulding
                      including moulded
                      skirting and other
                      moulded boards
ex 4415               Packing cases, boxes,        Manufacture from boards not
                      crates, drums and similar    cut to size
                      packings of wood
ex 4416               Casks, barrels, vats, tubs   Manufacture from riven staves,
                      and other coopers’           not further worked than sawn
                      products and parts           on the two principal surfaces
                      thereof, of wood
ex 4418               Builders’ joinery and        Manufacture in which all the
                      carpentry of wood            materials used are classified
                                                   within a heading other than
                                                   that of the product However,
                                                   cellular wood panels, shingles
                                                   and shakes may be used
                      Beadings and mouldings       Beading or moulding
ex 4421               Match splints; wooden        Manufacture from wood of any
                      pegs or pins for footwear    heading except drawn wood of
                                                   heading no 4409




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 378]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                         (1)                 (2)                     (3)      or     (4)
                ex Chapter 45    Cork and articles of cork;   Manufacture in which all the
                                 except for:                  materials used are classified
                                                              within a heading other than
                                                              that of the product
                4503             Articles of natural cork     Manufacture from cork of
                                                              heading No 4501
                Chapter 46       Manufactures of straw, of    Manufacture in which all the
                                 esparto or of other          materials used are classified
                                 plaiting materials;          within a heading other than
                                 basketware and               that of the product
                                 wickerwork
                Chapter 47       Pulp of wood or of other     Manufacture in which all the
                                 fibrous cellulosic           materials used are classified
                                 material; recovered          within a heading other than
                                 (waste and scrap) paper or   that of the product
                                 paperboard
                ex Chapter 48    Paper and paperboard;        Manufacture in which all the
                                 articles of paper pulp, of   materials used are classified
                                 paper or of paperboard;      within a heading other than
                                 except for:                  that of the product
                ex 4811          Paper and paperboard,        Manufacture from paper-
                                 ruled, lined or squared      making materials of Chapter
                                 only                         47
                4816             Carbon paper, self-copy      Manufacture from paper-
                                 paper and other copying      making materials of Chapter
                                 or transfer papers (other    47
                                 than those of heading No
                                 4809), duplicator stencils
                                 and offset plates, of
                                 paper, whether or not put
                                 up in boxes
                4817             Envelopes, letter cards,     Manufacturing in which:
                                 plain postcards and          -     all the materials used are
                                 correspondence cards, of     classified within a heading other
                                 paper or paperboard;
                                                              than that of the product;
                                 boxes, pouches, wallets
                                 and writing                  -    the value of all the
                                 compendiums, of paper or     materials used does not exceed
                                 paperboard, containing an    50% of the ex-works price of the
                                 assortment of paper          product
                                 stationery
                ex 4818          Toilet paper                 Manufacture from paper-making
                                                              materials of Chapter 47
                ex 4819          Cartons, boxes, cases,       Manufacturing in which:
                                 bags and other packing       - all the materials used are
                                 containers, of paper,        classified within a heading other
                                 paperboard, cellulose
                                                              than that of the product;
                                 wadding or webs of
                                 cellulose fibres             - the value of all the materials
                                                              used does not exceed 50% of the
                                                              ex-works price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 379



    HS Heading     Description of product        Working or Processing
        no                                         carried out on non-
                                                originating materials that
                                                confers originating status
          (1)                    (2)                  (3)      or      (4)

ex 4820            Letter pads                  Manufacture in which the
                                                value of all the materials used
                                                does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                                works price of the product
ex 4823            Other paper, paperboard,     Manufacture from paper-
                   cellulose wadding and        making materials of Chapter
                   webs of cellulose fibres,    47
                   cut to size or shape
ex Chapter 49      Printed books,               Manufacture in which all the
                   newspapers, pictures and     materials used are classified
                   other products of the        within a heading other than
                   printing industry;           that of the product
                   manuscripts, typescripts
                   and plans; except for:
4909               Printed or illustrated       Manufacture from materials
                   postcards; printed cards     not classified within heading
                   bearing personal             Nos 4909 or 4911
                   greetings, messages or
                   announcements, whether
                   or not illustrated with or
                   without envelopes or
                   trimmings
4910               Calendars of any kind,
                   printed, including
                   calendar blocks:
                   - Calendars of the           Manufacturing in which:
                   “perpetual” type or with     -     all the materials used are
                   replaceable blocks           classified within a heading
                   mounted on basis other       other than that of the product;
                   than paper or paperboard     -     the value of all the
                                                materials used does not exceed
                                                50% of the ex-works price of
                                                the product
                   - Other                      Manufacture from materials
                                                not classified in heading Nos
                                                4909 or 4911
ex Chapter 50      Silk; except for:            Manufacture in which all the
                                                materials used are classified
                                                within a heading other than
                                                that of the product
ex 5003            Silk waste (including        Carding or combing of silk
                   cocoons unsuitable for       waste
                   reeling, yarn waste and
                   garnetted stock), carded
                   or combed




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 380]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading     Description of product     Working or Processing
                        no                                      carried out on non-
                                                             originating materials that
                                                             confers originating status
                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)      or      (4)

                5004 to ex 5006   Silk yarn and yarn spun    Manufacture from1:
                                  from silk waste            raw silk or silk waste carded or
                                                             combed or otherwise prepared
                                                             for spinning,
                                                             -      other natural fibres not
                                                             carded or combed or otherwise
                                                             prepared for spinning,
                                                             -      chemical materials or
                                                             textile pulp, or
                                                             -      paper-making materials
                                                             1
                                                               For special conditions relating
                                                             to products made of a mixture
                                                             of textile materials, see
                                                             Introductory Note 5
                5007              Woven fabrics of silk or
                                  of silk waste:
                                  - Incorporating rubber     Manufacture from single yarn1
                                  thread
                                  - Other                    Manufacture from1:
                                                             -     coir yarn,
                                                             -     natural fibres,
                                                             -     man-made staple fibres
                                                             not carded or combed or
                                                             otherwise prepared for
                                                             spinning,
                                                             -     chemical materials or
                                                             textile pulp, or
                                                             -     paper
                                                             or
                                                             Printing accompanied by at
                                                             least two preparatory or
                                                             finishing operations (such as
                                                             scouring, bleaching,
                                                             mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                             raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                             resistance processing,
                                                             permanent finishing,
                                                             decatizing, impregnating,
                                                             mending and burling) where
                                                             the value of the unprinted
                                                             fabric used does not exceed
                                                             47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                             the product
                                                             1
                                                              For special conditions relating
                                                             to products made of a mixture
                                                             of textile materials, see
                                                             Introductory Note 5




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 381


    HS Heading     Description of product        Working or Processing
        no                                         carried out on non-
                                                originating materials that
                                                confers originating status
         (1)                   (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

ex Chapter 51      Wool, fine or coarse         Manufacture in which all the
                   animal hair; horsehair       materials used are classified
                   yarn and woven fabric;       within a heading other than
                   except for:                  that of the product
5106 to 5110       Yarn of wool, of fine or     Manufacture from1:
                   coarse animal hair or of     -     raw silk or silk waste
                   horsehair                    carded or combed or otherwise
                                                prepared for spinning,
                                                -     natural fibres not carded
                                                or combed or otherwise
                                                prepared for spinning,
                                                -     chemical materials or
                                                textile pulp, or
                                                -     paper-making materials
                                                1
                                                 For special conditions relating
                                                to products made of a mixture
                                                of textile materials, see
                                                Introductory Note 5”
5111 to 5113       Woven fabrics of wool, of
                   fine or coarse animal hair
                   or of horsehair:
                   -     Incorporating rubber
                                                Manufacture from single yarn1
                   thread
                                                Manufacture from1:
                   -     Other
                                                -     coir yarn,
                                                -     natural fibres,
                                                -     man-made staple fibres
                                                not carded or combed or
                                                otherwise prepared for
                                                spinning,
                                                -     chemical materials or
                                                textile pulp, or
                                                -     paper
                                                or
                                                Printing accompanied by at
                                                least two preparatory or
                                                finishing operations (such as
                                                scouring, bleaching,
                                                mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                resistance processing,
                                                permanent finishing,
                                                decatizing, impregnating,
                                                mending and burling) where
                                                the value of the unprinted
                                                fabric used does not exceed
                                                47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                the product
                                                1
                                                 For special conditions relating
                                                to products made of a mixture
                                                of textile materials, see
                                                Introductory Note 5”



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 382]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                    HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                        no                                       carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                         (1)                 (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

                ex Chapter 52    Cotton; except for:          Manufacture in which all the
                                                              materials used are classified
                                                              within a heading other than
                                                              that of the product
                5204 to 5207     Yarn arid thread of cotton   Manufacture froml:
                                                              -      raw silk or silk waste
                                                              carded or combed or otherwise
                                                              prepared for spinning,
                                                              -      natural fibres not carded
                                                              or combed or otherwise
                                                              prepared for spinning,
                                                              -      chemical materials or
                                                              textile pulp, or
                                                              -      paper-making materials
                                                              1
                                                                For special conditions relating
                                                              to products made of a mixture
                                                              of textile materials, see
                                                              Introductory Note 5”
                5208 to 5212     Woven fabrics of cotton:     Manufacture from single yarn1
                                 - Incorporating rubber       Manufacture from1 :
                                 thread                       -     coir yarn,
                                 - Other                      -     natural fibres,
                                                              -     man-made staple fibres
                                                              not carded or combed or
                                                              otherwise prepared for
                                                              spinning,
                                                              -     chemical materials or
                                                              textile pulp, or
                                                              -     paper
                                                              Printing accompanied by at
                                                              least two preparatory or
                                                              finishing operations (such as
                                                              scouring, bleaching,
                                                              mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                              raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                              resistance processing,
                                                              permanent finishing,
                                                              decatizing, impregnating,
                                                              mending and burling) where
                                                              the value of the unprinted
                                                              fabric used does not exceed
                                                              47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                              the product
                                                              1
                                                               For special conditions relating
                                                              to products made of a mixture
                                                              of textile materials, see
                                                              Introductory Note 5




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                     LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 383



    HS Heading     Description of product        Working or Processing
        no                                         carried out on non-
                                                originating materials that
                                                confers originating status
         (1)                    (2)                   (3)      or      (4)

ex Chapter 53      Other vegetable textile      Manufacture in which all the
                   fibres; paper yarn and       materials used are classified
                   woven fabrics of paper       within a heading other than
                   yarn; except for:            that of the product
5306 to 5308       Yarn of other vegetable      Manufacture from1:
                   textile fibres; paper yarn   -     raw silk or silk waste
                                                carded or combed or otherwise
                                                prepared for spinning,
                                                -     natural fibres not carded
                                                or combed or otherwise
                                                prepared for spinning,
                                                -     chemical materials or
                                                textile pulp, or
                                                -     paper-making materials
                                                1
                                                 For special conditions relating
                                                to products made of a mixture
                                                of textile materials, see
                                                Introductory Note 5”
5309 to 5311       Woven fabrics of other       Manufacture from single yarn1
                   vegetable textile fibres;    Manufacture from1:
                   woven fabrics of paper
                   yarn:                        -     coir yarn,
                                                -     natural fibres,
                   - Incorporating rubber       -     man-made staple fibres
                   thread                       not carded or combed or
                                                otherwise prepared for
                                                spinning,
                                                -     chemical materials or
                                                textile pulp, or
                                                -     paper
                                                or
                                                Printing accompanied by at
                                                least two preparatory or
                                                finishing operations (such as
                                                scouring, bleaching,
                                                mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                resistance processing,
                                                permanent finishing,
                                                decatizing, impregnating,
                                                mending and burling) where
                                                the value of the unprinted
                                                fabric used does not exceed
                                                47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                the product
                                                1
                                                 For special conditions relating
                                                to products made of a mixture
                                                of textile materials, see
                                                Introductory Note 5”le yarn1




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 384]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product    Working or Processing
                        no                                    carried out on non-
                                                           originating materials that
                                                           confers originating status
                         (1)                 (2)                 (3)      or      (4)

                5401 to 5406     Yarn, monofilament and    Manufacture from1:
                                 thread of man-made        -    raw silk or silk waste
                                 filaments                 carded or combed or otherwise
                                                           prepared for spinning,
                                                           -    natural fibres not carded
                                                           or combed or otherwise
                                                           prepared for spinning,
                                                           -     chemical materials or
                                                           textile pulp, or
                                                           -    paper-making materials
                                                           1
                                                            For special conditions relating
                                                           to products made of a mixture
                                                           of textile materials, see
                                                           Introductory Note 5
                5407 and 5408    Woven fabrics of man-     Manufacture from single yarn1
                                 made filament yarn:
                                 - Incorporating rubber    Manufacture from 1:
                                 thread
                                                           -    coir yarn,
                                 - Other
                                                           -    natural fibres,
                                                           -    man-made staple fibres
                                                           not carded or combed or
                                                           otherwise prepared for
                                                           spinning,
                                                           -     chemical materials or
                                                           textile pulp, or
                                                           -    paper
                                                           or
                                                           Printing accompanied by at
                                                           least two preparatory or
                                                           finishing operations (such as
                                                           scouring, bleaching,
                                                           mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                           raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                           resistance processing,
                                                           permanent finishing,
                                                           decatizing, impregnating,
                                                           mending and burling) where
                                                           the value of the unprinted
                                                           fabric used does not exceed
                                                           47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                           the product
                                                           1
                                                            For special conditions relating
                                                           to products made of a mixture
                                                           of textile materials, see
                                                           Introductory Note 5
                5501 to 5507     Man-made staple fibres    Manufacture from chemical
                                                           materials or textile pulp




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                   LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 385



    HS Heading     Description of product       Working or Processing
        no                                        carried out on non-
                                               originating materials that
                                               confers originating status
         (1)                  (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

5508 to 5511       Yarn and sewing thread      Manufacture from1:
                   of man-made staple fibres   -     raw silk or silk waste
                                               carded or combed or otherwise
                                               prepared for spinning,
                                               -     natural fibres not carded
                                               or
                                               combed or otherwise prepared
                                               for spinning,
                                               -     chemical materials or,
                                               textile pulp, or
                                               -     paper-making materials
                                               1
                                                For special conditions relating
                                               to products made of a mixture
                                               of textile materials, see
                                               Introductory Note 5”
5512 to 5516       Woven fabrics of man-       Manufacture from single yarn1
                   made staple fibres:         Manufacture from1:
                   -    Incorporating rubber   -     coir yarn,
                   thread                      -     natural fibres,
                   -    Other                  -     man-made staple fibres
                                               not carded or combed or
                                               otherwise prepared for
                                               spinning,
                                               -     chemical materials or
                                               textile pulp, or
                                               -     paper
                                               or
                                               Printing accompanied by at
                                               least two preparatory or
                                               finishing operations (such as
                                               scouring, bleaching,
                                               mercerizing, heat setting,
                                               raising, calendaring, shrink
                                               resistance processing,
                                               permanent finishing,
                                               decatizing, impregnating,
                                               mending and burling) where
                                               the value of the unprinted
                                               fabric used does not exceed
                                               47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                               the product
                                               1
                                                For special conditions relating
                                               to products made of a mixture
                                               of textile materials, see
                                               Introductory Note 5”




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 386]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product        Working or Processing
                        no                                   carried out on non-originating
                                                                 materials that confers
                                                                   originating status
                         (1)                 (2)                      (3)       or      (4)
                ex Chapter 56    Wadding, felt and non-      Manufacture from1:
                                 wovens; special yarns;      -     coir yarn,
                                 twine, cordage, ropes and   -     natural fibres,
                                 cables and articles         -     chemical materials or textile
                                 thereof; except for:        pulp, or
                                                             -     paper making materials
                                                             1
                                                              For special conditions relating to
                                                             products made of a mixture of
                                                             textile materials, see Introductory
                                                             Note 5”
                5602             Felt, whether or not
                                 impregnated, coated,
                                 covered or laminated:
                                 - Needleloom felt           Manufacture from1:
                                                             -     natural fibres,
                                                             -     chemical materials or textile
                                                             pulp
                                                             However:
                                                             -     Polypropylene filament of
                                                             heading No 5402,
                                                             -     Polypropylene fibres of
                                                             heading No 5503 or 5506 or
                                                             -     Polypropylene filament tow of
                                                             heading No 5501, of which the
                                                             denomination in all cases of a single
                                                             filament or fibre is less than 9
                                                             decitex may be used provided their
                                                             value does not exceed 40% of the
                                                             ex-works price of the product
                                                             Manufacture from1:
                                 - Other                     -     natural fibres,
                                                             -     man-made staple fibres not
                                                             carded or combed or otherwise
                                                             prepared for spinning,
                                                             -     chemical materials or textile
                                                             pulp
                                                             1
                                                              For special conditions relating to
                                                             products made of a mixture of
                                                             textile materials, see Introductory
                                                             Note 5”




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                  [CH.293– 387



   HS Heading      Description of product       Working or Processing
       no                                         carried out on non-
                                               originating materials that
                                               confers originating status
       (1)                     (2)                   (3)      or      (4)
       5604        Rubber thread and cord,
                   textile covered; textile
                   yarn, and strip and the
                   like of heading No 5404
                   or 5405, impregnated,
                   coated, covered or
                   sheathed with rubber or
                   plastics:

                   - Rubber thread and cord,
                   textile covered
                                               Manufacture from rubber thread
                   - Other                     or cord, not textile covered
                                               Manufacture from1:
                                               -     natural fibres not carded or
                                               combed or otherwise processed
                                               for spinning,
                                               -     chemical materials or
                                               textile pulp, or
                                               -     paper-making materials
                                               1
                                                For special conditions relating
                                               to products made of a mixture
                                               of textile materials, see
                                               Introductory Note 5”

5606               Gimped yarn, and strip      Manufacture from1 :
                   and the like of heading     -     natural fibres not carded
                   No 5404 or 5405, gimped     or combed or otherwise
                   (other than those of        processed for spinning,
                   heading No 5605 and         -     chemical materials or
                   gimped horsehair yarn);     textile pulp, or
                   chenille yarn (including    -     paper-making materials
                   flock chenille yam; loop
                                               1
                   wale- yarn                   For special conditions relating
                                               to products made of a mixture
                                               of textile materials, see
                                               Introductory Note 5”




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 388]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product      Working or Processing
                        no                                      carried out on non-
                                                             originating materials that
                                                             confers originating status
                         (1)                  (2)                  (3)      or     (4)

                Chapter 57       Carpets and other textile
                                 floor coverings:
                                 - Of needleloom felt        Manufacture from1:
                                                             -     natural fibres, or
                                                             -     chemical materials or
                                                             textile pulp
                                                             However:
                                                             -     Polypropylene filament
                                                             of heading No 5402,
                                                             -     Polypropylene fibres of
                                                             heading No 5503 or 5506
                                                             or
                                                             -     Polypropylene filament
                                                             tow of heading No 5501, of
                                                             which the denomination in all
                                                             cases of a single filament or
                                                             fibre is less than 9 decitex may
                                                             be used provided their value
                                                             does not exceed 40% of the ex-
                                                             works price of the product
                                                             -     jute fabric may be used as
                                                             backing
                                                             Manufacture from1:
                                                             -     Natural fibres not carded
                                                             or combed or otherwise
                                                             processed for spinning, or
                                                             -     Chemical materials or
                                                             textile pulp

                                 - Of other felt             Manufacture from1:
                                                             -     coir or jute yarn,
                                                             -     synthetic or artificial
                                                             filament yarn,
                                                             -     natural fibres, or
                                                             -     man-made staple fibres
                                                             not carded or combed
                                                             or otherwise processed for
                                                             spinning
                                 - Other                     Jute fabric may be used as
                                                             backing




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                   LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                   [CH.293– 389



    HS Heading     Description of product           Working or Processing
        no                                            carried out on non-
                                                   originating materials that
                                                   confers originating status
         (1)                    (2)                      (3)      or      (4)
ex Chapter 58      Special woven fabrics;
                   tufted textile fabrics; lace;
                   tapestries; trimmings;
                   embroidery; except for:
                   -     Combined with             Manufacture from single yarn1
                   rubber thread
                   -     Other                     Manufacture from1:
                                                   -     natural fibres,
                                                   -     man-made staple fibres
                                                   not carded or combed or
                                                   otherwise processed for
                                                   spinning, or
                                                   -     chemical materials or
                                                   textile pulp,
                                                   or
                                                   Printing accompanied by at
                                                   least two preparatory or
                                                   finishing operations (such as
                                                   scouring, bleaching,
                                                   mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                   raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                   resistance processing,
                                                   permanent finishing,
                                                   decatizing, impregnating,
                                                   mending and burling) where
                                                   the value of the unprinted
                                                   fabric used does not exceed
                                                   47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                   the product
                                                   1
                                                    For special conditions relating
                                                   to products made of a mixture
                                                   of textile materials, see
                                                   Introductory Note 5
5805               Hand-woven tapestries of        Manufacture in which all the
                   the types gobelins,             materials used are classified
                   flanders, aubusson,             within a heading other than
                   beauvais and the like, and      that of the product
                   needle-worked tapestries
                   (for example, petit point,
                   cross stitch), whether or
                   not made up

5810               Embroidery in the piece,        Manufacture in which:
                   in strips or in motifs          -     all the materials used are
                                                   classified within a heading
                                                   other than that of the product;
                                                   -     the value of all the
                                                   materials used does not exceed
                                                   50% of the ex-works price of
                                                   the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 390]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                   HS Heading    Description of product       Working or Processing
                       no                                       carried out on non-
                                                             originating materials that
                                                             confers originating status
                       (1)                  (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

                5901            Textile fabrics coated       Manufacture from yarn
                                with gum or amylaceous
                                substances, of a kind used
                                for the outer covers of
                                books or the like; tracing
                                cloth; prepared painting
                                canvas; buckram and
                                similar stiffened textile
                                fabrics of a kind used for
                                that foundations

                5902            Tyre cord fabric of high
                                tenacity yarn of nylon or
                                other polyamides,
                                polyesters or viscose
                                rayon:
                                -     Containing not more    Manufacture from yarn
                                than 90% by weight of
                                textile materials
                                -     Other                  Manufacture from chemical
                                                             materials or textile pulp

                5903            Textile fabrics              Manufacture from yarn
                                impregnated, coated,
                                covered or laminated with    or
                                plastics, other than those
                                of heading No 5902           Printing accompanied by at
                                                             least two preparatory or
                                                             finishing operations (such as
                                                             scouring, bleaching,
                                                             mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                             raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                             resistance processing,
                                                             permanent finishing,
                                                             decatizing, impregnating,
                                                             mending and burling) where
                                                             the value of the unprinted
                                                             fabric used does not exceed
                                                             47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                             the product
                5904            Linoleum, whether or not     Manufacture from yarn1
                                cut to shape; floor
                                                             1
                                coverings consisting of a     For special conditions relating
                                coating or covering          to products made of a mixture
                                applied on a textile         of textile materials, see
                                backing, whether or not      Introductory Note 5”
                                cut to shape




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                  [CH.293– 391



   HS Heading      Description of product         Working or Processing
       no                                           carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
       (1)                     (2)                     (3)      or      (4)

5905               Textile wall coverings:
                   - Impregnated, coated,        Manufacture from yarn
                   covered or laminated with
                   rubber, plastics
                   or other materials
                   - Other                       Manufacture from1:
                                                 -     coir yarn,
                                                 -     natural fibres,
                                                 -     man-made staple fibres
                                                 not carded or combed or
                                                 otherwise processed for
                                                 spinning, or
                                                 -     chemical materials or
                                                 textile pulp,
                                                 or
                                                 Printing accompanied by at
                                                 least two preparatory or
                                                 finishing operations (such as
                                                 scouring, bleaching,
                                                 mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                 raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                 resistance processing,
                                                 permanent finishing,
                                                 decatizing, impregnating,
                                                 mending and burling) where
                                                 the value of the unprinted
                                                 fabric used does not exceed
                                                 47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                 the product
                                                 1
                                                  For special conditions relating
                                                 to products made of a mixture
                                                 of textile materials, see
                                                 Introductory Note 5”
5906               Rubberized textile
                   fabrics, other than those
                   of heading No 5902
                   - Knitted or crocheted        Manufacture from1:
                   fabrics                       -     natural fibres,
                                                 -     man-made staple fibres
                                                 not carded or combed or
                                                 otherwise processed for
                                                 spinning, or
                                                 -     chemical materials or
                                                 textile pulp
                   -    Other fabrics made       Manufacture from chemical
                   of synthetic filament yarn,   materials
                   containing more than
                   90% by weight of textile
                   materials




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 392]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                   HS Heading    Description of product      Working or Processing
                       no                                      carried out on non-
                                                            originating materials that
                                                            confers originating status
                       (1)                   (2)                  (3)     or      (4)
                                -    Other                  Manufacture from yarn
                                                            1’’
                                                              For special conditions
                                                            relating to products made of a
                                                            mixture of textile materials,
                                                            see Introductory Note 5”
                5907            Textile fabrics otherwise   Manufacture from yarn
                                impregnated, coated or
                                covered; painted canvas     or
                                being theatrical scenery,
                                studio back-cloths or the   Printing accompanied by at
                                like                        least two preparatory or
                                                            finishing operations (such as
                                                            scouring, bleaching,
                                                            mercerizing, heat setting,
                                                            raising, calendaring, shrink
                                                            resistance processing,
                                                            permanent finishing,
                                                            decatizing, impregnating,
                                                            mending and burling) where
                                                            the value of the unprinted
                                                            fabric used does not exceed
                                                            47.5% of the ex-works price of
                                                            the product
                5908            Textile wicks, woven,
                                plaited or knitted, for
                                lamps, stoves, lighters,
                                candles or the like;
                                incandescent gas mantles
                                and tubular knitted gas
                                mantle fabric therefor,
                                whether or not
                                impregnated:
                                - Incandescent gas          Manufacture from tubular
                                mantles, impregnated        knitted gas mantle fabric

                                - Other
                                                            Manufacture in which all the
                                                            materials used are classified
                                                            within a heading other than
                                                            that of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                  LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 393


    HS Heading     Description of product           Working or Processing
        no                                            carried out on non-
                                                   originating materials that
                                                   confers originating status
          (1)                    (2)                     (3)     or      (4)
5909 to 5911       Textile articles of a kind
                   suitable for industrial use:
                   -     Polishing discs or       Manufacture from yarn or waste
                   rings other than of felt of    fabrics or rags of heading No 6310
                   heading No 5911
                   -     Woven fabrics, of a      Manufacture from1:
                   kind commonly used in          -     coir yarn,
                   papermaking or other           -     the following materials:
                   technical uses, felted or      -     yarn of
                   not, whether or not            polytetrafluoroethylee2,
                   impregnated or coated,         -     yarn, multiple, of polyamide,
                   tubular or endless with        coated impregnated or covered
                   single or multiple warp        with a phenolic resin,
                   and/or weft, or flat woven     -     yarn of synthetic textile
                   with multiple warp and/or      fibres of aromatic polyamides,
                   weft of heading No 5911        obtained by polycondensation or
                                                  m- phenylenediamine and
                                                  isophathalic acid,
                                                  -     monofil of
                                                  polytetrafluoroethylene2
                                                  -     yarn of synthetic textile
                                                  fibres of poly-p-phenylene
                                                  terphthalamide,
                                                  -     glass fibre yarn, coated with
                                                  phenol resin and gimped with
                                                  acrylic yarn2
                                                  -     copolyester monofilaments
                                                  of a polyester and a resin of
                                                  terephtalic acid and 1,4 -
                                                  cyclohexane-diethanol and
                                                  isophthalic acid,
                                                  -     natural fibres,
                                                  -     man-made staple fibres not
                                                  carded or combed or otherwise
                                                  processed for spinning, or
                                                  -     chemical materials or textile
                                                  pulp
                                                  Manufacture from1:
                                                  -     coir yarn,
                                                  -     natural fibres,
                                                  -     man-made staple fibres not
                                                  carded or combed or otherwise
                                                  processed for spinning, or
                                                  -     chemical materials or textile
                                                  pulp
                                                  1
                   - Other                         For special conditions relating to
                                                  products made of a mixture of
                                                  textile materials, see Introductory
                                                  Note 5
                                                  2
                                                   The use of this material is
                                                  restricted to the manufacture of
                                                  woven fabrics of a kind used in
                                                  paper-making machinery




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 394]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product      Working or Processing
                        no                                      carried out on non-
                                                             originating materials that
                                                             confers originating status
                         (1)                 (2)                   (3)      or      (4)
                Chapter 60       Knitted or crocheted        Manufacture from fabric1
                                 fabrics
                                                             1
                                                               For special conditions relating
                                                             to products made of a mixture
                                                             of textile materials, see
                                                             Introductory Note 5
                Chapter 61       Articles of apparel and
                                 clothing accessories,
                                 knitted or crocheted;
                                 - Obtained by sewing        Manufacture from fabric1,2
                                 together or otherwise
                                                             1
                                 assembling, two or more      For special conditions relating
                                 pieces of knitted or        to products made of a mixture
                                 crocheted fabric which      of textile materials, see
                                 have been either cut to     Introductory Note 5
                                 form or obtained directly
                                                             2
                                 to form                      See Introductory Note

                                 - Other                     Manufacture from yarn1:
                                                             1
                                                              For special conditions relating
                                                             to products made of a mixture
                                                             of textile materials, see
                                                             Introductory Note 5”
                ex Chapter 62    Articles of apparel and     Manufacture from fabric
                                 clothing accessories, not
                                 knitted or crocheted;
                                 except for:

                6213 and 6214    Handkerchiefs, shawls,
                                 scarves, mufflers,
                                 mantillas, veils and the
                                 like:

                                 - Embroidered               Manufacture from yarn1.2
                                                             1
                                                              For special conditions relating
                                                             to products made of a mixture
                                                             of textile materials, see
                                                             Introductory Note 5”
                                                             2
                                                              See Introductory Note 6

                                 - Other                     Manufacture from yarn1.2
                                                             1
                                                              See Introductory Note 6
                                                             2
                                                              For special conditions relating
                                                             to products made of a mixture
                                                             of textile materials, see
                                                             Introductory Note 5




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                 [CH.293– 395



    HS Heading     Description of product         Working or Processing
        no                                          carried out on non-
                                                 originating materials that
                                                 confers originating status
         (1)                    (2)                    (3)      or      (4)

6217               Other made up clothing
                   accessories; parts of
                   garments or of clothing
                   accessories, other than
                   those of heading No 6212

                   - Embroidered                 Manufacture from yarn1

                   - Fire-resistant equipment    Manufacture from yam1
                   of fabric covered with foil
                   of aluminized polyester

                   - Interlinings for collars    Manufacture in which:
                   and cuffs, cut out            -     all the materials used are
                                                 classified within a heading
                                                 other than that of the product;
                                                 -     the value of all the
                                                 materials used does not exceed
                                                 40% of the ex-works price of
                                                 the product
                                                 1
                                                  See Introductory Note 6
Ex Chapter 63      Other made-up textile         Manufacture in which all the
                   articles; sets; worn          materials used are classified
                   clothing and worn textile     within a heading other than
                   articles; rags; except for:   that of the product

6301 to 6304       Blankets, travelling rugs,
                   bed linen etc.; curtains
                   etc.; other furnishing
                   articles:
                                                 Manufacture from2:
                   - Of felt, of nonwovens       - fibres, or chemical materials
                                                 or textile pulp
                                                 2
                   - Other:                      See Introductory Note 6
                   - Embroidered                 Manufacture from yarn l.3
                   - Other                       Manufacture from yarn1.3
                                                 1
                                                  For special conditions relating
                                                 to products made of a mixture
                                                 of textile materials, see
                                                 Introductory Note 5
                                                 3
                                                  For knitted or crocheted
                                                 articles, not elastic or
                                                 rubberized, obtained by sewing
                                                 or assembly pieces of knitted
                                                 or crocheted fabrics (cut out or
                                                 knitted directly to shape), see
                                                 Introductory Note 6




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 396]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product         Working or Processing
                        no                                         carried out on non-
                                                                originating materials that
                                                                confers originating status
                         (1)                  (2)                     (3)      or      (4)

                6305             Sacks and bags, of a kind      Manufacture from yarn1
                                 used for the packing of
                                                                1
                                 goods                           For special conditions relating
                                                                to products made of a mixture
                                                                of textile materials, see
                                                                Introductory Note 5
                6306             Tarpaulins, awnings and        Manufacture from fabric
                                 sunblinds; tents; sails for
                                 boats, sailboards or
                                 landcraft; camping goods:

                6307             Other made-up articles,        Manufacture in which the
                                 including dress patterns       value of all the materials used
                                                                does not exceed 40% of the ex-
                                                                works price of the product

                6308             Sets consisting of woven       Each item in the set must
                                 fabric and yarn, whether       satisfy the rule which would
                                 or not with accessories,       apply to it if it were not
                                 for making up into rugs,       included in the set. However,
                                 tapestries, embroidered        non-originating articles may be
                                 table cloths or serviettes,    incorporated provided their
                                 or similar textile articles,   total value does not exceed
                                 put up in packings for         25% of the ex-works price of
                                 retail sale                    the set

                ex Chapter 64    Footwear, gaiters and the      Manufacture from materials of
                                 like; except for:              any heading except for
                                                                assemblies of uppers affixed to
                                                                inner soles or to other sole
                                                                components of heading No
                                                                6406

                6406             Parts of footwear              Manufacture in which all the
                                 (including uppers whether      materials used are classified
                                 or not attached to soles       within a heading other than
                                 other than outer soles);       that of the product
                                 removable in-soles, heel
                                 cushions and similar
                                 articles; gaiters, leggings
                                 and similar articles, and
                                 parts thereof

                ex Chapter 65    Headgear and parts             Manufacture in which all the
                                 thereof, except for            materials used are classified
                                                                within a heading other than
                                                                that of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                       LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                  [CH.293– 397



    HS Heading     Description of product          Working or Processing
        no                                           carried out on non-
                                                  originating materials that
                                                  confers originating status
          (1)                   (2)                     (3)      or      (4)

6503               Felt hats and other felt       Manufacture from yarn or
                   headgear, made from the        textile fibres1
                   hat bodies, hoods or
                                                  1
                   plateaux of heading No          For special conditions relating
                   6501, whether or not           to products made of a mixture
                   lined or trimmed               of textile materials, see
                                                  Introductory Note 5
6505               Hats and other headgear,       Manufacture from yarn or
                   knitted or crocheted, or       textile fibres1
                   made up from lace, felt or
                                                  1
                   other textile fabric, in the    For special conditions relating
                   piece (but not in strips),     to products made of a mixture
                   whether or not lined or        of textile materials, see
                   trimmed; hair-nets of any      Introductory Note 5
                   material, whether or not
                   lined or trimmed

ex Chapter 66      Umbrellas, sun umbrellas,      Manufacture in which all the
                   walking-sticks, seat-          materials used are classified
                   sticks, whips, riding-         within a heading other than
                   crops, and parts thereof;      that of the product
                   except for:
6601               Umbrellas and sun              Manufacture in which the
                   umbrellas (including           value of all the materials used
                   walking-stick umbrellas,       does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                   garden umbrellas and           works price of the product
                   similar umbrellas)
Chapter 67         Prepared feathers and          Manufacture in which all the
                   down and articles made of      materials used are classified
                   feathers or of down;           within a heading other than
                   artificial flowers; articles   that of the product
                   of human hair
ex Chapter 68      Articles of stone, plaster,    Manufacture in which all the
                   cement, asbestos, mica or      materials used are classified
                   similar materials; except      within a heading other than
                   for:                           that of the product
ex 6803            Articles of slate or of        Manufacture from worked
                   agglomerated slate             slate
ex 6812            Articles of asbestos;          Manufacture from materials of
                   articles of mixtures with a    any heading
                   basis of asbestos or of
                   mixtures with a basis of
                   asbestos and magnesium
                   carbonate




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 398]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading         Description of product        Working or Processing
                        no                                             carried out on non-
                                                                    originating materials that
                                                                    confers originating status
                          (1)                      (2)                    (3)      or     (4)
                ex 6814               Articles of mica,             Manufacture from worked
                                      including agglomerated or     mica (including agglomerated
                                      reconstituted mica, on a      or reconstituted mica)
                                      support of paper,
                                      paperboard or other
                                      materials
                Chapter 69            Ceramic products              Manufacture in which all the
                                                                    materials used are classified
                                                                    within a heading other than
                                                                    that of the product
                ex Chapter 70         Glass and glassware;          Manufacture in which all the
                                      except for:                   materials used are classified
                                                                    within a heading other than
                                                                    that of the product
                ex 7003 ex 7004 and   Glass with a non-             Manufacture from materials of
                ex 7005               reflecting layer              heading No 7001

                7006                  Glass of heading No
                                      7003, 7004 or 7005, bent,
                                      edgeworked, engraved,
                                      drilled, enamelled or
                                      otherwise worked, but not
                                      framed or fitted with
                                      other materials:
                                      -     glass plate substrate   Manufacture from non-coated
                                      coated with dielectric thin   glass plate substrate of heading
                                      film, semi-conductor          No 7006
                                      grade, in accordance with
                                      SEMII standards1
                                      1
                                       SEMII-Semiconductor
                                      Equipment and Materials
                                      Institute Incorporated”

                                      -    other                    Manufacture from materials of
                                                                    heading No 7001
                7007                  Safety glass, consisting of   Manufacture from materials of
                                      toughened (tempered) or       heading No 7001
                                      laminated glass
                7008                  Multiple-walled               Manufacture from materials of
                                      insulating units of glass     heading No 7001

                7009                  Glass mirrors, whether or     Manufacture from materials of
                                      not framed, including         heading No 7001
                                      rear-view mirrors




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                          LRO 1/2017
                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 399



    HS Heading          Description of product         Working or Processing
        no                                               carried out on non-
                                                      originating materials that
                                                      confers originating status
          (1)                       (2)                     (3)     or      (4)

7010                    Carboys, bottles, flasks,     Manufacture in which all the
                        jars, pots, phials,           materials used are classified
                        ampoules and other            within a heading other than
                        containers, of glass, of a    that of the product
                        kind used for the
                        conveyance or packing of
                        goods; preserving jars of
                        glass; stoppers, lids and
                        other closures, of glass

7013                    Glassware of a kind used      Manufacture in which all the
                        for table, kitchen, toilet,   materials used are classified
                        office, indoor decoration     within a heading other than
                        or similar purposes (other    that of the product
                        than that of heading No
                        7010 or 7018)
ex 7019                 Articles (other than yarn)    Manufacture from:
                        of glass fibres               -    uncoloured slivers,
                                                      rovings, yarn or chopped
                                                      strands, or
                                                      -    glass wool
ex Chapter 71           Natural or cultured pearls,   Manufacture in which all the
                        precious or semi-precious     materials used are classified
                        stones, precious metals,      within a heading other than
                        metals clad with precious     that of the product
                        metal, and articles
                        thereof; imitation
                        jewellery; coin; except
                        for:
ex 7101                 Natural or cultured pearls,   Manufacture in which the
                        graded and temporarily        value of all the materials used
                        strung for convenience of     does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                        transport                     works price of the product

ex 7102, ex 7103 and    Worked precious or semi-      Manufacture from unworked
ex 7104                 precious stones (natural,     precious or semi-precious
                        synthetic or                  stones
                        reconstructed)
7106, 7108 and 7110     Precious metals:
                        - Unwrought                   Manufacture from materials
                                                      not classified within heading
                                                      No 7106, 7108 or 7110

                        - Semi-manufactured or        Manufacture from unworked
                        in powder form                precious or semi-precious
                                                      stones

ex 7107, ex 7109 and    Metals clad with precious     Manufacture from metals clad
ex 7111                 metals, semi-                 with precious metals,
                        manufactured                  unwrought




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 400]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                    HS Heading    Description of product        Working or Processing
                        no                                        carried out on non-
                                                               originating materials that
                                                               confers originating status
                          (1)                (2)                     (3)     or      (4)

                7116             Articles of natural or        Manufacture in which the
                                 cultured pearls, precious     value of all the materials used
                                 or semi-precious stones       does not exceed 50% of the ex-
                                 (natural, synthetic or        works price of the product
                                 reconstructed)

                7117             Imitation jewellery           Manufacture in which all the
                                                               materials used are classified
                                                               within a heading other than
                                                               that of the product

                ex Chapter 72    Iron and steel; except for:   Manufacture in which all the
                                                               materials used are classified
                                                               within a heading other than
                                                               that of the product

                7207             Semi-finished products of     Manufacture from materials of
                                 iron or non-alloy steel       heading No 7201, 7202, 7203,
                                                               7204 or 7205

                7208 to 7216     Flat-rolled products, bars    Manufacture from ingots or
                                 and rods, angles, shapes      other primary forms or semi-
                                 and sections of iron or       finished materials of headings
                                 non-alloy steel               No 7206 or 7207
                7217             Wire of iron or non-alloy     Manufacture from semi-
                                 steel                         finished materials of heading
                                                               No 7207

                ex 7218          Semi-finished products        Manufacture from materials of
                                                               headings No 7201, 7202, 7203,
                                                               7204 or 7205

                7219 to 7222     Flat-rolled products, bars    Manufacture from ingots or
                                 and rods, angles, shapes      other primary forms or semi-
                                 and sections of stainless     finished materials of heading
                                 steel                         No 7218

                7223             Wire of stainless steel       Manufacture from semi-
                                                               finished materials of heading
                                                               No 7218

                ex 7224          Semi-finished products        Manufacture from materials of
                                                               headings No 7201, 7202, 7203,
                                                               7204 or 7205

                7225 to 7228     Flat-rolled products, hot-    Manufacture from ingots or
                                 rolled bars and rods, in      other primary forms or semi-
                                 irregularly wound coils;      finished materials of headings
                                 angles, shapes and            No 7206, 7207, 7218 or 7224
                                 sections, of other alloy
                                 steel; hollow drill bars
                                 and rods of alloy or non-
                                 alloy steel




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                     LRO 1/2017
                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 401


    HS Heading         Description of product           Working or Processing
        no                                                carried out on non-
                                                       originating materials that
                                                       confers originating status
          (1)                         (2)                    (3)     or      (4)
7229                   Wire of other alloy steel       Manufacture from semi-
                                                       finished materials of heading
                                                       No 7224
ex chapter 73          Articles of iron or steel;      Manufacture in which all the
                       except for:                     materials used are classified
                                                       within a heading other than
                                                       that of the product
ex 7301                Sheet piling                    Manufacture from materials of
                                                       heading No 7206
7302                   Railway or tramway track        Manufacture from materials of
                       construction materials of       heading No 7206
                       iron or steel, the following:
                       rails, checkrails and
                       rackrails, switch blades,
                       crossing frogs, point rods
                       and other crossing pieces,
                       sleepers (cross-ties), fish-
                       plates, chairs, chair
                       wedges, sole plates (base
                       plates), rail clips,
                       bedplates, ties and other
                       material specialized for
                       jointing or fixing rails
7304, 7305 and 7306    Tubes, pipes and hollow         Manufacture from materials of
                       profiles, of iron (other        heading No 7206, 7207, 7218
                       than cast iron) or steel        or 7224

ex 7307                Tube or pipe fittings of        Turning, drilling, reaming,
                       stainless steel (ISO No         threading, deburring and
                       X5CrNiMo 1712),                 sandblasting of forged blanks
                       consisting of several parts     the value of which does not
                                                       exceed 35 % of the ex-works
                                                       price of the product
7308                   Structures (excluding           Manufacture in which all the
                       prefabricated buildings of      materials used are classified
                       heading No 9406) and            within a heading other than
                       parts of structures (for        that of the product. However,
                       example, bridges and            welded angles, shapes and
                       bridge-sections, lock-          sections of heading No 7301
                       gates, towers, lattice          may not be used
                       masts, roofs, roofing
                       frame-works, doors and
                       windows and their frames
                       and thresholds for doors,
                       shutters, balustrades,
                       pillars and columns), of
                       iron or steel; plates, rods,
                       angles, shapes, sections,
                       tubes and the like,
                       prepared for use in
                       structures, of iron or steel



–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 402]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    HS Heading    Description of product      Working or Processing
                        no                                      carried out on non-
                                                             originating materials that
                                                             confers originating status
                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)      or      (4)
                ex 7315          Skid chain                  Manufacture in which the
                                                             value of all the materials of
                                                             heading No 7315 used does not
                                                             exceed 50% of the ex-works
                                                             price of the product
                ex Chapter 74    Copper and articles         Manufacture in which:
                                 thereof; except for:        -     all the materials used are
                                                             classified within a heading
                                                             other than that of the product;
                                                             -     the value of all the
                                                             materials used does not exceed
                                                             50% of the ex-works price of
                                                             the product

                7401             Copper mattes; cement       Manufacture in which all the
                                 copper (precipitated        materials used are classified
                                 copper)                     within a heading other than
                                                             that of the product

                7402             Unrefined copper; copper    Manufacture in which all the
                                 anodes for electrolytic     materials used are classified
                                 refining                    within a heading other than
                                                             that of the product

                7403             Refined copper and          Manufacture in which all the
                                 copper alloys, unwrought:   materials used are classified
                                                             within a heading other than
                                 -    Refined copper         that of the product

                                                             Manufacture from refined
                                 -     Copper alloys and     copper, unwrought, or waste
                                 refined copper containing   and scrap of copper
                                 other elements
                7404             Copper waste and scrap      Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials used are classified
                                                             within a heading other than
                                                             that of the product

                7405             Master alloys of copper     Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials used are classified
                                                             within a heading other than
                                                             that of the product

                ex Chapter 75    Nickel and articles         Manufacture in which:
                                 thereof; except for;        -     all the materials used are
                                                             classified within a heading
                                                             other than that of the product;
                                                             -     the value of all the
                                                             materials used does not exceed
                                                             50% of the ex-works price of
                                                             the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                    LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                  [CH.293– 403



   HS Heading     Description of product         Working or Processing
       no                                          carried out on non-
                                                  originating materials
                                                 that confers originating
                                                          status
          (1)                 (2)                     (3)      or      (4)
 7501 to 7503   Nickel mattes, nickel oxide      Manufacture in which all the
                sinters and other                materials used are classified
                intermediate products of         within a heading other than
                nickel metallurgy;               that of the product
                unwrought nickel; nickel
                waste and scrap
ex Chapter 76     Aluminium and articles         Manufacture in which:
                  thereof; except for            - all the materials used are
                                                 classified within a heading
                                                 other than that of the product;
                                                 - the value of all the
                                                 materials used does not
                                                 exceed 50% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product
7601             Unwrought aluminium             Manufacture in which:
                                                 - all the materials used are
                                                 classified within a heading
                                                 other than that of the product;
                                                 - the value of all the
                                                 materials used does not
                                                 exceed 50% of the ex-works
                                                 price of the product
  7602           Aluminium waste or scrap        Manufacture in which all the
                                                 materials used are classified
                                                 within a heading other than
                                                 that of the product
ex 7616          Aluminium articles other         Manufacture in which:
                 than gauze, cloth, grill,        - all the materials used are
                 netting, fencing, reinforcing    classified within a heading
                 fabric and similar materials     other than that of the product.
                 (including endless bands) of     However, gauze, cloth, grill,
                 aluminium wire, and              netting, fencing, reinforcing
                 expanded metal of                fabric and similar materials
                 aluminium
                                                  (including endless bands) of
                                                  aluminium wire, or expanded
                                                  metal of aluminium may be
                                                  used;
                                                 - the value of all the materials
                                                 used does not exceed 50% of
                                                 the ex-works price of the
                                                 product
Chapter 77       Reserved for possible future     Manufacture in which:
ex Chapter 78    use in HS Lead and articles      - all the materials used are
                 thereof; except for:             classified within a heading
                                                  other than that of the product;
                                                  - the value of all the
                                                  materials used does not
                                                  exceed 50% of the ex-works
                                                  price of the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 404]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


           HS Heading         Description of product            Working or Processing
               no                                                 carried out on non-
                                                               originating materials that
                                                               confers originating status
                 (1)                       (2)                     (3)     or     (4)
         7801            Unwrought lead:
                         - Refined lead                      Manufacture from “bullion" or
                                                             “work” lead
                         - Other                             Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials used are classified within
                                                             a heading other than that of the
                                                             product. However, waste and scrap
                                                             of heading 7802 may not be used
         7802            Lead waste and scrap                Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials used are classified within
                                                             a heading other than that of the
                                                             product
         ex Chapter 79   Zinc and articles thereof; except   Manufacture in which:
                         for:                                -     all the materials used are
                                                             classified within a heading other
                                                             than that of the product;
                                                             -     the value of all the materials
                                                             used does not exceed 50% of the
                                                             ex-works price of the product
         7901            Un wrought zinc                     Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials used are classified within
                                                             a heading other than that of the
                                                             product. However, waste and scrap
                                                             of heading No 7902 may not be
                                                             used
         7902            Zinc waste and scrap                Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials used are classified within
                                                             a heading other than that of the
                                                             product
         ex chapter 80   Tin and articles thereof; except    Manufacture in which:
                         for:                                -     all the materials used are
                                                             classified within a heading other
                                                             than that of the product;
                                                             -     the value of all the materials
                                                             used does not exceed 50% of the
                                                             ex- works price of the product
         8001            Unwrought tin                       Manufacture in which all the
                                                             materials used are classified within
                                                             a heading other than that of the
                                                             product. However, waste and scrap
                                                             of heading No 8002 may not be
                                                             used




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                         LRO 1/2017
                          CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                   [CH.293– 405



HS Heading            Description of product               Working or Processing
    no                                                       carried out on non-
                                                          originating materials that
                                                          confers originating status
       (1)                        (2)                                (3) or (4)
8002 and 8007 Tin waste and scrap; other articles       Manufacture in which all the
              of tin                                    materials used are classified
                                                        within a heading other than that of
                                                        the product
Chapter 81      Other base metals; cermets; articles
                thereof:
                -     Other base metals, wrought;       Manufacture in which the value of
                articles thereof                        all the materials classified within
                                                        the same heading as the product
                                                        used does not exceed 50% of the
                                                        ex- works price of the product
                -    Other                              Manufacture in which all the
                                                        materials used are classified
                                                        within a heading other than that of
                                                        the product
ex Chapter 82   Tools, implements, cutlery, spoons      Manufacture in which all the
                and forks, of base metal; parts         materials used are classified
                thereof of base metal; except for:      within a heading other than that of
                                                        the product
8206            Tools of two or more of the heading     Manufacture in which all the
                Nos 8202 to 8205, put up in sets for    materials used are classified
                retail sale                             within a heading other than
                                                        heading Nos 8202 to 8205.
                                                        However, tools of heading Nos
                                                        8202 to 8205 may be incorporated
                                                        into the set provided their value
                                                        does not exceed 15% of the ex-
                                                        works price of the set
8207            Interchangeable tools for hand          Manufacture in which:
                tools, whether or not power-            -     all the materials used are
                operated, or for machine-tools (for     classified within a heading other
                example, for pressing, stamping,        than that of the product;
                punching, tapping, threading,           -     the value of all the materials
                drilling, boring, broaching, milling,   used does not exceed 40% of the
                turning, or screwdriving), including    ex-works price of the product
                dies for drawing or extruding metal,
                and rock drilling or earth boring
                tools
8208            Knives and cutting blades, for          Manufacture in which:
                machines or for mechanical              -     all the materials used are
                appliances                              classified within a heading other
                                                        than that of the product;
                                                        -     the value of all the materials
                                                        used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                        ex-works price of the product




   –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
   LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 406]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



           HS Heading          Description of product               Working or Processing
               no                                                     carried out on non-
                                                                   originating materials that
                                                                   confers originating status
                 (1)                        (2)                        (3)     or     (4)
          ex 8211         Knives with cutting blades, serrated   Manufacture in which all the
                          or not (including pruning knives),     materials used are classified
                          other than knives of heading No        within a heading other than that of
                          8208                                   the product. However, knife
                                                                 blades and handles of base metal
                                                                 may be used
          8214            Other articles of cutlery (for         Manufacture in which all the
                          example, hair clippers, butchers’ or   materials used are classified
                          kitchen cleavers, choppers and         within a heading other than that of
                          mincing knives, paper knives);         the product. However, handles of
                          manicure or pedicure sets and          base metal may be used
                          instruments (including nail files)
          8215            Spoons, forks, ladles, skimmers,       Manufacture in which all the
                          cake- servers, fish-knives, butter-    materials used are classified
                          knives, sugar tongs and similar        within a heading other than that of
                          kitchen or tableware                   the product. However, handles of
                                                                 base metal may be used
          ex Chapter 83   Miscellaneous articles of base         Manufacture in which all the
                          metal; except for:                     materials used are classified
                                                                 within a heading other than that of
                                                                 the product
          ex 8302         Other mountings, fittings and          Manufacture in which all the
                          similar articles suitable for          materials used are classified
                          buildings, and automatic door          within a heading other than that of
                          closers                                the product. However, the other
                                                                 materials of heading No 8302 may
                                                                 be used provided their value does
                                                                 not exceed 20% of the ex-works
                                                                 price of the product
          ex 8306         Statuettes and other ornaments, of     Manufacture in which all the
                          base metal                             materials used are classified
                                                                 within a heading other than that of
                                                                 the product However, the other
                                                                 materials of heading No 8306 may
                                                                 be used provided their value does
                                                                 not exceed 30% of the ex-works
                                                                 price of the product
          ex Chapter 84   Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery   Manufacture in which:
                          and mechanical appliances; parts       -     all the materials used are
                          thereof; except for:                   classified within a heading other
                                                                 than that of the product;
                                                                 -     the value of all the materials
                                                                 used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                                 ex- works price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                              LRO 1/2017
                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                    [CH.293– 407



HS Heading        Description of product         Working or Processing carried
    no                                              out on non-originating
                                                    materials that confers
                                                      originating status
       (1)                     (2)                             (3) or (4)
ex 8401       Nuclear fuel elements              Manufacture in which all the
                                                 materials used are classified within a
                                                 heading other than that of the product1
                                                 1
                                                   This rule shall apply until 31
                                                 December 2005

8402          Steam or other vapour              Manufacture in which:
              generating boilers (other than     -     all the materials used are
              central heating hot water          classified within a heading other than
              boilers capable also of            that of the product;
              producing low pressure steam);     -     the value of all the materials
              super heated water boilers         used does not exceed 40% of the ex-
                                                 works price of the product
8403 and ex   Central heating boilers other      Manufacture in which all the
8404          than those of heading No 8402      materials used are classified within a
              and auxiliary plant for central    heading other than heading No 8403
              heading boilers                    or 8404
8406          Steam turbines and other           Manufacture in which the value of all
              vapour turbines                    the materials used does not exceed
                                                 40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                 product
8407          Spark-ignition reciprocating or    Manufacture in which the value of all
              rotary internal combustion         the materials used does not exceed
              piston engines                     40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                 product
8408          Compression-ignition internal      Manufacture in which the value of all
              combustion piston engines          the materials used does not exceed
              (diesel or semi-diesel engines)    40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                 product
8409          Parts suitable for use solely or   Manufacture in which the value of all
              principally with the engines of    the materials used does not exceed
              heading No 8407 or 8408            40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                 product
8411          Turbo-jets, turbo propellers and   Manufacture in which;
              other gas turbines                 -     all the materials used are
                                                 classified within a heading other than
                                                 that of the product;
                                                 -     the value of all the materials
                                                 used does not exceed 40% of the ex-
                                                 works price of the product
8412          Other engines and motors           Manufacture in which the value of all
                                                 the materials used does not exceed
                                                 40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                 product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 408]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                HS Heading        Description of product             Working or Processing
                    no                                                 carried out on non-
                                                                    originating materials that
                                                                    confers originating status
                       (1)                    (2)                            (3) or (4)
                ex 8413      Rotary positive displacement         Manufacture in which:
                             pumps                                -     all the materials used are
                                                                  classified within a heading other
                                                                  than that of the product;
                                                                  -     the value of all the materials
                                                                  used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                                  ex-works price of the product
                ex 8414      Industrial fans, blowers and the     Manufacture in which:
                             like                                 -     all the materials used are
                                                                  classified within a heading other
                                                                  than that of the product;
                                                                  -     the value of all the materials
                                                                  used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                                  ex-works price of the product
                8415         Air conditioning machines,           Manufacture in which the value of
                             comprising a motor-driven fan        all the materials used does not
                             and elements for changing the        exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                             temperature and humidity,            of the product
                             including those machines in
                             which the humidity cannot be
                             separately regulated
                8418         Refrigerators, freezers and other    Manufacture in which:
                             refrigerating or freezing            -     all the materials used are
                             equipment, electric or other; heat   classified within a heading other
                             pumps other than air conditioning
                             machines of heading No 8415          than that of the product;
                                                                  -     the value of all the materials
                                                                  used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                                  ex-works price of the product;
                                                                  -     the value of all the non-
                                                                  originating materials used does not
                                                                  exceed the value of the originating
                                                                  materials used
                8419         Machines for wood, paper pulp        Manufacture:
                             and paperboard industries            -    in which the value of all the
                                                                  materials used does not exceed
                                                                  40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                                  product;
                                                                  where, within the above limit, the
                                                                  materials classified within the same
                                                                  heading as the product are only
                                                                  used up to a value of 25% of the
                                                                  ex-works price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                              LRO 1/2017
                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                    [CH.293– 409



HS Heading         Description of product               Working or Processing
    no                                                    carried out on non-
                                                       originating materials that
                                                       confers originating status
       (1)                      (2)                               (3) or (4)
8420          Calendering or other rolling           Manufacture:
              machines, other than for metals or     -    in which the value of all the
              glass, and cylinders therefor          materials used does not exceed
                                                     40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                     product;
                                                     -    where, within the above limit,
                                                     the materials classified within the
                                                     same heading as the product are
                                                     only used up to a value of 25% of
                                                     the ex-works price of the product
8423          Weighing machinery (excluding          Manufacture in which:
              balances of a sensitivity of 5 cg or   -     all the materials used are
              better), including weight operated     classified within a heading other
              counting or checking machines;         than that of the product;
              weighing machine weights of all        -     the value of all the materials
              kinds                                  used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                     ex-works price of the product
8425 to 8428 Lifting, handling, loading or           Manufacture:
             unloading machinery                     -    in which the value of all the
                                                     materials used does not exceed
                                                     40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                     product;
                                                     where, within the above limit, the
                                                     materials classified within heading
                                                     No 8431 are only used up to a value
                                                     of 10% of the ex-works price of the
                                                     product
    8429      Self-propelled bulldozers,
              angledozers, graders, levellers,
              scrapers, mechanical shovels
              excavators, shovel loaders,
              tamping machines and road
              rollers:
              -    Road rollers                      Manufacture in which the value of
                                                     all the materials used does not
                                                     exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                     of the product

              -    Other                             Manufacture:
                                                     -     in which the value of all the
                                                     materials used does not exceed
                                                     40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                     product;
                                                     -     where, within the above limit,
                                                     the materials classified within
                                                     heading No 8431 are only used up
                                                     to a value of 10% of the ex-works
                                                     price of the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 410]                          CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                HS Heading        Description of product             Working or Processing
                    no                                                 carried out on non-
                                                                    originating materials that
                                                                    confers originating status
                       (1)                     (2)                            (3) or (4)
                8430         Other moving, grading, levelling,    Manufacture:
                             scraping, excavating, tamping,       - in which the value of all the
                             compacting, extracting or boring     materials used does not exceed
                             machinery, for earth, minerals or    40% of the ex-works price of the
                             ores; pile-drivers and pile-         product; where, within the above
                             extractors; snowploughs and          limit, the value of the materials
                             snow-blowers                         classified within
                                                                  - heading No 8431 are only used up
                                                                  to a value of 10% of the ex-works
                                                                  price of the product
                ex 8431      Parts suitable for use solely or     Manufacture in which the value of
                             principally with road rollers        all the materials used does not
                                                                  exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                                  of the product
                8439         Machinery for making pulp of         Manufacture:
                             fibrous cellulosic material or for   -    in which the value of all the
                             making or finishing paper or         materials used does not exceed
                             paperboard                           40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                                  product;
                                                                  -    where, within the above limit,
                                                                  the materials classified within the
                                                                  same heading as the product are
                                                                  only used up to a value of 25% of
                                                                  the ex-works price of the product
                8441         Other machinery for making up        Manufacture:
                             paper pulp, paper or paperboard,     -    in which the value of all the
                             including cutting machines of all    materials used does not exceed
                             kinds                                40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                                  product;
                                                                  -    where, within the above limit,
                                                                  the materials classified within the
                                                                  same heading as the product are
                                                                  only used up to a value of 25% of
                                                                  the ex-works price of the product
                8444 to 8447 Machines of these headings for       Manufacture in which the value of
                             use in the textile industry          all the materials used does not
                                                                  exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                                  of the product
                ex 8448      Auxiliary machinery for use with     Manufacture in which the value of
                             machines of headings Nos 8444        all the materials used does not
                             and 8445                             exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                                  of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                            LRO 1/2017
                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                     [CH.293– 411



HS Heading          Description of product              Working or Processing
    no                                                    carried out on non-
                                                       originating materials that
                                                       confers originating status
       (1)                       (2)                              (3) or (4)
8452           Sewing machines, other than
               book-sewing machines of
               heading No 8440; furniture, bases
               and covers specially designed for
               sewing machines; sewing
               machine needles:
               -     Sewing machines (lock           Manufacture;
               stitch only) with heads of a          -     in which the value of all the
               weight not exceeding 16 kg            materials used does not exceed
               without motor or 17 kg with           40% of the ex-works price of the
               motor                                 product;
                                                     -     where the value of all the non-
                                                     originating materials used in
                                                     assembling the head (without
                                                     motor) does not exceed the value of
                                                     the originating materials used;
                                                     -     the thread tension, crochet and
                                                     zigzag mechanisms used are
                                                     already originating

               -    Other                            Manufacture in which the value of
                                                     all the materials used does not
                                                     exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                     of the product
8456 to 8466   Machine-tools and machines and        Manufacture in which the value of
               their parts and accessories of        all the materials used does not
               headings Nos 8456 to 8466.            exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                     of the product
8469 to 8472   Office machines (for example,         Manufacture in which the value of
               typewriters, calculating machines,    all the materials used does not
               automatic data processing             exceed 40% of the ex-works price
               machines, duplicating machines,       of the product
               stapling machines)
8480           Moulding boxes for metal              Manufacture in which the value of
               foundry; mould bases; moulding        all the materials used does not
               patterns; moulds for metal (other     exceed 50% of the ex-works price
               than ingot moulds), metal             of the product
               carbides, glass, mineral materials,
               rubber or plastics
8482           Ball or roller bearings               Manufacture in which:
                                                     -     all the materials used are
                                                     classified within a heading other
                                                     than that of the product;
                                                     -     the value of all the materials
                                                     used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                     ex-works price of the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 412]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


            HS Heading        Description of product              Working or Processing
                no                                                  carried out on non-
                                                                 originating materials that
                                                                 confers originating status
                   (1)                     (2)                              (3) or (4)
            8484         Gaskets and similar joints of         Manufacture in which the value of
                         metal sheeting combined with          all the materials used does not
                         other material or of two or more      exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         layers of metal; sets or              of the product
                         assortments of gaskets and
                         similar joints, dissimilar in
                         composition, put up in pouches,
                         envelopes or similar packings;
                         mechanical seals.
            8485 ex      Machinery parts, not containing       Manufacture in which the value of
            Chapter 85   electrical connectors, insulators,    all the materials used does not
                         coils, contacts or other electrical   exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         features, not specified or included   of the product
                         elsewhere in this Chapter
                         Electrical machinery and
                         equipment and parts thereof;          Manufacture in which:
                         sound recorders and reproducers,      -     all the materials used are
                         television image and sound            classified within a heading other
                         recorders and reproducers, and        than that of – the product;
                         parts and accessories of such         -     the value of all the materials
                         articles; except for:                 used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                               ex-works price of the product
            8501         Electric motors and generators        Manufacture:
                         (excluding generating sets)           -     in which the value of all the
                                                               materials used does not exceed
                                                               40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                               product;
                                                               -     where, within the above limit,
                                                               the materials classified within
                                                               heading No 8503 are only used up
                                                               to a value of 10% of the ex-works
                                                               price of the product
            8502         Electric generating sets and          Manufacture:
                         rotary converters                     -     in which the value of all the
                                                               materials used does not exceed
                                                               40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                               product;
                                                               -     where, within the above limit,
                                                               the materials classified within
                                                               heading No 8501 or 8503, taken
                                                               together are only used up to a value
                                                               of 10% of the ex-works price of the
            ex 8504      Power supply units for automatic      Manufacture in which the value of
                         data- processing machines             all the materials used does not
                                                               exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                               of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                           LRO 1/2017
                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                    [CH.293– 413


HS Heading        Description of product             Working or Processing
    no                                                 carried out on non-
                                                    originating materials that
                                                    confers originating status
       (1)                    (2)                              (3) or (4)
ex 8518      Microphones and stands therefor;     Manufacture:
             loudspeakers, whether or not         -     in which the value of all the
             mounted in their enclosures;         materials used does not exceed
             audio-frequency electric             40% of the ex-works price of the
             amplifiers; electric sound           product;
             amplifier sets                       -     where the value of all the non-
                                                  originating materials used does not
                                                  exceed the value of the originating
                                                  materials used
8519         Turntables (record-decks),           Manufacture:
             record-players, cassette-players     -     in which the value of ail the
             and other sound reproducing          materials used does not exceed
             apparatus, not incorporating a       40% of the ex-works price of the
             sound recording device               product;
                                                  -     where the value of all the non-
                                                  originating materials used does not
                                                  exceed the value of the originating
                                                  materials used
8520         Magnetic tape recorders and          Manufacture:
             other sound recording apparatus,     -     in which the value of all the
             whether or not incorporating a       materials used does not exceed
             sound reproducing device             40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                  product;
                                                  -     where the value of all the non-
                                                  originating materials used does not
                                                  exceed the value of the originating
                                                  materials used
8521         Video recording or reproducing       Manufacture:
             apparatus, whether or not            -     in which the value of all the
             incorporating a video tuner          materials used does not exceed
                                                  40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                  product;
                                                  -     where the value of all the non-
                                                  originating materials used does not
                                                  exceed the value of the originating
                                                  materials used
8522         Parts and accessories suitable for   Manufacture in which the value of
             use solely or principally with the   all the materials used does not
             apparatus of heading Nos 8519 to     exceed 40% of the ex-works price
             8521                                 of the product

8523         Prepared unrecorded media for        Manufacture in which the value of
             sound recording or similar           all the materials used does not
             recording of other phenomena,        exceed 40% of the ex-works price
             other than products of Chapter 37    of the product




 –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
 LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 414]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



            HS Heading        Description of product             Working or Processing
                no                                                 carried out on non-
                                                                originating materials that
                                                                confers originating status
                   (1)                    (2)                              (3) or (4)
            8524         Records, tapes and other recorded
                         media for sound or other
                         similarly recorded phenomena,
                         including matrices and masters
                         for the production of records, but
                         excluding products of chapter 37:
                         - Matrices and masters for the
                         production of records
                         - Other                              Manufacture in which the value of
                                                              all the materials used does not
                                                              exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                              of the product
                                                              Manufacture:
                                                              -     in which the value of all the
                                                              materials used does not exceed
                                                              40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                              product;
                                                              -     where, within the above limit,
                                                              the materials classified within
                                                              heading No 8523 are only used up
                                                              to a value of 10% of the ex-works
                                                              price of the product

            8525         Transmission apparatus for           Manufacture:
                         radiotelephony, radio-telegraphy,    -     in which the value of all the
                         radiobroadcasting or television,     materials used does not exceed
                         whether or not incorporating         40% of the ex-works price of the
                         reception apparatus or sound         product;
                         recording or reproducing             -     where the value of all the non-
                         apparatus; television cameras;       originating materials used does not
                         still image video cameras and        exceed the value of the originating
                         other video camera recorders         materials used
            8526         Radar apparatus, radio               Manufacture:
                         navigational aid apparatus and       -     in which the value of all the
                         radio remote control apparatus       materials used does not exceed
                                                              40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                              product;
                                                              -     where the value of all the non-
                                                              originating materials used does not
                                                              exceed the value of the originating
                                                              materials used
            8527         Reception apparatus for radio-       Manufacture:
                         telephony, radio-telegraphy or       -     in which the value of all the
                         radio broadcasting, whether or       materials used does not exceed
                         not combined, in the same            40% of the ex-works price of the
                         housing, with sound recording or     product;
                         reproducing apparatus or a clock     -     where the value of all the non-
                                                              originating materials used does not
                                                              exceed the value of the originating
                                                              materials used




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                         LRO 1/2017
                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                    [CH.293– 415



HS Heading        Description of product                Working or Processing
    no                                                    carried out on non-
                                                       originating materials that
                                                       confers originating status
       (1)                     (2)                                (3) or (4)
8528         Reception apparatus for                 Manufacture:
             television, whether or not              -     in which the value of all the
             incorporating radio broadcast           materials used does not exceed
             receivers or sound or video             40% of the ex-works price of the
             recording or reproducing                product;
             apparatus; video monitors and           -     where the value of all the non-
             video projectors                        originating materials used does not
                                                     exceed the value of the originating
                                                     materials used

8529         Parts suitable for use solely or
             principally with the apparatus of
             heading Nos 8525 to 8528
             - Suitable for use solely or            Manufacture in which the value of
             principally with video recording        all the materials used does not
             or reproducing apparatus                exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                     of the product

             - Other                                 Manufacture:
                                                     -     in which the value of all the
                                                     materials used does not exceed 4%
                                                     of the ex-works price of the
                                                     product;
                                                     -     where the value of all the non-
                                                     originating materials used does not
                                                     exceed the value of the originating
                                                     materials used
8535 and     Electrical apparatus for switching      Manufacture:
8536         or protecting electrical circuits, or   -     in which the value of all
             for making connections to or in         the materials used does not exceed
             electrical circuits                     40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                     product;
                                                     -     where within the above limit,
                                                     the materials classified within
                                                     heading No 8538 are only used up
                                                     to a value of 10% of the ex-works
                                                     price of the product
8537         Boards, panels, consoles, desks,        Manufacture:
             cabinets and other bases,               -     in which the value of all the
             equipped with two or more               materials used does not exceed
             apparatus of heading No 8535 or         40% of the ex-works price of the
             8536, for electric control or the       product;
             distribution of electricity,            -     where within the above limit,
             including those incorporating           the materials classified within
             instruments or apparatus of             heading No 8538 are only used up
             Chapter 90, and numerical               to a value of 10% of the ex-works
             control apparatus, other than           price of the product
             switching apparatus of heading
             No 8517




 –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
 LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 416]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



            HS Heading        Description of product              Working or Processing
                no                                                  carried out on non-
                                                                 originating materials that
                                                                 confers originating status
                   (1)                     (2)                            (3) or (4)
            8541         Diodes, transistors and similar       Manufacture in which:
                         semiconductor devices, except         -     all the materials used are
                         wafers not yet cut into chips         classified within a heading other
                                                               than that of the product; ’
                                                               -     the value of all the materials
                                                               used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                               ex-works price of the product
            8542         Electronic integrated circuits and    Manufacture:
                         microassemblies                       -     in which the value of all the
                                                               materials used does not exceed
                                                               40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                               product;
                                                               -     where, within the above limit,
                                                               the materials classified within
                                                               heading No 8541 or 8542, taken
                                                               together, are only used up to a
                                                               value of 10% of the ex-works price
                                                               of the product
            8544         Insulated (including enameled or      Manufacture in which the value of
                         anodised) wire, cable (including      all the materials used does not
                         coaxial cable) and other insulated    exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         electric conductors, whether or       of the product
                         not fitted with connectors; optical
                         fibre cables, made up of
                         individually sheathed fibres,
                         whether or not assembled with
                         electric conductors or fitted with
                         connectors

            8545         Carbon electrodes, carbon             Manufacture in which the value of
                         brushes, lamp carbons, battery        all the materials used does not
                         carbons and other articles of         exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         graphite or other carbon, with or     of the product
                         without metal, of a kind used for
                         electrical purposes
            8546         Electrical insulators of any          Manufacture in which the value of
                         material                              all the materials used does not
                                                               exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                               of the product
            8547         Insulating fittings for electrical    Manufacture in which the value of
                         machines, appliances or               all the materials used does not
                         equipment, being fittings wholly      exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         of insulating materials apart from    of the product
                         any minor components of metal
                         (for example, threaded sockets)
                         incorporated during moulding
                         solely for purposes of assembly
                         other than insulators of heading
                         No 8546; electrical conduit
                         tubing and joints therefor, of base
                         metal lined with insulating
                         material




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                           LRO 1/2017
                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                    [CH.293– 417



HS Heading           Description of product              Working or Processing
    no                                                     carried out on non-
                                                        originating materials that
                                                        confers originating status
       (1)                        (2)                              (3) or (4)
8548            Waste and scrap of primary cells,     Manufacture in which the value of
                primary batteries and electric        all the materials used does-not
                accumulators; spent primary           exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                cells, spent primary batteries and    of the product
                spent electric accumulators;
                electrical parts of machinery or
                apparatus, not specified or
                included elsewhere in this
                Chapter

ex Chapter 86 Railway or tramway locomotives,         Manufacture in which the value of
              rolling- stock and parts thereof;       all the materials used does not
              railway or tramway track fixtures       exceed 40% of the ex-works price
              and fittings and parts thereof;         of the product
              mechanical (including electro-
              mechanical) traffic signaling
              equipment of all kinds; except
              for:

8608          Railway or tramway track                Manufacture in which:
              fixtures and fittings; mechanical       -     all the materials used are
              (including electro-mechanical)          classified within a heading other
              signaling, safety or traffic control    than that of the product;
              equipment for railways,                 -     the value of all the materials
              tramways, roads, inland                 used does not exceed 40% of the
              waterways, parking facilities, port     ex-works price of the product
              installations or airfields; parts of
              the foregoing
ex Chapter 87 Vehicles other than railway or          Manufacture in which the value of
              tramway rolling-stock, and parts        all the materials used does not
              and accessories thereof; except         exceed 40% of the ex-works price
              for:                                    of the product
8709            Works trucks, self-propelled, not     Manufacture in which:
                fitted with lifting or handling       -     all the materials used are
                equipment, of the type used in        classified within a heading other
                factories, warehouses, dock areas     than that of the product;
                or airports for short distance        -     the value of all the materials
                transport of goods; tractors of the   used does not exceed 40% of the
                type used on railway station          ex-works price of the product
                platforms; parts of the foregoing
                vehicles

8710            Tanks and other armoured              Manufacture in which:
                fighting vehicles, motorized,         -     all the materials used are
                whether or not fitted with            classified within a heading other
                weapons, and parts of such            than that of the product;
                vehicles                              -     the value of all the materials
                                                      used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                      ex-works price of the product




 –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
 LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 418]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



            HS Heading        Description of product              Working or Processing
                no                                                  carried out on non-
                                                                 originating materials that
                                                                 confers originating status
                   (1)                    (2)                               (3) or (4)

            8711         Motorcycles (including mopeds)
                         and cycles fitted with an auxiliary
                         motor, with or without side-cars;
                         side-cars:
                         -    With reciprocating internal
                         combustion piston engine of a
                         cylinder capacity:

                         - Not Exceeding 50 cc                 Manufacture:
                                                               -     in which the value of all the
                                                               materials used does not exceed
                                                               40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                               product;
                                                               where the value of all the non-
                                                               originating materials used does not
                                                               exceed the value of the originating
                                                               materials used

                         - Exceeding 50 cc                     Manufacture:
                                                               -     in which the value of all the
                                                               materials used does not exceed
                                                               40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                               product;
                                                               -     where the value of all the non-
                                                               originating materials used does not
                                                               exceed the value of the originating
                                                               materials used
                         - Other                               Manufacture: -
                                                               -    in which the value of all the
                                                               materials used does not exceed
                                                               40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                               product;
                                                               -    where the value of all the non-
                                                               originating materials used does not
                                                               exceed the value of the originating
                                                               materials used

            Ex 8712      Bicycles without ball bearings        Manufacture from materials not
                                                               classified in heading No 8714

            8715         Baby carriages and parts thereof      Manufacture in which:
                                                               - all the materials used are
                                                               classified within a heading other
                                                               than that of the product;
                                                               - the value of all the materials used
                                                               does not exceed 40% of the ex-
                                                               works price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                           LRO 1/2017
                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                   [CH.293– 419



HS Heading           Description of product             Working or Processing
    no                                                    carried out on non-
                                                       originating materials that
                                                       confers originating status
       (1)                       (2)                              (3) or (4)
8716           Trailers and semitrailers; other      Manufacture in which:
               vehicles, not mechanically            -     all the materials used are
               propelled; parts thereof              classified within a heading other
                                                     than that of the product;
                                                     -     the value of all the materials
                                                     used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                     ex-works price of the product

ex Chapter 88 Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts        Manufacture in which all the
              thereof; except for:                   materials used are classified within
                                                     a heading other than that of the
                                                     product
ex 8804         Rotochutes                           Manufacture from materials of any
                                                     heading including other materials
                                                     of heading No 8804
8805           Aircraft launching gear; deck-        Manufacture in which all the
               arrestor or similar gear; ground      materials used are classified within
               flying trainers; parts of the         a heading other than that of the
               foregoing articles                    product
Chapter 89     Ships, boats and floating             Manufacture in which all the
               structures                            materials used are classified within
                                                     a heading other than that of the
                                                     product However, hulls of heading
                                                     No 8906 may not be used
ex Chapter 90 Optical, photographic,                 Manufacture in which:
              cinematographic, measuring,            -     all the materials used are
              checking, precision, medical or        classified within a heading other
              surgical instruments and               than that of the product;
              apparatus; parts and accessories       -     the value of all the materials
              thereof; except for:                   used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                     ex- works price of the product
9001           Optical fibres and optical fibre      Manufacture in which the value of
               bundles; optical fibre cables         all the materials used does not
               other than those of heading No        exceed 40% of the ex-works price
               8544; sheets and plates of            of the product
               polarizing material; lenses
               (including contact lenses),
               prisms, mirrors and other optical
               elements, of any material,
               unmounted, other than such
               elements of glass not optically
               worked
9002           Lenses, prisms, mirrors and other     Manufacture in which the value of
               optical elements, of any material,    all the materials used does not
               mounted, being parts of or fittings   exceed 40% of the ex-works price
               for instruments or apparatus,         of the product
               other than such elements of glass
               not optically worked



 –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
 LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 420]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



            HS Heading        Description of product            Working or Processing
                no                                                carried out on non-
                                                               originating materials that
                                                               confers originating status
                   (1)                    (2)                           (3) or (4)
            9004         Spectacles, goggles and the like,   Manufacture in which the value of
                         corrective, protective or other     all the materials used does not
                                                             exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                             of the product
            ex 9005      Binoculars, monoculars, other       Manufacture in which:
                         optical telescopes, and mountings   -     all the materials used are
                         therefor, except for astronomical   classified within a heading other
                         refracting telescopes and           than that of the product;
                         mountings therefor                  -     the value of all the materials
                                                             used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                             ex- works price of the product;
                                                             -     the value of all the non-
                                                             originating materials used does not
                                                             exceed the value of the originating
                                                             materials used
            ex 9006      Photographic (other than            Manufacture in which:
                         cinematographic) cameras;           -     all the materials used are
                         photographic flashlight apparatus   classified within a heading other
                         and flashbulbs other than           than that of the product;
                         electrically ignited flashbulbs     -     the value of all the materials
                                                             used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                             ex-works price of the product;
                                                             -     the value of all the non-
                                                             originating materials used does not
                                                             exceed the value of the originating
                                                             materials used
            9007         Cinematographic cameras and         Manufacture in which:
                         projectors, whether or not          -     all the materials used are
                         incorporating sound recording or    classified within a heading other
                         reproducing apparatus               than that of the product;
                                                             -     the value of all the materials
                                                             used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                             ex-works price of the product;
                                                             the value of all the non-originating
                                                             materials used does not exceed the
                                                             value of the originating materials
                                                             used
            9011         Compound optical microscopes,       Manufacture in which:
                         including those for                 -     all the materials used are
                         photomicrography,                   classified within a heading other
                         cinephotomicrography or             than that of the product;
                         microprojection                     -     the value of all the materials
                                                             used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                             ex-works price of the product;
                                                             -     the value of all the non-
                                                             originating materials used does not
                                                             exceed the value of the originating
                                                             materials used




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                        LRO 1/2017
                       CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                [CH.293– 421



HS Heading        Description of product             Working or Processing
    no                                                 carried out on non-
                                                    originating materials that
                                                    confers originating status
       (1)                    (2)                              (3) or (4)
ex 9014      Other navigational instruments       Manufacture in which the value of
             and appliances                       all the materials used does not
                                                  exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                  of the product
9015         Surveying (including                 Manufacture in which the value of
             photogrammetrical surveying),        all the materials used does not
             hydrographic, oceanographic,         exceed 40% of the ex-works price
             hydrological, meteorological or      of the product
             geophysical instruments and
             appliances, excluding compasses,
             rangefinders
9016         Balances of a sensitivity of         Manufacture in which the value of
             5 cg or better, with or without      all the materials used does not
             weights                              exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                  of the product
9017         Drawing, marking-out or              Manufacture in which the value of
             mathematical calculating             all the materials used does not
             instruments (for example,            exceed 40% of the ex-works price
             drafting machines, pantographs,      of the product
             protractors, drawing sets, slide
             rules, disc calculators);
             instruments for measuring length,
             for use in the hand (for example,
             measuring rods and tapes,
             micrometers, callipers), not
             specified or included elsewhere in
             this Chapter
9018         Instruments and appliances used
             in medical, surgical, dental or
             veterinary sciences, including
             scintigraphic apparatus, other
             electro-medical apparatus and
             sight-testing instruments:
             - Dentists’ chairs incorporating     Manufacture from materials of any
             dental appliances or dentists’       heading, including other materials
             spittoons                            of heading No 9018

             - Other                              Manufacture in which:
                                                  -     all the materials used are
                                                  classified within a heading other
                                                  than that of the product;
                                                  -     the value of all the materials
                                                  used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                  ex-works price of the product
9019         Mechano-therapy appliances;          Manufacture in which:
             massage apparatus; psychological     -     all the materials used are
             aptitude-testing apparatus; ozone    classified within a heading other
             therapy, oxygen therapy, aerosol     than that of the product;
             therapy, artificial respiration or   -     the value of all the materials
             other therapeutic respiration        used does not exceed 40% of the
             apparatus                            ex-works price of the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 422]                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



            HS Heading        Description of product             Working or Processing
                no                                                 carried out on non-
                                                                originating materials that
                                                                confers originating status
                   (1)                     (2)                             (3) or (4)
            9020         Other breathing appliances and       Manufacture in which:
                         gas masks, excluding protective      -     all the materials used are
                         masks having neither mechanical      classified within a heading other
                         parts nor replaceable filters        than that of the product;
                                                              -     the value of all the materials
                                                              used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                              ex-works price of the product
            9024         Machines and appliances for          Manufacture in which the value of
                         testing the hardness, strength,      all the materials used does not
                         compressibility, elasticity or       exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         other mechanical properties of       of the product
                         materials (for example, metals,
                         wood, textiles, paper, plastics)
            9025         Hydrometers and similar floating     Manufacture in which the value of
                         instruments, thermometers,           all the materials used does not
                         pyrometers, barometers,              exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         hygrometers and psychrometers,       of the product
                         recording or not, and any
                         combination of these instruments
            9026         Instruments and apparatus for        Manufacture in which the value of
                         measuring or checking the flow,      all the materials used does not
                         level, pressure or other variables   exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         of liquids or gases (for example,    of the product
                         flow meters, level gauges,
                         manometers, heat meters),
                         excluding instruments and
                         apparatus of heading No 9014,
                         9015, 9028 or 9032
            9027         Instruments and apparatus for        Manufacture in which the value of
                         physical or chemical analysis        all the materials used does not
                         (for example, polarimeters,          exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                         refractometers, spectrometers, gas   of the product
                         or smoke analysis apparatus);
                         instruments and apparatus for
                         measuring or checking viscosity,
                         porosity, expansion, surface
                         tension or the like; instruments
                         and apparatus for measuring or
                         checking quantities of heat,
                         sound or light (including
                         exposure meters); microtomes




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                          LRO 1/2017
                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                      [CH.293– 423



HS Heading         Description of product               Working or Processing
    no                                                    carried out on non-
                                                       originating materials that
                                                       confers originating status
       (1)                      (2)                               (3) or (4)
9028          Gas, liquid or electricity supply or
              production meters, including
              calibrating meters therefor:

              -    Parts and accessories             Manufacture in which the value of
                                                     all the materials used does not
                                                     exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                     of the product
              -    Other                             Manufacture:
                                                     -     in which the value of all the
                                                     materials used does not exceed
                                                     40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                     product;
                                                     -     where the value of all the non-
                                                     originating materials used does not
                                                     exceed the value of the originating
                                                     materials used
9029          Revolution counters, production        Manufacture in which the value of
              counters, taximeters, mileometers,     all the materials used does not
              pedometers and the like; speed         exceed 40% of the ex-works price
              indicators and tachometers, other      of the product
              than those of heading Nos 9014 or
              9015; stroboscopes
9030          Oscilloscopes, spectrum analysers      Manufacture in which the value of
              and other instruments and              all the materials used does not
              apparatus for measuring or             exceed 40% of the ex-works price
              checking electrical quantities,        of the product
              excluding meters of heading No
              9028; instruments and apparatus
              for measuring or detecting alpha,
              beta, gamma, X-ray, cosmic or
              other ionizing radiations
9031          Measuring or checking                  Manufacture in which the value of
              instruments, appliances and            all the materials used does not
              machines, not specified or             exceed 40% of the ex-works price
              included elsewhere in this             of the product
              Chapter; profile projectors
9032          Automatic regulating or                Manufacture in which the value of
              controlling instruments and            all the materials used does not
              apparatus                              exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                     of the product
9033          Parts and accessories (not specified   Manufacture in which the value of
              or included elsewhere in this          all the materials used does not
              Chapter) for machines, appliances,     exceed 40% of the ex-works price
              instruments or apparatus of            of the product
              Chapter 90
ex Chapter 91 Clocks and watches and parts           Manufacture in which the value of
              thereof; except for:                   all the materials used does not
                                                     exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                     of the product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 424]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


            HS Heading        Description of product           Working or Processing
                no                                               carried out on non-
                                                              originating materials that
                                                              confers originating status
                   (1)                    (2)                            (3) or (4)
            9105         Other clocks                       Manufacture:
                                                            -     in which the value of all the
                                                            materials used does not exceed
                                                            40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                            product;
                                                            -     where the value of all the non-
                                                            originating materials used does not
                                                            exceed the value of the originating
                                                            materials used
            9109         Clock movements, complete          Manufacture:
                         and assembled                      -     in which the value of all the
                                                            materials used does not exceed
                                                            40% of the ex-works price of the
                                                            product;
                                                            - where the value of all the non-
                                                            originating materials used does not
                                                            exceed the value of the originating
                                                            materials used
            9110         Complete watch or clock            Manufacture:
                         movements, unassembled or          -     in which the value of all the
                         partly assembled (movement         materials used does not exceed
                         sets); incomplete watch or clock   40% of the ex-works price of the
                         movements, assembled; rough        product;
                         watch or clock movements           - where, within the above limit,
                                                            the materials classified within
                                                            heading No 9114 are only used up
                                                            to a value of 10% of the ex-works
                                                            price of the product
            9111         Watch cases and parts thereof      Manufacture:
                                                            -     all the materials used are
                                                            classified within a heading other
                                                            than that of the product;
                                                            - the value of all the materials
                                                            used does not exceed 40% of the
                                                            ex-works price of the product
            9112         Clock cases and cases of a         Manufacture:
                         similar type for other goods of    - all the materials used are
                         this Chapter, and parts thereof    classified within a heading other
                                                            than that of the product;
                                                            - the value of all the materials used
                                                            does not exceed 40% of the ex-
                                                            works price of the product




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                        LRO 1/2017
                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                  [CH.293– 425



HS Heading          Description of product            Working or Processing
    no                                                  carried out on non-
                                                     originating materials that
                                                     confers originating status
       (1)                      (2)                           (3) or (4)
9113           Watch straps, watch bands and       Manufacture in which the value of
               watch bracelets, and parts          all the materials used does not
               thereof:                            exceed 30% of the ex-works price
                                                   of the product

               -    of base metal, whether or      Manufacture in which the value of
               not gold- or                        all the materials used does not
                ……..silver-plated, or of metal     exceed 40% of the ex-works price
               clad with                           of the product
                ……...precious metal

               -    Other                          Manufacture in which the value of
                                                   all the materials used does not
                                                   exceed 50% of the ex-works price
                                                   of the product
Chapter 92     Musical instruments; parts and      Manufacture in which the value of
               accessories of such articles        all the materials used does not
                                                   exceed 40% of the ex-works price
                                                   of the product
Chapter 93     Arms and ammunition; parts and      Manufacture in which the value of
               accessories thereof                 all the materials used does not
                                                   exceed 50% of the ex-works price
                                                   of the product
ex Chapter 94 Furniture; bedding, mattresses,      Manufacture in which all the
              mattress supports, cushions and      materials used are classified within
              similar stuffed furnishings; lamps   a heading other than that of the
              and lighting fittings, not           product
              elsewhere specified or included;
              illuminated signs, illuminated
              name-plates and the like;
              prefabricated buildings; except
              for:
ex 9401 and    Base metal furniture,               Manufacture in which all the
ex 9403        incorporating unstuffed cotton      materials used are classified in a
               cloth or a weight of 300 g/m2       heading other than that of the
               or less                             product
                                                   or
                                                   Manufacture from cotton cloth
                                                   already made up in a form ready for
                                                   use of heading No 9401 or 9403,
                                                   provided:
                                                   -its value does not exceed 25% of
                                                   the ex-works price of the product;
                                                   -all the other materials used are
                                                   already originating and are
                                                   classified in a heading other than
                                                   heading No 9401 or 9403




 –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
 LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 426]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



            HS Heading           Description of product           Working or Processing
                no                                                  carried out on non-
                                                                 originating materials that
                                                                 confers originating status
                   (1)                      (2)                             (3) or (4)
            9405           Lamps and lighting fittings         Manufacture in which the value of
                           including searchlights and          all the materials used does not
                           spotlights and parts thereof, not   exceed 50% of the ex-works price
                           elsewhere specified or included;    of the product
                           illuminated signs, illuminated
                           name-plates and the like, having
                           a permanently fixed light source,
                           and parts thereof not elsewhere
                           specified or included

            9406           Prefabricated buildings             Manufacture in which the value of
                                                               all the materials used does not
                                                               exceed 50% of the ex-works price
                                                               of the product
            ex Chapter 95 Toys, games and sports               Manufacture in which all the
                          requisites; parts and accessories    materials used are classified within
                          thereof;                             a heading other than that of the
                          except for:                          product
            9503           Other toys; reduced-size            Manufacture in which:
                           (‘‘scale”) models and similar       -     all the materials used are
                           recreational models, working or     classified within a heading other
                           not; puzzles of all kinds           than that of the product;
                                                               -     the value of all the materials
                                                               used does not exceed 50% of the
                                                               ex-works price of the product

            ex 9506        Golf clubs and parts thereof        Manufacture in which all the
                                                               materials used are classified within
                                                               a heading other than that of the
                                                               product. However, roughly shaped
                                                               blocks for making golf club heads
                                                               may be used
            ex Chapter 96 Miscellaneous manufactured           Manufacture in which all the
                          articles; except for:                materials used are classified within
                                                               a heading other than that of the
                                                               product
            ex 9601 and    Articles of animal, vegetable or    Manufacture from “worked”
            ex 9602        mineral carving materials           carving materials of the same
                                                               heading
            ex 9603        Brooms and brushes (except for      Manufacture in which the value of
                           besoms and the like and brushes     all the materials used does not
                           made from marten or squirrel        exceed 50% of the ex-works price
                           hair), hand-operated mechanical     of the product
                           floor sweepers, not motorized,
                           paint pads and rollers, squeegees
                           and mops




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                           LRO 1/2017
                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                  [CH.293– 427



HS Heading        Description of product             Working or Processing
    no                                                 carried out on non-
                                                    originating materials that
                                                    confers originating status
       (1)                     (2)                           (3) or (4)
9605         Travel sets for personal toilet,     Each item in the set must satisfy
             sewing or shoe or clothes            the rule, which would apply to it if
             cleaning                             it were not included in the set.
                                                  However, non-originating articles
                                                  may be incorporated, provided their
                                                  total value does not exceed 15% of
                                                  the ex-works price of the set

9606         Buttons, press-fasteners, snap-      Manufacture in which:
             fasteners and press-studs, button    -     all the materials used are
             moulds and other parts of these      classified within a heading other
             articles; button blanks              than that of the product
                                                  -     the value of all the materials
                                                  used does not exceed 50% of the
                                                  ex-works price of the product
9608         Ball-points pens; felt-tipped and    Manufacture in which all the
             other porous-tipped pens and         materials used are classified within
             markers; fountain pens,              a heading other than that of the
             stylograph pens and other pens;      product However, nibs or nib-
             duplicating stylos; propelling or    points classified within the same
             sliding pencils; penholders,         heading may be used
             pencil-holders and similar
             holders; parts (including caps and
             clips) of the foregoing articles,
             other than those of heading No
             9609
9612         Typewriter or similar ribbons,       Manufacture in which:
             inked or otherwise prepared for      -     all the materials used are
             giving impressions, whether or       classified within a heading other
             not on spools or in cartridges;      than that of the product
             ink-pads, whether or not inked,      -     the value of all the materials
             with or without boxes                used does not exceed 50% of the
                                                  ex-works price of the product

ex 9613      Lighters and piezo-igniter           Manufacture in which the value of
                                                  all the materials of the heading No
                                                  9613 used does not exceed 30% of
                                                  the ex-works price of the product
ex 9614      Smoking pipes and pipe bowls         Manufacture from roughly shaped
                                                  blacks

Chapter 97   Works of art, collectors’’ pieces    Manufacture in which all the
             and antiques                         materials used are classified within
                                                  a heading other than that of the
                                                  product




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 428]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                            ANNEX III TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

                              Form for movement certificate
                1. Movement certificates EUR.1 shall be made out on the form
                   of which a specimen appears in this Annex. This form shall
                   be printed in one or more of the languages in which the
                   Agreement is drawn up. Certificates shall be made out in one
                   of these languages and in accordance with the provisions of
                   the domestic law of the exporting State if they are
                   handwritten, they shall be completed in ink and in capital
                   letters.

                2. Each certificate shall measure 210 x 297mm, a tolerance of
                   up to plus 8mm or minus 5mm in the length may be allowed.
                   The paper used must be white, sized for writing, not
                   containing mechanical pulp and weighing not less than
                   25g/m2. It shall have a printed green guilloche pattern
                   background making any falsification by mechanical or
                   chemical means apparent to the eye.

                3. The exporting States may reserve the right to print the
                   certificates themselves or may have them printed by
                   approved printers. In the latter case each certificate must
                   include a reference to such approval. Each certificate must
                   bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by which
                   the printer can be identified. It shall also bear a serial
                   number, either printed or not, by which it can be identified.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                      [CH.293– 429


                    MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE

 l. Exporter (name.full address, country)                  EUR.1             No A          000.000
                                                   See notes overleaf before completing this form
                                             2. Certificate used in preferential trade between
3. Consignee (name, full address, country)
   (Optional)                                                                and

                                               (insert appropriate countries, groups or countries or territories)
                                             4. Country, group of          5. Country, group of countries
                                                countries       or            or territory of destination
                                                territory in which
                                                the products are
                                                considered      as
                                                originating


6. Transport details (Optional)              7. Remarks



8. Item number; Marks and numbers; Number and               9. Gross mass (kg)          10. Invoices
   kind of package (‘); Description of goods                or other measure                  (Optional)
                                                            (litres,mJ,etc.)




11. CUSTOMS ENDORSEMENT                                     12. DECLARATION BY THE EXPORTER
Declaration certified                                           I, the undersigned, declare that the goods
Export document (‘)                                             described above meet the conditions
From……………….…….….. No…………                                        required for the issue of this certificate.
Customs office……………………………..                    Stamp
Issuing country or territory                                             Place and date …………………….
……………………………….………………
Date …………………………...……….                                                  ………..…………………………….
……………………………………….…                                                          (Signature)
                 (Signature)

(1) If goods are not packed, indicate number of articles or state “In bulk” as
    appropriate.
(2) Complete only where the regulations of the exporting-country or territory
    require.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
       CH.293 – 430]                               CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



     13. Request for verification, to:                  14. Result of verification

                                                        Verification carried out shows that this certificate (‘)

                                                        □
                                                            was issued by the customs otfice indicated and that
                                                            the information contained therein is accurate.
     Verification of the authenticity and accuracy of
     this cerficatate is requested                          does not meet the requirements as to authenticity
                                                            and accuracv (see remarks appended)

        …………………………………………………
              (Place and date)
                                                        …………………………………………………………...
                                                                 (Place and date)
     …………………………………… Stamp
                                                        ………….....................                   Stamp

     ……………………………………….
                                                        …………………………………
     …………………… (Signature)                                      (Signature)

                                                        (‘) Insert X in the appropriate box.


        NOTES

1. Certificates must not contain erasures or words written over one another. Any alterations must be
    made by deleting the incorrect particulars and adding any necessary corrections. Any such
    alteration must be initialled by the person who completed the certificate and endorsed by the
    customs authorities of the issuing country or territory.

2. No spaces must be left between the items entered on the certificate and each item must be
    preceded by an item number. A horizontal line must be drawn immediately below the last item.
    Any unused space must be struck through in such a manner as to make any later additions
    impossible.

3.      Goods must be described in accordance with commercial practice and with sufficient detail to
        enable them to be identified.




     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                                        LRO 1/2017
                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                      [CH.293– 431


        APPLICATION FOR A MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE

 l. Exporter (name.full address, country)                  EUR.1             No A          000.000
                                                   See notes overleaf before completing this form
                                             2. Certificate used in preferential trade between
3. Consignee (name, full address, country)
   (Optional)                                                                and

                                               (insert appropriate countries, groups or countries or territories)
                                             4. Country, group of          5. Country, group of countries
                                                countries       or            or territory of destination
                                                territory in which
                                                the products are
                                                considered      as
                                                originating


6. Transport details (Optional)              7. Remarks



8. Item number; Marks and numbers; Number and                9. Gross mass (kg)         10. Invoices
   kind of package (‘); Description of goods                    or          other             (Optional)
                                                                measure
                                                                (litres,mJ,etc.)




(1) If goods are not packed, indicate number of articles or state “In bulk” as appropriate.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 432]                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                             DECLARATION BY THE EXPORTER

                I, the undersigned, exporter of the goods described overleaf,

                DECLARE that the goods meet the conditions required for the
                issue of the attached certificate;

                SPECIFY as follows the circumstances which have enabled
                these goods to meet the above conditions:
                ……………………………………………………………………
                ……………………………………………………………………
                ……………………………………………………………………
                ……………………………………………………………………
                ………………………………
                SUBMIT the following supporting documents: (1)
                ……………………………………………………………………
                ……………………………………………………………………
                ……………………………………………………………………
                ……………………………………………………………………
                ……………………………….
                UNDERTAKE to submit, at the request of the appropriate
                authorities, any supporting evidence which these authorities may
                require for the purpose of issuing the attached certificate, and
                undertake, if required, to agree to any inspection of my accounts
                and to any check on the processes of manufacture of the above
                goods, carried out by the said authorities;

                REQUEST the issue of the attached certificate for these goods.
                                      …………………………………………
                                                 (Place and date)
                                      ………………………………………….
                                                    (Signature)




                (1) For example, import documents, movement certificates, manufacturer’s
                declarations, etc. referring to the products used in manufacture or to the goods
                re-exported in the same state.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                        LRO 1/2017
                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                             [CH.293– 433


             ANNEX IV TO FOURTH SCHEDULE
                           Invoice declaration

The invoice declaration, the text of which is given below, must
be made out in accordance with the footnotes. However, the
footnotes do not have to be reproduced.

“The exporter of the products covered by this document
(Customs authorisation No ... (1)) declares that, except where
otherwise clearly indicated, these products are of... (2) preferential
origin.”




…………………………………………………..
(Place and date)(3)

…………………………………………………..
(Signature of the exporter; in addition the
name of the person signing the declaration
has to be indicated in clear script(4)



1 When the invoice declaration is made out by an approved exporter within the
meaning of section 22 of this Schedule, the authorization number of the
approved exporter must be entered in this space. When the invoice declaration
is not made out by an approved exporter, the words in brackets shall be omitted
or the space left blank.
2 Origin of products to be indicated. When the invoice declaration relates in
whole or in part, to products originating in Ceuta and Melilla, the exporter
must clearly indicate them in the document on which the declaration is made
out by means of the symbol “CM”.
3. These indications may be omitted if the information is contained on the
document itself.
4 See section 21(5) of this Schedule. In cases where the exporter is not
required to sign, the exemption of signature also implies the exemption of the
name of the signatory.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 434]                        CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT




                             ANNEX VA TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

                             Supplier declaration for products having
                                    preferential origin status

                I, the undersigned, declare that the goods listed on this invoice
                (1)………………………………………………………………
                ………………………………………………………………
                were produced in (2)……………………………… and satisfy
                the rules of origin governing preferential trade between the
                CARIFORUM States and the EC Party.
                I undertake to make available to the Customs authorities, if
                required, evidence in support of this declaration.

                (3)………………………………………….
                (4)……………………………………………………
                (5)………………..………

                                              Note
                The abovementioned text, suitably completed in conformity
                with the footnotes below, constitutes a supplier’s declaration.
                The footnotes do not have to be reproduced.




                (1) - If only some of the goods listed on the invoice are concerned they should
                be clearly indicated or marked and this marking entered on the declaration as
                follows: “…………… listed on this invoice and marked …………….. were
                produced …………………..”
                - If a document other than an invoice or an annex to the invoice is used (see
                Article 27(3)), the name of the document concerned shall be mentioned instead
                of the word “invoice”
                (2) The EC Party, Member State, CARIFORUM State, OCT or other ACP
                State. Where a CARIFORUM State, an OCT or another ACP State is given, a
                reference must also be made to the EC Party customs office holding any
                EUR.1 (s) concerned, giving the No of the certificate(s) concerned and, if
                possible, the relevant customs entry No involved.
                (3) Place and date
                (4) Name and function in company
                (5) Signature




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                       LRO 1/2017
                      CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                   [CH.293– 435


              ANNEX VB TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

                Supplier declaration for products not
                  having preferential origin status

I, the undersigned, declare that the goods listed on this
invoice……………….. (1) were
produced in………………….(2) and incorporate the following
components or materials
which do not have a CARIFORUM State, EC Party, OCT or
other ACP State origin for preferential trade:
……………………………(3)………………………….
(4)……………………………..(5)
………………………………
……………………………………………………
……………………………...
……………………………………………………..
……………………………………………………………………
…....(6)
I undertake to make available to the Customs authorities, if
required, evidence in support of this declaration.
……………………………… (7) ……………………………..….(8)
……………………………… (9)
                              Note
The abovementioned text, suitably completed in conformity with
the footnotes below, constitutes a supplier’s declaration. The
footnotes do not have to be reproduced.
(1) - If only some of the goods listed on the invoice are concerned they should be
clearly indicated or marked and this marking entered on the declaration as follows:
“…………… listed on this invoice and marked ………. were produced ……………..”
- If a document other than an invoice or an annex to the invoice is used (see section
27(3)), the name of the document concerned shall be mentioned instead of the word
“invoice”
(2) The EC Party, Member State, CARIFORUM State, OCT or other ACP State.
(3) Description is to be given in all cases. The description must be adequate and should
be sufficiently detailed to allow the tariff classification of the goods concerned to be
determined.
(4) Customs values to be given only if required
(5) Country of origin to be given only if required. The origin to be given must be a
preferential origin, all other origins to be given as “third country”.
(6) And have undergone the following processing in [the EC Party] [Member State]
[CARIFORUM State] [OCT] [other ACP State] …………………….., to be added with
a, description of the processing carried out if this information is required.
(7) Place and date
(8) Name and function in company
(9) Signature




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 436]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                          ANNEX VI TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

                                   Information certificate

                1. The form of information certificate given in this Annex
                shall be used and be printed in one or more of the official
                languages in which the Agreement is drawn up and in
                accordance with the provisions of the domestic law of the
                exporting State. Information certificates shall be completed
                in one of those languages; if they are handwritten, they
                shall be completed in ink in capital letters. They shall bear
                a serial number, whether or not printed, by which they can
                be identified.

                2. The information certificate shall measure 210 x 297mm,
                a tolerance of up to plus 8mm or minus 5mm in the length
                may be allowed. The paper must be white, sized for
                writing, not containing mechanical pulp and weighing not
                less than 25g/m2.

                3. The national administratons may reserve the right to
                print the forms themselves or may have them printed by
                printers approved by them. In the latter case, each form
                must include a reference to such approval. The forms shall
                bear the name and address of the printer or a mark by
                which the printer can be identified.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        LRO 1/2017
                             CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                                              [CH.293– 437



1. Supplies                                                    INFORMATION CERTIFICATE
                                                                    to facilitate the issue of a

                                                                  MOVEMENT CERTIFICATE
                                                                   for preferential trade between the

2. Consignee r,.                                                                EUROPEAN

                                                                              COMMUNITY


3. Processor                                          4. State in which the working ot processing has been earned out

6. Customs office of importation pt                   5. For official use

7. Import document
Form……………….. No……………………….
Series……………………….……………….

Date


                     GOODS SENT TO THE MEMBER STATES OF DESTINATION
8. Marks. numbers, quantity                9. Harmonised Commodity Description              10. Quantity
   and kind of package                        and         Coding          System
                                              headmg/subheading number (HS code)
                                                                                            11. Value

                                       IMPORTED GOODS USED
12. Hetmonised Commodity Description and Coding System 13. Country of                       14.               I5. Value
    heading/subheading number (Hs code)                    origin                           Quantity



16. Nature of the working or processing carried out
17. Remarks
18. CUSTOMS ENDORSEMENT                                                19. DECLARATION BY THE SUPPLIER
     Declaration certified:                                            1, the undersigned, declare that the information on this
                                                                       certificate is accurate.
       Document…………………………..…
       Form……………………No…………….                                            ………………….
       Customs Office ……………………         …………………..                              (Place)               (Date)
       Date.

                                               Official
                                               Stamp

       ……………………………..                                                   ……………………………………………………………………
               (Signature)                                                        (Signature)

(1)(2)(3)(4)(5) See footnotes on verso




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 438]                                         CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



   REQUEST FOR VERIFICATION                            RESULT OF VERIFICATION
   The undersigned customs official requests           Verification carried out by the undersigned customs
   verification of the authenticity and accuracy of    official shows that this infonnation certificate:
   this infonnation certificate.
                                                       a) was issued by the customs office indicated and
                                                       that the infonnation contained therein is accurate (*)

                                                       b) does not meet the requirements as to
                                                       authenticity and accuracy (see notes appended)(*)



    ___________________________________                  _______________________________
                 (Place and date)                                    (Place and date)



        Official                                            Official
        Stamp                                               Stamp



               ________________________________                         ______________________________

                     (Official‘s signature)                                   (Official’s signature)

                                                        (*)
                                                         Delete where not applicable


                                   CROSS REFERENCES
(1) Name of individual or business and full address.
(2) Optional information.
(3) Kg, hl, m3 or other measure.
(4) Packaging shall be considered as forming a whole with the goods contained therein.
    However, this provision shall not apply to packaging which is not of the normal type
    for the article packed, and which has a lasting utility va lue of its own, apart from its
    function as packaging.
(5) The value must be indicated in accordance with the provisions on rules of origin.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                                                      LRO 1/2017
                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                                               [CH.293– 439


                   ANNEX VII TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

                     Form for application for a derogation

1. Commercial description of the finished             2. Anticipated annual quantity of
product 1.1 Customs classification (HS code)          exports to the EC Party (weight, No of
                                                      pieces, meters or other unit)

3. Commercial description of third country            4. Anticipated annual quantity of third
materials Customs classification (HS code)            country materials to be used



5. Value of third country materials                   6. Value of finished products


7. Origin of third country materials                  8. Reasons why the rule of origin for
                                                      the finished product cannot be
                                                      fulfilled

9. Commercial description of materials                10. Anticipated annual quantity of
originating in States or territories referred to in   materials originating in States or
Articles 3 and 4                                      territories referred to in Articles 3 and
                                                      4 to be used


11. Value of materials originating in States or       12. Working or processing carried out
territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4           in States or territories referred to in
                                                      Articles 3 and 4 on third country
                                                      materials without obtaining origin


13. Duration requested for derogation from            14. Detailed description of working
……... to …........                                    and processing in the CARIFORUM
                                                      States:


15. Capital structure of the firm concerned           16. Amount of investments
                                                      made/foreseen


17. Staff emploved/expected                           18. Value added by the working or
                                                      processing in the CARIFORUM
                                                      States:
                                                      18.1 Labour;
                                                      18.2 Overheads:
                                                      18.3 Others:

19. Other possible sources of supply for              20. Possible developments to
materials                                             overcome the need for a derogation

21. Observations




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 440]                            CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT


                                              NOTES

 1. If the boxes in the form are not sufficient to contain all relevant information, additional pages
 may be attached to the form. In this case, the mention “see annex” shall be entered in the box
 concerned.

 2. If possible, samples or other illustrative material (pictures, designs, catalogues, etc) of the
 final product and of the materials should accompany the form.

 3. A form shall be completed for each product covered by the request.

 Boxes 3, 4, 5, 7: “third country” means any country or territory which is not
 referred to in Articles 3 and 4.

 Box 12: If third country materials have been worked or processed in the States or territories
 referred to in Articles 3 and 4 without obtaining origin, before being further processed in the
 CARIFORUM State requesting the derogation, indicate the working or processing carried out in
 the States or territories referred to in Articles 3 and 4.

 Box 13: The dates to be indicated are the initial and final one for the period in which EUR 1
 certificates may be issued under the derogation.

 Box 18: Indicate either the percentage of added value in respect of the ex-works price of the
 product or the monetary amount of added value for unit of product.

 Box 19: If alternative sources of material exist, indicate here what they are and, if possible, the
 reasons of cost or other reasons why they are not used.

 Box 20: Indicate possible further investments or suppliers’ differentiation which make the
 derogation necessary for only a limited period of time.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                             LRO 1/2017
                 CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 441



          ANNEX VIII TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

             Neighbouring developing countries

For the implementation of section 5 of Schedule Four the
expression “neighbouring developing country” shall refer to the
following list of countries:

- Colombia;
- Costa Rica;
- Cuba;
- El Salvador;
- Guatemala;
- Honduras;
- Nicaragua;
- Panama;
- Venezuela;
- Mexico.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 442]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                     ANNEX IX TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

                        Overseas countries and territories

   Within the meaning of this Protocol “overseas countries and territories”
   shall mean the countries and territories referred to in Part Four of the Treaty
   establishing the European Community listed below:

   (This list does not prejudge the status of these countries and territories, or
   future changes in their status.)

   1. Country having special relations with the Kingdom of Denmark:
   XXXII.Greenland.

   2. Overseas territories of the French Republic:
   XXXIII. New Caledonia,
   XXXIV. French Polynesia,
   XXXV. French Southern and Antarctic Territories,
   XXXVI. Wallis and Futuna Islands.

   3. Territorial collectivities of the French Republic:
   XXXVII. Mayotte,
   XXXVIII. Saint Pierre and Miquelon.

   4. Overseas countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands:
   XXXIX. Aruba,
   XL. Netherlands Antilles:
   = Bonaire,
   =Curasao,
   = Saba,
   = Sint Eustatius,
   =Sint Maarten.

   5. British overseas countries and territories:
   XLI. Anguilla,
   XLII. Cayman Islands,
   XLIII. Falkland Islands,
   XLIV. South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands,
   XLV. Montserrat,
   XLVI. Pitcairn,
   XLVII. Saint Helena, Ascension Island, Tristan da Cunha



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 443


XLVIII. British Antarctic Territory,
XLIX. British Indian Ocean Territory,
L. Turks and Caicos Islands,
LI. British Virgin Islands.




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 444]                   CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                    ANNEX X TO FOURTH SCHEDULE
   HS/CN-code                              Description
   1701              Cane or beet sugar and chemically pure sucrose, in
                     solid Form
   1702              Sugars, including chemically pure lactose, maltose,
                     glucose and fructose, in solid form; sugar syrups not
                     containing added flavouring or colouring matter;
                     artificial honey, whether or not mixed with natural
                     honey; caramel (excl. cane or beet sugar and
                     chemically pure sucrose)
   ex 1704 90        Sugar confectionery, not containing cocoa (excl.
   corresponding     chewing gum; liquorice extract containing more than
   to 1704 90 99     10% by weight of sucrose but not containing other
                     added substances; white chocolate; pastes, including
                     marzipan, in immediate packings of a net content of
                     1kg or more; throat pastilles and cough drops; sugar-
                     coated (panned) goods; gum confectionery and jelly
                     confectionery, including fruit pastes in the form of
                     sugar confectionery; boiled sweets; toffees, caramels
                     and similar sweet; compressed tablets)
   ex 1806 10 Cocoa powder, containing 65% or more but less than
   corresponding to 80% by weight of sucrose (including invert sugar
   1806 10 30       expressed as sucrose) or isoglucose expressed as
                    sucrose
   ex 1806 10       Cocoa powder, containing 80% or more by weight of
   corresponding    sucrose (including invert sugar expressed as sucrose) or
   to 1806 10 90    isoglucose expressed as sucrose
   ex 1806 20        Food preparations containing cocoa in blocks, slabs or
   corresponding     bars weighing more than 2kg or in liquid, paste,
   to 1806 20 95     powder, granular or other bulk form in containers or
                     immediate packings, of a content exceeding 2kg (excl.
                     cocoa powder, preparations containing 18% or more by
                     weight of cocoa butter or containing a combined weight
                     of 25% or more of cocoa butter and milkfat; chocolate
                     milk crumb; chocolate flavour coating; chocolate and
                     chocolate products; sugar confectionery and substitutes
                     therefor made from sugar substitution products,
                     containing cocoa; spreads containing cocoa;
                     preparations containing cocoa for making beverages)




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                         LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                               [CH.293– 445



HS/CN-code                                 Description
ex 1901 90         Food preparations of flour, groats, meal, starch or malt
corresponding to   extract, not containing cocoa or containing less than 40% by
1901 90 99         weight of cocoa calculated on a totally defatted basis, not
                   elsewhere specified or included; food preparations of goods
                   of headings 0401 to 0404, not containing cocoa or
                   containing less than 5% by weight of cocoa calculated on a
                   totally defatted basis, not elsewhere specified or included
                   (excl. food preparations containing no or less than 1.5%
                   milkfat, 5% sucrose (including invert sugar) or isoglucose,
                   5% glucose or starch; food preparations in powder form of
                   goods of headings 0401 to 0404; preparations for infant use,
                   put up for retail sale; mixes and doughs for the preparations
                   of bakers’ wares of heading 1905)
ex 2101 12         Preparations with a basis of coffee (excl. extracts, essences
corresponding to   and concentrates of coffee and preparations with a basis of
2101 12 98         these extracts, essences or concentrates)
ex 2101 20         Preparations with a basis of tea or mate (excl. extracts,
corresponding to   essences and concentrates of tea or mate and preparations
2101 20 98         with a basis of these extracts, essences or concentrates)
ex 2106 90         Flavoured or coloured sugar syrups (excl. isoglucose syrups,
corresponding to   lactose syrup, glucose syrup and maltodextrine syrup)
2106 90 59
ex 2106 90         Food preparations not elsewhere specified or included (excl.
corresponding to   protein concentrates and textured protein substances;
2106 90 98         compound alcoholic preparations, other than those based on
                   odoriferous substances, of a kind used for the manufacture of
                   beverages; flavoured or coloured sugar syrups; preparations
                   containing no or less than 1.5% milkfat, 5% sucrose or
                   isoglucose, 5% glucose or starch)
ex 3302 10         Preparations based on odoriferous substances, of a kind used
corresponding to   in the drink industries, containing all flavouring agents
3302 10 29         characterising a beverage and with an actual alcoholic
                   strength by volume not exceeding 0.5 % (excl. preparations
                   containing no or less than 1.5% milkfat, 5% sucrose or
                   isoglucose, 5% glucose or starch)




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 446]                    CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                           ANNEX XI TO FOURTH SCHEDULE

                                          ACP States

                Within the meaning of this Protocol “other ACP States” shall
                mean the States listed below:

                -   Angola
                -   Benin
                -   Botswana
                -   Burkina Faso
                -   Burundi
                -   Cameroun
                -   Cape Verde
                -   Central African Republic
                -   Chad
                -   Cook Islands
                -   Comoros
                -   Ivory Coast
                -   Democratic Republic of Congo
                -   Djibouti
                -   Equatorial Guinea
                -   Eritrea
                -   Ethiopia
                -   Federated States of Micronesia
                -   Fiji
                -   Gabon
                -   Gambia
                -   Ghana
                -   Guinea
                -   Guinea Bissau
                -   Kenya
                -   Kiribati
                -   Lesotho
                -   Liberia
                -   Madagascar
                -   Malawi
                -   Mali
                -   Marshall Islands
                -   Mauritania
                -   Mauritius
                -   Mozambique
                -   Namibia



STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                           LRO 1/2017
                CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT                              [CH.293– 447


-   Nauru
-   Niger
-   Niue
-   Nigeria
-   Palau
-   Papua New guinea
-   Republic of Congo
-   Rwanda
-   Samoa
-   Sao Tome & Principe
-   Senegal
-   Seychelles
-   Sierra Leone
-   Solomon Islands
-   Somalia
-   Sudan
-   Swaziland
-   Tanzania
-   Togo
-   Tonga
-   Tuvalu
-   Uganda
-   Vanuatu
-   Zambia
-   Zimbabwe




–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2017                                     STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.293 – 448]                     CUSTOMS MANAGEMENT



                       FIFTH SCHEDULE (Section 53)
                      CUSTOMS SEARCH WARRANT


To………………………


In accordance with the Customs Management Act, you are hereby authorised to
enter and search, by day or by night, any premises, in which you have
reasonable grounds to believe that there are any uncustomed goods, or any
books or documents relating to uncustomed goods; and if there be any part of
the premises so entered, or any container therein, to which you are unable to
obtain free access, you may enter such part, or open such container, in such
manner as you may think necessary; and on any such entry you may seize,
detain and carry away any uncustomed goods or any books or documents
relating to uncustomed goods which may be found on such premises or in such
containers and which you have reasonable grounds to believe are liable to
forfeiture or may afford evidence of the commission of any offence against the
Customs laws; and for all such purposes you may use all reasonable force and
may require the assistance of, and take with you, other Customs officers or
Police officers.


For all of which, this shall be your sufficient warrant.


Given under my hand and the seal of the Customs, this …... day of …….……
20….


(Customs seal)




                                                           Comptroller of Customs
                 1
                 1




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2017
