        INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                                [CH.2 – 1


      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES
                                 CHAPTER 2

      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES

LIST OF AUTHORISED PAGES
1-2     LRO 1/2010
3       LRO 1/2008
4       Blank
5-6     LRO 1/2010
7-8     Original
9 - 10  LRO 1/2006
11 - 12 LRO 1/2008
13 - 14 Original
15 - 16 LRO 1/2010
17 - 28 Original
29 - 30 LRO 1/2008
31 - 34 Original


               ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
                                 PART I
                      SHORT TITLE AND APPLICATION

SECTION

1.     Short title.
2.     Application.

                           PART II
           INTERPRETATION OF WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS

3.     Interpretation of words and expressions.
4.     Gazette.
5.     Grammatical variations and cognate expressions.
6.     Provisions for gender and number.
7.     Service by post.
8.     References to pounds, shillings and pence.

                                PART III
                      GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO ACTS

9.     Acts and enactment formula.
10.    Act to be public Act.
11.    Sections and schedules.
12.    Citation of Act.
13.    Collective citation.
14.    Reference to Act as amended.
15.    Citation of part of Act.
16.    Construction of reference to Act, section, etc.
17.    Marginal note or heading note.



LRO 1/2010                                               STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 2]           INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES



                                      PART IV
                        COMMENCEMENT, AMENDMENT AND REPEAL

             18.   Commencement of Act.
             19.   Principal Act, etc.
             20.   Effect of repeal generally.
             21.   Repealed written law not revived.
             22.   Repeal and substitution.
             23.   Repeal of amended written law to include amendments.
             24.   Effect of expiry of written law.

                                              PART V
                                      SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION

             25.   General provision with regard to power to make subsidiary legislation.
             26.   Fees and charges.
             27.   Effect of subsidiary legislation.
             28.   Construction of subsidiary legislation.
             29.   Exercise of statutory powers between enactment and commencement of Act.
             30.   Acts done under subsidiary legislation deemed done under Act.
             31.   Subsidiary legislation to be laid before both Houses.
             32.   Subsidiary legislation annulled by resolution of either House.
             33.   Effect of repeal on subsidiary legislation.
             34.   Deviation from form.

                                                  PART VI
                                                  POWERS

             35.   Exercise of powers.
             36.   Construction of enabling words.
             37.   Power to issue licences, etc., discretionary.
             38.   Power to appoint includes power to suspend, dismiss, reappoint, etc.
             39.   Delegation by specified public officers.
             40.   Effect of delegation of powers and duties.
             41.   Exercise of powers in special cases.
             42.   Power to make public instruments and perform acts.
             43.   Power to relate back appointment.

                                            PART VII
                                     BOARDS AND COMMITTEES

             44.   Power to appoint chairman.
             45.   Power to appoint public officer to board, etc.
             46.   Appointment of alternates and temporary members.
             47.   Powers of board, etc. not affected by vacancy.
             48.   Powers of public boards, etc. to regulate procedure.
             49.   Members of public boards, etc. to incur no personal liability.
             50.   Declaration of pecuniary interest.
             51.   Procedure when Minister has interest.
             52.   Power of majority and exercise of powers.
             53.   Seal.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                          LRO 1/2010
       INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                                        [CH.2 – 3


                           PART VIII
             PUBLIC OFFICERS AND PUBLIC CONTRACTS

54.   References to public officer.
55.   Change of title of office.
56.   Appointment of officers by name or office.
57.   Power to appoint while holder on retirement leave.
58.   Qualification for holding office not to apply to acting appointments.
59.   Contracts by Minister or public officer.
60.   Omission of title after signature of public officer immaterial.
61.   Effect of past contracts by Minister or public officer.

                         PART IX
           CROWN, GOVERNOR-GENERAL AND MINISTER

62.   Signification of orders of Governor-General.
63.   References to the Sovereign.
64.   Saving of rights of Crown.

                                   PART X
                             TIME AND DISTANCE

65.   Standard time.
66.   Summer time.
67.   References to “a.m.” and “p.m.”.
68.   Provision where no time prescribed.
69.   Computation of time.
70.   Power to extend time.
71.   Distance.
72.   Warrants, etc. valid on public holiday.

                           PART XI
         FEES, PENALTIES, OFFENCES AND PROCEEDINGS

73.   Imposition of penalty not to bar civil action.
74.   Penalties prescribed to be deemed maximum penalties.
75.   Summary procedure.
76.   Evidence of signature of fiat, etc.
77.   Disposal of forfeits.
78.   Collection of fees.

                                  PART XII
                               MISCELLANEOUS

79    Rectification of errors.
80.   Reprint of written laws.
81.   Performance of acts for which payment required.

SCHEDULE — Boundaries of the City of Nassau




LRO 1/2008                                                      STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
       INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                             [CH.2 – 5




                       CHAPTER 2
    INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES
      An Act to consolidate and amend the Law relating          20 of 1976
to the construction, application and interpretation of          9 of 1978
                                                                41 of 1992
laws, to make general provisions with regard thereto, to        34 of 1996
define terms and expressions used in laws and public            21 of 2009
documents, to make general provision for other like
purposes, and for matters incidental thereto or
connected therewith.
                   [Commencement 8th December, 1976]

                        PART I
             SHORT TITLE AND APPLICATION
       1. This Act may be cited as the Interpretation and       Short title.
General Clauses Act.
       2. (1) Save where the contrary intention appears         Application.
either from the context of this Act or any other written law    9 of 1978, s. 3.
or instrument, the provisions of this Act shall apply to this
Act and to any other written law in force whether such
other written law came or comes into operation before or
after the commencement of this Act, and to any instrument
made or issued under or by virtue of any such Act.
       (2) This Act shall be binding upon the Crown.

                   PART II
         INTERPRETATION OF WORDS AND
                 EXPRESSIONS
      3. (1) In this and in any other written law unless        Interpretation of
the context otherwise requires —                                words and
                                                                expressions.
      “act”, when used with reference to an offence or civil    9 of 1978, s. 3.
           wrong, includes a series of acts, an illegal
           omission and a series of illegal omissions;
      “Act” means an Act of Parliament whether passed           9 of 1978, s. 3.
           before or after the coming into force of this Act
           and includes —
           (a) any law passed by a legislature of the
                former Colony of The Bahama Islands;


LRO 1/2010                                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 6]                   INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                                 (b) an Act of Parliament of the United
                                      Kingdom and any legislative instrument
                                      made thereunder having effect or having
                                      had effect as part of the law of The
                                      Bahamas;
 9 of 1987, s. 3            “amend” includes repeal, revoke, cancel, add to, vary
                                 and the doing of all such things simultaneously
                                 or by the same written law;
                            “The Bahamas” means The Commonwealth of The
                                 Bahamas;
 9 of 1978, s. 3.           “Bahamian currency” means currency of The
                                 Bahamas, the issue of which is authorized by
                                 any written law;
                            “cent” means a cent in Bahamian currency;
                            “City of Nassau” and “Nassau” mean the area within
 Schedule.                       the boundaries specified in the Schedule;
 9 of 1978, s. 3.           “commencement” when used with reference to any
                                 written law, means the date when the written
                                 law came or comes into operation;
 9 of 1978, s. 3.           “commissioner”1 means a person who is a
                                 commissioner under the Local Government Act;
                            “the Consolidated Fund” means the Consolidated
                                 Fund established by Article 128 of the
                                 Constitution;
 9 of 1978, s. 3.           “Constitution” means the Constitution of The
                                 Bahamas as set out in the Schedule of The
                                 Bahamas Independence Order 1973, as
                                 amended from time to time;
                            “consul” and “consular officer” mean any person
                                 including the head of a consular post,
                                 recognized by the competent authority of the
                                 receiving state as entrusted in that capacity with
                                 the exercise of consular functions;
 9 of 1978, s. 3.           “contravene” in relation to any requirement or
                                 condition prescribed in any written law or in
                                 any grant, permit, licence, lease or authority
                                 granted under or by virtue of any written law,
                                 includes a failure to comply with that
                                 requirement or condition;


                       1
                          Title of office of "Commissioner" changed to "Deputy Family Island Adminis-
                    trator". See Ch. 37, section 37 (2).


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                              LRO 1/2010
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                                [CH.2 – 7


      “counsel and attorney” means a person who has been
            admitted to practice as counsel before the
            Supreme Court;
      “court” means any court of The Bahamas of
            competent jurisdiction;
      “Crown Agents” means the persons or body for the
            time being acting as Crown Agents for Oversea
            Governments and Administrations;
      “daily penalty” means a penalty for each day on
            which the offence is continued after conviction
            thereof;
      “definition” means the interpretation given by a           9 of 1978, s. 3.
            written law to any word or expression;
      “dollar” means a dollar in Bahamian currency;
      “export” means to take out or cause to be taken out
            of The Bahamas by air, land or water;
      “financial year” means any period of twelve months         41 of 1992, s. 3.
            beginning on 1st July in any year;
      “Freeport” means the whole of the Port Area;
      “functions” includes jurisdictions, powers and duties;
      “Government” means the Government of The
            Bahamas;
      “Government Printer” means any printer authorized
            by or on behalf of the Government to print any
            written law or any other document of the              9 of 1978, s. 3.
            Government;
      “House” means the Senate or the House of Assembly
            or both as the context may require;
      “immovable property” means —
            (a) land whether covered by water or not;
            (b) any estate, right, interest or easement in or
                 over any land; and
            (c) things attached to land or permanently
                 fastened to anything attached to land;
      “import” means to bring or cause to be brought into
            The Bahamas by air, land or water;
      “instrument” includes any publication in the Gazette
            having legal effect;

––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 8]           INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                    “Island of New Providence” and “New Providence”
                          include the island of New Providence, Paradise
                          Island and all other adjacent islands and cays
                          within ten miles of the Island of New
                          Providence;
 9 of 1978, s. 3.   “Judicial and Legal Service Commission” means the
                          Judicial and Legal Service Commission
                          constituted by Article 116 of the Constitution;
                    “judge” includes the Chief Justice and any Justice of
                          the Supreme Court;
                    “land” includes land of any tenure, and tenements
                          and hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal,
                          and houses and other buildings, also an
                          undivided share in land;
                    “law” means a law for the time being in force in The
                          Bahamas;
 Ch. 54.            “magistrate” means a magistrate appointed under the
                          Magistrates Act and includes a justice of the
                          peace lawfully exercising the jurisdiction of a
                          magistrate;
 Ch. 224.           “medical practitioner” means a person for the time
                          being duly registered or deemed to be
                          registered, or licensed as a medical practitioner,
                          or otherwise permitted to practice as a medical
                          practitioner, under the Medical Act;
                    “Minister” means the Minister responsible for the
                          matter or department to which the context
                          refers;
                    “month” means calendar month;
                    “movable property” means property of every
                          description except immovable property;
                    “oath” and “affidavit” include, in the case of persons
                          allowed or required by law to affirm instead of
                          swearing, affirmation; and “swear” in the like
                          case includes affirm;
                    “officer” or “public officer” means any person
                          holding a public office;
                    “or”, “other” and “otherwise” shall be construed
                          disjunctively and not as implying similarity,
                          unless the word “similar” or some other word of
                          like meaning is added;
                    “Out Island” and “Family Island” mean any island of
                          The Bahamas other than New Providence;


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                               [Original Service 2001]
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                              [CH.2 – 9


      “Parliament” means the Parliament of The Bahamas
           established under Article 38 of the Constitution;
      “peace officer” or “police officer” includes a
           constable and any member of the Police Force
           and any other person lawfully authorized to
           discharge police duties;
      “person” includes any public body and any body of
           persons, corporate or unincorporate, and this
           definition shall apply notwithstanding that the
           word “person” occurs in a provision creating or
           relating to an offence or for the recovery of any
           fine or compensation;
      “Police Service Commission” means the Police
           Service Commission constituted by Article 118
           of the Constitution;
      “Port Area” and “Port Authority” have the meanings
           respectively ascribed thereto by the agreement
           set out in the Schedule to the Hawksbill Creek,       Ch. 261.
           Grand Bahama (Deep Water Harbour and
           Industrial Area) Act;
      “power” includes any privilege, authority and
           discretion;
      “prescribed” when used in or with reference to any
           Act, means prescribed by that Act or by
           subsidiary legislation made thereunder;
      “prison” means any place or building or portion of a
           building declared, or within an area declared, to
           be a prison under the Prisons Act;                    Ch. 208.

      “proclamation” means a proclamation of the
           Governor-General;
      “Provost Marshal” means the Commissioner of
           Police exercising the powers and functions of
           the Provost Marshal conferred upon him by
           section 6 of the Police Act;                          Ch. 205.
      “publication” means —
           (a) all written or printed matter;
           (b) any record, tape, wire, perforated roll,
                cinematograph film or other contrivance by
                means of which any words or ideas may be
                mechanically, electronically or electrically
                produced, reproduced, represented or
                conveyed;



––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
LRO 1/2006                                 STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 10]          INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                          (c) anything whether of a similar nature to the
                               foregoing or not, containing any visible
                               representation or by its form, shape, or in
                               any manner capable of producing,
                               reproducing, representing or conveying
                               words or ideas; and
                          (d) every copy and reproduction of any
                               publication as defined in paragraphs (a),
                               (b) and (c) of this definition;
                    “public body” includes any public board,
                          commission, statutory corporation, committee
                          and any undertaking by or of the Government;
9 of 1978, s. 3.    “public holiday” means any day which is mentioned
                          as or is declared to be a public holiday in the
 Ch. 36.
                          Public Holidays Act;
                    “public office” means, subject to the provisions of
                          the Constitution, any office of emolument under
                          the Crown in right of the Government of The
                          Bahamas, whether such office be permanent or
                          temporary;
                    “public place” includes every place to which the
                          public are entitled or permitted to have access
                          whether on payment or otherwise;
                    “Public Seal” means the Public Seal of The
                          Bahamas;
                    “Public Service Commission” means the Public
                          Service Commission constituted by Article 107
                          of the Constitution;
 9 of 1978, s. 3.   “registered”, when used with reference to a
                          document, means registered under the
                          provisions of any written law applicable to the
                          registration of such a document;
                    “repeal” includes rescind, revoke, cancel or replace;
                    “rules” means rules under the Act in which the word
                          “rules” is used and where the context so admits
                          includes orders, regulations, bye-laws and
                          forms;
                    “rules of court” when used in relation to any court,
                          means rules made by the authority having for
                          the time being power to make rules and orders
                          regulating the practice and procedure of such
                          court;
                    “sell” includes offer or exposure for sale, barter and
                          exchange;


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      LRO 1/2006
       INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                          [CH.2 – 11


      “subsidiary legislation” or “statutory instrument”       9 of 1978, s. 3.
            means any proclamation, regulation, rule, order,
            resolution, rule of court, bye-law, or other
            instrument made under or by virtue of any Act
            and having legislative effect;
      “summary conviction” means a summary conviction
            by a magistrate in accordance with the
            provisions of the Magistrates Act;                 Ch. 54.

      “swear” includes affirm and declare;
      “Treasurer” means the Treasurer of The Bahamas;
      “Treasury” means the Treasury of The Bahamas;
      “treaty” means a treaty, convention or agreement
            made with a foreign state, and any protocol or
            declaration attached thereto or independent
            thereof but referring thereto;
      “triable summarily” means triable by a magistrate, in
            accordance with the provisions of the
                                                               Ch. 54.
            Magistrates Act;
      “vessel” means any ship or boat and any description
            of vessel used in navigation;
      “waters of The Bahamas” means the waters within
            the jurisdiction of The Bahamas;
      “will” includes any testamentary instrument;
      “words” includes figures and symbols;
      “writing” includes typewriting, printing, lithography,
            photography and other means of reproduction;
      “written law” means Acts and subsidiary legislation;
      “year” means a calendar year.
      (2) In this and any other written law, the expression
“Commonwealth” when used otherwise than as a reference
to the Commonwealth of The Bahamas, means The
Bahamas, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, India, Sri Lanka, Ghana, Malaysia, Nigeria,
Cyprus, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Jamaica, Republic of
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Malta,
Zambia, The Gambia, Singapore, Guyana, Lesotho,
Botswana, Barbados, Mauritius, Swaziland, Tonga, Fiji,
Western Samoa, Nauru, Bangladesh, Grenada, Papua New
Guinea, Seychelles and any dependency of any such
country:


LRO 1/2008                                   STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 12]                  INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                           Provided that the Governor-General may from time to
                    time by Order published in the Gazette add any country to or
                    delete any country from the countries so specified.
Gazette.                   4. (1) The Official Gazette Bahamas, any
9 of 1978, s. 3.    Supplement thereto and any Extraordinary Gazette shall from
                    time to time be published by the competent authority.
34 of 1996, s. 2.          (2) Wherever the word Gazette is used in any written
                    law, the same shall be held and deemed to refer to and mean —
                           (a) the Official Gazette Bahamas, any Supplement
                               thereto and the Extraordinary Gazette published
                               pursuant to subsection (1); or
                           (b) any newspaper published and in general
                               circulation in The Bahamas and designated as the
                               Gazette by Order1 of the Governor-General.
                           (3) For the purposes of this section the expression
                    “competent authority” means the person empowered by any
                    written law or instrument to cause to be published the
                    Gazette.
Grammatical                5. Where any word or expression is defined in any
variations and      written law such definition shall extend to the grammatical
cognate
expressions.        variations and cognate expressions of such word or
9 of 1978, s. 3.    expression.
Provisions for             6. (1) Words and expressions importing the
gender and
number.
                    masculine gender include the feminine.
                           (2) Words and expressions in the singular include the
                    plural and words and expressions in the plural include the
                    singular.
Service by post.           7. Where any written law authorizes or requires any
9 of 1978, s. 3.    documents to be served or any notice to be given by post or
                    by registered post, whether the expression “serve” or “give”
                    or “send” or any other expression is used, the service or
                    notice shall be deemed to be effected by properly addressing,
                    pre-paying the postage thereon and dispatching by post or by
                    registered post, as the case may be, to the last known postal
                    address or to the post office box number of the person to be
                    served or given notice or in care of the Post Office for general
                    delivery, an envelope containing the document or notice, and,
                    unless the contrary is proved, such service or notice shall be
                    deemed to have been effected ninety-six hours after the time
                    of posting of the envelope.

                    1
                     The Tribune (S.I. 15/1997), The Nassau Guardian (S.I. 15/1997), The Bahama Journal
                    (S.I. 107/2004), The Punch (S.I. 69/2007)


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                                 LRO 1/2008
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                             [CH.2 – 13


       8. In any written law or other instrument having          References to
                                                                 pounds, shillings
the force of law in The Bahamas a reference to pounds,           and pence.
shillings and pence shall be construed as a reference to the     9 of 1978, s. 3.
equivalent sum in the currency of The Bahamas converted
at the ruling rate on the 25th day of May 1966.

                  PART III
        GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO ACTS
      9. (1) Laws passed by Parliament shall be styled           Acts and enact-
“Acts”.                                                          ment formula.

      (2) Acts shall be prefaced by the following
enactment formula —
      “Enacted by the Parliament of The Bahamas”.
      10. Every Act shall be a public Act.                       Act to be public
                                                                 Act.
      11. (1) Every section of an Act shall have effect as a     Sections and
substantive enactment without introductory words.                schedules.

      (2) Every schedule to or table in any Act and any
notes to such schedule or table shall be construed and have
effect as part of such Act.
      12. (1) Where any Act is referred to, it shall be          Citation of Act.
sufficient for all purposes to cite such Act by —
      (a) the title, short title or citation thereof;
      (b) its number among the Acts of the year in which
            it was enacted; or
      (c) any chapter number lawfully given to it under          9 of 1978, s. 3.
            the authority of any Act providing for the issue
            of a revised edition or other editions of the laws
            of The Bahamas.
      (2) Any reference made to any Act, in accordance
with the provisions of subsection (1), may be made
according to the title, short title, citation, number or
chapter number used in copies of Acts printed by the
Government Printer.
      13. (1) Where it is provided that any Act may, as to       Collective
the whole or any part thereof, be cited with any other Act       citation.
or with any group of Acts, all such Acts shall be read and
construed together, and any such group shall be construed
as including such first-mentioned Act.




––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 14]                 INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                            (2) Where it is provided that two or more Acts may
                     together be cited by a collective short title or citation
                     containing therein the years of the first and last of such
                     Acts, such short title or citation shall be construed to
                     include all the Acts covered by the same, or any of them.
 Reference to Act           14. (1) Where in any Act a reference is made to
 as amended.         another Act, such reference shall be deemed to include a
                     reference to such last mentioned Act as the same may from
                     time to time be amended.
                            (2) Where any Act repeals and re-enacts, with or
                     without modification, any provision of a former Act,
                     references in any other Act to the provision so repealed
                     shall be construed as references to the provision so re-
                     enacted.
 9 of 1978, s. 3.           (3) The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) shall
                     apply mutatis mutandis to subsidiary legislation.
 Citation of part           15. In any Act a description or citation of a portion
 of Act.             of an Act shall be construed as including the word, section
                     or other part mentioned or referred to as forming the
                     beginning and as forming the end of the portion comprised
                     in the description or citation.
 Construction of            16. (1) Any reference in any Act to “any Act” or to
 reference to Act,
 section, etc.
                     “any enactment” shall be construed as a reference to any
                     Act for the time being in force.
                            (2) Where in any Act there is a reference to a
                     section, part, chapter or schedule by number or letter only,
                     and not in conjunction with the title or short title of any
                     other Act, such reference shall be construed as a reference
                     to the section, part, chapter or schedule of that number or
                     letter contained in the Act in which such reference occurs.
                            (3) Where in any section of any Act there is a
                     reference to a subsection, paragraph, subparagraph or other
                     division by number or letter only, and not in conjunction
                     with the number of any section of that or of any other Act,
                     such reference shall be construed as a reference to the
                     subsection, paragraph, subparagraph or other division of
                     that number or letter contained in the section in which such
                     reference occurs.
                            (4) The provisions of subsections (2) and (3) shall
                     apply, mutatis mutandis, to subsidiary legislation.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                    [Original Service 2001]
       INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                            [CH.2 – 15


      (5) Any reference to an Act in any Act shall include
a reference to any subsidiary legislation made under the
Act to which reference is made.
      17. A marginal note or heading note to any                 Marginal note or
provision of any Act shall not have any legislative effect       heading note.
                                                                 21 of 2009, s. 2.
and shall not in any way vary, limit or extend the
interpretation of any Act.

                     PART IV
             COMMENCEMENT, AMENDMENT
                   AND REPEAL
      18. Every written law shall —                              Commencement
                                                                 of Act.
      (a) be published in the Gazette; and                       9 of 1978, s. 3.
      (b) come into operation on the expiration of the day
           next preceding the day of each publication or, if
           it is provided in the written law or in some other
           law that such written law shall come into
           operation on some other day, then it shall come
           into operation on the expiration of the day next
           preceding such other day.
      19. In an amending Act the amended Act may be              Principal Act,
referred to as the “principal Act” and this section shall        etc.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
apply mutatis mutandis to subsidiary legislation.
      20. Where a written law repeals in whole or in part        Effect of repeal
any other written law, the repeal shall not —                    generally.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
      (a) revive anything not in force or existing at the
           time at which the repeal takes effect;
      (b) affect the previous operation of any written law
           so repealed or anything duly done or suffered
           under any written law so repealed;
      (c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability
           acquired, accrued or incurred under any written
           law so repealed;
      (d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
           incurred in respect of any offence committed
           against any written law so repealed; or
      (e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or
           remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
           obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or
           punishment as aforesaid; and any such




LRO 1/2010                                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 16]                INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                                investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may
                                be instituted, continued or enforced, and any
                                such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be
                                imposed, as if the repealing Act had not been
                                passed.
Repealed written           21. Where any written law repealing in whole or in
law not revived.
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                    part any former written law is itself repealed, such last
                    repeal shall not revive the written law or provision
                    previously repealed, unless provision is made to that effect.
Repeal and sub-            22. Where any written law repeals in whole or in
stitution.          part any other written law and substitutes other provisions
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                    therefor, the repealed written law shall remain in force
                    until the substituted provisions come into operation.
Repeal of                  23. Where any written law which has been amended
amended written     by any other written law is repealed, such repeal shall
law to include
amendments.         include the repeal of all those provisions of such other
9 of 1978, s. 3.    written law by which such first-mentioned written law was
                    amended.
Effect of expiry           24. Upon the expiry or lapse of any written law, the
of written law.     provisions of section 20 shall apply as if such written law
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                    had been repealed.

                                         PART V
                                 SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION
 General provi-           25. Where an Act confers power on any authority to
 sion with regard   make subsidiary legislation, the following provisions shall
 to power to make
 subsidiary
                    have effect with reference to the making thereof —
 legislation.             (a) when any subsidiary legislation purports to be
                              made in exercise of a particular power or
                              powers, it shall be deemed also to be made in
                              exercise of all other powers thereunto enabling;
                          (b) no subsidiary legislation shall be inconsistent
                              with the provisions of the Act under which it is
                              made;
                          (c) subsidiary legislation may at any time be
                              amended by the same authority and in the same
                              manner by and in which it was made:




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                             LRO 1/2010
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                             [CH.2 – 17


             Provided that where such authority has been
           replaced wholly or in part by another authority,
           the power conferred hereby upon the original
           authority may be exercised by the replacing
           authority concerning all matters or things within
           its jurisdiction as if it were the original
           authority;
      (d) where any Act confers power on any authority to
           make subsidiary legislation for any general
           purpose, and also for any special purpose
           incidental thereto, the enumeration of special
           purposes shall not be deemed to derogate from
           the generality of the powers conferred with
           reference to the general purpose;
      (e) subsidiary legislation may provide that a
           contravention or breach thereof shall be
           punishable on summary conviction by such fine
           not exceeding five hundred dollars or by such
           term of imprisonment not exceeding six months
           as may be specified in the subsidiary legislation
           or by both such fine and imprisonment;
      (f) subsidiary legislation may amend any forms
           contained in the Act under which such
           subsidiary legislation is made and may prescribe
           new forms for the purpose thereof and for the
           purposes of such subsidiary legislation; and
      (g) subsidiary legislation may provide for the
           imposition of fees and charges in respect of any
           matter with regard to which provision is made in
           such subsidiary legislation or in the Act under
           which such subsidiary legislation is made.
      26. (1) Where provision is made by any subsidiary          Fees and charges.
legislation in respect of fees or other charges, such
subsidiary legislation may provide for all or any of the
following matters —
      (a) specific fees or charges;
      (b) maximum or minimum fees or charges;
      (c) maximum and minimum fees or charges;
      (d) the payment of fees or charges either generally
           or under specified conditions or in specified
           circumstances;
      (e) the exemption of any person or class of persons
           from the payment of fees or charges; and


––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 18]                  INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                             (f) the reduction, waiver or refund, in whole or in
                                 part, of any such fees or charges, either upon the
                                 happening of a certain event or in the discretion
                                 of a specified person.
                             (2) Where any reduction, waiver or refund, in whole
                      or in part, of any fee or charge is provided for by any
                      subsidiary legislation, such reduction, waiver or refund
                      may be expressed to apply or be applicable either generally
                      or specially —
                             (a) in respect of certain matters or transactions or
                                 classes of matters or transactions;
                             (b) in respect of certain documents or classes of
                                 documents;
                             (c) in respect of the occurrence or the termination of
                                 any event;
                             (d) in respect of certain persons or classes of
                                 persons; or
                             (e) in respect of any combination of such matters,
                                 transactions, documents, events or persons, and
                                 may be expressed to apply or be applicable
                                 subject to such conditions as may be specified in
                                 the subsidiary legislation or in the discretion of
                                 any person specified therein.
 Effect of                   27. Subsidiary legislation shall have the same force
 subsidiary
 legislation.
                      and effect and shall be as binding and shall be construed
                      for all purposes as if it had been contained in the Act under
                      which it was made.
 Construction of             28. Where any Act confers power to make any
 subsidiary
 legislation.
                      subsidiary legislation, expressions used in the subsidiary
                      legislation shall have the same meaning as in the Act
                      conferring the power, and any reference in such subsidiary
                      legislation to “the Act” shall be construed as a reference to
                      the Act conferring the power to make such subsidiary
                      legislation.
 Exercise of statu-          29. Where an Act is not to come into operation
 tory powers be-
 tween enactment
                      immediately on the publication thereof and confers power
 and commence-        to make any appointment, to make any subsidiary
 ment of Act.         legislation, to issue notices, to prescribe forms or to do any
                      other thing for the purposes of the Act, such power may be
                      exercised at any time after the publication of the Act in the
                      Gazette:




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      [Original Service 2001]
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                             [CH.2 – 19


       Provided that any appointment, subsidiary
legislation, instrument, notice, form or thing made,
granted, issued, prescribed, given or done under such
power shall not, unless the appointment, subsidiary
legislation, instrument, notice, form or thing is necessary
for bringing the Act into operation, come into operation or
have any effect until the Act comes into operation.
       30. An act shall be deemed to be done under an Act        Acts done under
or by virtue of the powers conferred by an Act or in             subsidiary legis-
                                                                 lation deemed
pursuance or execution of the provisions of or under the         done under Act.
authority of an Act, if it is done under or by virtue of or in
pursuance or execution of or under the authority of
subsidiary legislation made under any power contained in
that Act.
       31. All rules, regulations and bye-laws shall be laid     Subsidiary legis-
before both Houses of Parliament immediately after               lation to be laid
                                                                 before both
publication in the Gazette or within fourteen days of the        Houses.
making thereof, whichever be the earlier, or if the Houses
are not then in session, within fourteen days of the first
meeting thereof following the making of such rules,
regulations or bye-laws.
       32. (1) If either House of Parliament within a period     Subsidiary
of six weeks beginning with the day on which a copy of           legislation
                                                                 annulled by
any rules, regulations or bye-laws is laid before it, resolves   resolution of
that an Address be presented to the Governor-General             either House.
praying that the rules, regulations or bye-laws or any
provision thereof be annulled, no further proceedings shall
be taken or be valid thereunder after the date of the
resolution and the Governor-General shall thereupon by
Order revoke the rules, regulations or bye-laws or such
provision with effect from the said date, so however that
any such resolution and revocation shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
the rules, regulations or bye-laws or any provision thereof
or to the making of new rules, regulations or bye-laws.
       (2) Where in pursuance of subsection (1) a
resolution is passed in respect of any rules, regulations or
bye-laws or any provision thereof which imposes a tax,
duty, rate, fee or similar impost, in replacement of any
existing tax, duty, rate, fee or similar impost, such existing
tax, duty, rate, fee or similar impost shall upon the passing
of the resolution revive and remain valid until it is lawfully
revoked or amended.



––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 20]               INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


Effect of repeal
on subsidiary             33. (1) Where any Act —
legislation.              (a) repeals any former Act and substitutes other
                                provisions therefor; or
                          (b) repeals any former Act and re-enacts such
                                former Act with or without modification,
                   any subsidiary legislation made under the former Act and
                   in force at the commencement of the repealing Act shall, so
                   far as it is not inconsistent with the repealing Act, continue
                   in force and have the like effect for all purposes as if made
                   under the repealing Act.
                          (2) Where any subsidiary legislation is continued in
                   force by virtue of subsection (1), such subsidiary
                   legislation may be from time to time amended as if it had
                   been made under the repealing Act.
Deviation from            34. Where any form is prescribed by or under any
form.              written law, deviations therefrom, not affecting the
9 of 1978, s. 3.   substance of such form, shall not invalidate it.

                                            PART VI
                                            POWERS
Exercise of              35. (1) Where any written law confers any power or
powers.            imposes any duty, then the power may be exercised and the
9 of 1978, s. 3.   duty shall be performed from time to time as occasion
                   requires.
                         (2) Where any written law confers any power or
                   imposes any duty on the holder of any public office as
                   such, then the power may be exercised and the duty shall
                   be performed by the holder for the time being of that public
                   office.
Construction of          36. (1) Where any written law confers upon any
enabling words.    person power to do or enforce the doing of any act or thing,
9 of 1978, s. 3.   all such powers shall be deemed to be also conferred as are
                   reasonably necessary to enable the person to do or enforce
                   the doing of the act or thing.
9 of 1978, s. 3.         (2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection
                   (1), where any written law confers power —




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                   [Original Service 2001]
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                             [CH.2 – 21


       (a) to provide for, prohibit, control or regulate any
            matter, such power shall include power to
            provide for the same by the licensing thereof and
            power to prohibit acts whereby the prohibition,
            control or regulation of such matter might be
            evaded;
       (b) to grant a licence, lease, permit, authority,
            approval or exemption, such power shall include
            power to impose reasonable conditions subject
            to which such licence, lease, permit, authority,
            approval or exemption may be granted;
       (c) to approve any person or thing, such power shall
            include power to withdraw approval thereof;
       (d) to give directions, such power shall include
            power to couch the same in the form of
            prohibitions.
       (3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection     9 of 1978, s. 3.
(1), whenever in any written law the expression “as the
Governor-General may appoint” or “as the Governor-
General may direct” or “as the Governor-General may
specify” or “as the Governor-General may prescribe” or
“as may be designated by the Governor-General”, or any
similar expression referring to the Governor-General
appears and no power is expressly conferred upon the
Governor-General to make the appointment, give the
discretion or specification, prescribe or make the
designation, as the case may be, such power shall
nevertheless be deemed to be conferred.
       (4) Subsection (3) shall have effect in relation to a
Minister, a public officer, a public body or other person as
it has effect in relation to the Governor-General.
       37. (1) Where any written law confers power upon          Power to issue
any person to issue, grant, give or renew any licence, lease,    licences, etc.,
                                                                 discretionary.
authority, approval or permit, the person so empowered           9 of 1978, s. 3.
shall have a discretion either to issue, grant, give or renew
or to refuse to issue, grant, give or renew such licence,
lease, authority, approval or permit.
       (2) Nothing in this section shall affect any right        9 of 1978, s. 3.
which may be conferred by any written law upon any
person to appeal against a refusal to issue, grant, give or
renew any licence, lease, authority, approval or permit.




––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 22]                INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


Power to appoint          38. Where any written law confers a power or
includes power to
suspend, dismiss,   imposes a duty upon any person to make any appointment
reappoint, etc.     or to constitute or establish any board, tribunal,
9 of 1978, s. 3.    commission, committee or similar body, then the person
                    having such power or duty shall also have the power —
                          (a) to remove, suspend, dismiss or revoke the
                                appointment of, and to reappoint or reinstate,
                                any person appointed in exercise of such power
                                or duty;
                          (b) to revoke the appointment, constitution or
                                establishment of, or to dissolve, any board,
                                tribunal, commission, committee or similar body
                                appointed, constituted or established, in exercise
                                of such power or duty, and to reappoint, re-
                                constitute, or re-establish the same; and
                          (c) to specify the period for which any person
                                appointed in exercise of such power or duty
                                shall hold such appointment:
                          Provided that where the power or duty of such person
                    so to act is only exercisable upon the recommendation, or
                    is subject to the approval or consent, of some other person,
                    then such power shall only be exercisable upon such
                    recommendation or subject to such approval or consent.
 9 of 1978, s. 3.
Delegation by
                          39. (1) Where any written law confers powers or
specified public    imposes duties upon a specified public officer, such public
officers.           officer may delegate any other public officer or the person
9 of 1978, s. 3.    for the time being holding any office designated by him to
                    exercise such powers or perform such duties on his behalf,
                    and thereupon, or from the date specified by such specified
                    public officer, the person delegated shall have and may
                    exercise such powers and perform such duties.
                          (2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall authorize a
                    specified public officer to delegate any power to make
                    subsidiary legislation or to hear any appeal.
 9 of 1978, s. 3.         (3) Where any written law confers any power or
                    imposes any duty upon a specified public officer and such
                    power is exercised or such duty is performed by any other
                    public officer, the specified public officer shall, unless the
                    contrary is proved, be deemed to have delegated the latter
                    public officer under subsection (1) to exercise the power or
                    perform the duty.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                    [Original Service 2001]
                         INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                              [CH.2 – 23


                         (4) In this section “specified public officer” means        9 of 1978, s. 3.
                   the person for the time being holding any public office
                   which has been specified, either generally or for the
                   purposes of any particular written law, under this section
                   by the Governor-General by notice in the Gazette.
                         40. (1) Where any written law confers power upon           Effect of dele-
                   any person to delegate the exercise on his behalf of any of      gation of powers
                                                                                    and duties.
                   the powers or the performance of any duties conferred or         9 of 1978, s. 3.
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                   imposed upon him under any written law —
                         (a) such delegation shall not preclude the person so
                              delegating from exercising or performing at any
                              time any of the powers or duties so delegated;
                         (b) such delegation may be conditional, qualified or
                              limited in such manner as the person so
                              delegating may think fit;
                         (c) where the delegation may be made only with
                              approval of some person, such delegation may
                              be conditional, qualified or limited in such
                              manner as the person whose approval is required
                              may think fit;
                         (d) the delegation may be to a named person or to
                              the person for the time being holding any office
                              designated by the person so delegating; and
                         (e) any delegation may be amended by the person
                              so delegating.
                         (2) The delegation of any power shall be deemed to
                   include the delegation of any duty incidental thereto or
                   connected therewith and the delegation of any duty shall be
                   deemed to include the delegation of any power incidental
                   thereto or connected therewith.
                                                                                    Exercise of
                         41. Where any written law confers any power or             powers in special
                   imposes any duty upon the holder of any public office and        cases.
9 of 1978, s. 3.   either —                                                         9 of 1978, s. 3.

                         (a) that office has been abolished; or
                         (b) no person has been appointed to discharge the
                              functions of that office,
                   those powers and duties may be exercised or performed —
                          (i) in the case of making subsidiary legislation, by
                              the Governor-General; and




                   ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
                   [Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 24]                 INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                            (ii) in any other case, by the holder of such other
                                 public office as the Governor-General may by
                                 order direct.
  9 of 1978, s. 3.
Power to make              42. Where any written law confers power upon any
public
instruments and
                     person to make, issue or approve any proclamation, order,
perform acts.        notice, declaration, instrument, notification, licence,
9 of 1978, s. 3.     permit, register or list, such power shall include power —
                           (a) to amend or suspend such proclamation, order,
                                 notice, declaration, instrument, notification,
                                 licence, permit, register or list;
                           (b) to substitute another proclamation, order, notice,
                                 declaration, instrument, notification, licence,
                                 permit, register or list for one already made,
                                 issued or approved;
                           (c) to withdraw approval of any proclamation,
                                 order,     notice,     declaration,    instrument,
                                 notification, licence, permit, register or list so
                                 approved; and
                           (d) to declare the date of the coming into operation,
                                 and the period of operation, of any such
                                 proclamation, order, notice, declaration,
                                 instrument, notification, licence, permit, register
                                 or list.
 9 of 1978, s. 3.
Power to relate            43. Any appointment made under the provisions of
back appoint-         any written law may be declared to have effect as from the
ment.                 date upon which the person appointed in fact began to
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                      exercise the powers and perform the duties of his
                      appointment not being a date earlier than the
                     commencement of the written law under which the
                     appointment is made.

                                         PART VII
                                  BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
 9 of 1978, s. 3.
Power to appoint           44. Where any written law confers power upon any
chairman.            person to appoint any persons to be members of any board,
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                     tribunal, commission, committee or similar body, the
                     person so appointing may appoint a chairman, a deputy
                     chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary of such board,
                     tribunal, commission, committee or similar body.




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                      [Original Service 2001]
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                              [CH.2 – 25


      45. Where any written law confers power upon any           Power to appoint
person to appoint any persons to be members of any board,        public officer to
                                                                 board, etc.
tribunal, commission, committee or similar body, the             9 of 1978, s. 3.
person so empowered may appoint any public officer, by
his official designation, to be a member of such board,
tribunal, commission, committee or similar body, and, on
such appointment and until such appointment shall be
revoked or otherwise determined, the person for the time
being holding the public office in question shall be a
member of such board, tribunal, commission, committee or
similar body.
                                                                            .s.3.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s.  3.
      46. Where any board, tribunal, commission,                 Appointment of
committee or similar body is established by or under any         alternates and
written law, any person who is empowered by such written         temporary mem-
                                                                 bers.
law to appoint any or all of the members thereof may —           9 of 1978, .s. 3.
      (a) appoint one or more duly qualified persons to be
           alternate members of the same, and any one
           such alternate member may attend any meeting
           of the same when a substantive member is
           temporarily unable to attend for any reason; and
      (b) appoint a duly qualified person to be a
           temporary member of the same in the place of
           any substantive member who is precluded by
           illness, absence from The Bahamas or any other
           cause from exercising his functions as such,
and when attending any meeting of such board, tribunal,
commission, committee or similar body, such alternate or
temporary member shall be deemed for all purposes to be a
member of the same.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
      47. Where any board, tribunal, commission,                 Powers of board,
committee or similar body is established by or under any         etc. not affected
written law, the powers of such board, tribunal, commission,     by vacancy.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
committee or similar body shall not be affected by —
      (a) any vacancy in the membership thereof;
      (b) any defect in the appointment or qualification of
           a person purporting to be a member thereof; or
      (c) any minor irregularity in the convening of any
           meeting thereof.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
      48. Where any public board, commission, corporation,       Powers of public
committee or similar public body is established by or under      boards, etc. to
                                                                 regulate pro-
any written law, then unless the contrary intention appears,     cedure.
such board, commission, corporation, committee                    9 of 1978, s. 3.




––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 26]                  INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                      or similar public body may regulate its own procedure by
                      standing orders.
  9 of 1978, s. 3.
Members of pub-              49. Except as may be otherwise expressly provided
lic boards, etc. to   in any written law, no member of any public board,
incur no personal
liability.
                      commission, corporation, committee or similar public body
9 of 1978, s. 3.      shall incur any personal civil liability in respect of anything
                      done or suffered in good faith and without negligence by
                      such member in the exercise or purported exercise of the
                      statutory powers or duties of the public board, commission,
                      corporation, committee or similar public body of which he
                      is a member.
 Declaration of              50. A member of any public board, commission,
 pecuniary
 interest.
                      corporation, committee or similar public body who directly
                      or indirectly has a pecuniary interest in any matter under
                      consideration by such public board, commission,
                      corporation, committee or similar public body, shall be
                      bound to declare such interest and shall not participate in
                      any vote regarding such matter.
 Procedure when              51. A Minister who has any pecuniary interest,
 Minister has
 interest.
                      whether directly or indirectly, in any matter in relation to
                      which he has any statutory or other powers or functions as
                      such Minister shall forthwith declare such interest to the
                      Prime Minister and shall thereupon withdraw from the
                      exercise of any such powers or functions in relation to such
                      matter; and the Prime Minister may take such action as
                      may be necessary to arrange for the exercise of such
                      powers and functions by another Minister.
  9 of 1978, s. 3.
Power of major-              52. (1) Where any written law confers a power or
ity and exercise
of powers.            imposes a duty upon a body or number of persons
9 of 1978, s. 3.      consisting of or being not less than three, such power may
                      be exercised or duty performed in the name of that body or
                      number of persons by a majority of those persons.
                             (2) Whenever such body or number of persons is
                      assembled, the chairman or other member presiding shall
                      have a casting as well as a deliberative vote, in all matters
                      in which a decision is taken by vote by whatever name
                      such vote may be called.
                             (3) The exercise of any power vested in such body
                      or number of persons may be signified either by the
                      chairman or other person presiding at the meeting or other
                      deliberation at which such power was exercised or at




STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                       [Original Service 2001]
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                             [CH.2 – 27


which, as the case may be, authority to exercise it was
conferred, or by any person from time to time authorized
by such body or persons to signify the exercise of such
power.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
      53. Where any written law constitutes any board,           Seal.
tribunal, commission, committee or similar body to be a          9 of 1978, s. 3.
body corporate having perpetual succession and a common
seal and any document requires to be sealed with such
common seal, then such common seal shall be affixed by
the chairman of such board, tribunal, commission,
committee or similar body, or by any member thereof
appointed by the chairman for that purpose and shall be
authenticated by the signature of the chairman or such
member.

                    PART VIII
           PUBLIC OFFICERS AND PUBLIC
                   CONTRACTS
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
       54. In any written law, instrument, warrant, or           References to
process of any kind, any reference to a public officer, or to    public officer.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
a person holding a public office by a term designating his
office, shall include a reference to any person for the time
being lawfully discharging the functions of that office, or
of any part of such functions, and any person appointed to
act in or perform the duties of such office, or any part of
such duties, for the time being.
       55. The Governor-General may, by notice (which            Change of title of
may be given retrospective effect) in the Gazette, declare a     office.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
change in title of any public office or public body, or of
any person referred to in any written law, and such change
of title shall have effect from the date specified in such
notice or, if no date is specified therein, from the date of
publication thereof in the Gazette and with effect from
such a day, any reference in any written law to the former
title of such public office, public body or person shall be
read and construed as a reference to that office, body or
person by such new title as the Governor-General may
have so declared.




––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
  CH.2 – 28]                INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


Appointment of               56. Where any written law confers power upon any
officers by name      person to appoint or name a person to have and exercise
or office.
9 of 1978, s. 3.      any powers or perform any duties, the person so
                      empowered may either appoint a person by name or direct
                      the person for the time being holding any office designated
                      by him to have and exercise such powers or perform such
                      duties, and thereupon, or from the date specified by the
                      person so empowered, the person appointed by name or the
                      person holding the office aforesaid shall have and may
                      exercise such powers or perform such duties accordingly
                      until such appointment be revoked or otherwise
                      determined.
  Power to appoint           57. (1) Where the holder of any public office is on
  while holder on
  retirement leave.
                      leave of absence pending the relinquishment by him of
                      such office, another person may be appointed to the same
                      public office.
                             (2) Where two or more persons are holding the
                      same public office by reason of an appointment made in
  9 of 1978, s. 3.    accordance with subsection (1), then, for the purposes of
                      any written law and in respect of any power conferred or
                      duty imposed upon the holder of such office, the person
                      last appointed to the office shall be deemed to be the holder
                      thereof.
  Qualification for          58. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any
  holding office
  not to apply to
                      written law, the qualifications required from, and the
  acting              restrictions imposed upon, and the disabilities attached to,
  appointments.       the holder of any office do not apply to any person who is
  9 of 1978, s. 3.    temporarily appointed to discharge the duties of that office.
  Contracts by
  Minister or
                             59. In any contract or other document, signed,
  public officer.     executed or made by a Minister or public officer on behalf
                      of the Government or of any Government department, it
                      shall not be necessary to name the Minister or such public
                      officer, but it shall be sufficient to name the office held by
                      the Minister or such public officer, and the Minister or
                      public officer shall be deemed to be a party thereto as if the
                      Minister or such public officer were a corporation sole with
                      perpetual succession for this purpose.




   STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                   [Original Service 2001]
       INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                          [CH.2 – 29


      60. Any contract or other document signed,               Effect of past
executed or made before the commencement of this Act by        contracts by
                                                               Minister or
a Minister or by a public officer on behalf of the             public officer.
Government or of any Government department shall be
enforceable as if the office of Minister or such public
officer had at the time of such execution or making, been a
corporation sole with perpetual succession for this purpose.
      61. The omission to add the title of the public office   Omission of title
                                                               after signature of
held by a Minister or public officer signing or executing      public officer
any contract or other document after the signature of such     immaterial.
officer shall not exclude such contract or other document
from the operation of sections 59 and 60.

                      PART IX
             CROWN, GOVERNOR-GENERAL
                   AND MINISTER
      62. (1) Where any Act confers a power or imposes a       Signification of
duty upon the Governor-General to make any subsidiary          orders of
                                                               Governor-
legislation or appointment, give any directions, issue any     General.
order, authorize any thing or matter to be done, grant any
exemption, remit any fee or penalty, or exercise any other
power or perform any other duty, the exercise of such
power or the performance of such duty may be signified
under the hand of a Minister or such officer as the
Governor-General may, acting in his discretion, designate.
      (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
(1), proclamations and warrants shall be made or issued
only under the hand of the Governor-General himself.
      63. Any reference to the Sovereign or to the Crown       References to the
shall be construed as a reference to the Sovereign for the     Sovereign.
time being.
                                                               9 of 1978, s. 3.
      64. No written law shall in any manner whatsoever        Saving of rights
affect the right of or be binding on the Crown unless it is    of Crown.
                                                               9 of 1978, s. 3.
therein expressly provided or unless it appears by
necessary implication that the Crown is bound thereby.




LRO 1/2008                                   STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 30]                   INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                                                  PART X
                                            TIME AND DISTANCE
 Standard time.            65. (1) Standard time means the mean time of the
                     75th meridian West of Greenwich, that is to say, five hours
                     slow of Greenwich Mean Time.
 9 of 1978, s. 3.          (2) Whenever any expression of time occurs in any
                     written law, the time referred to shall be held to be —
                           (a) summer time, during the period thereof;
                           (b) at all other times, standard time.
 Summer time.              66. (1) Summer time shall be one hour slow of
                     standard time as defined in section 65.
                           (2) The period of summer time shall be the period
                     so declared by the Governor-General by order.1
                           (3) Nothing in this section or section 65 shall affect
                     the use of Greenwich Mean Time for the purposes of
                     astronomy, meteorology, navigation or aviation, or affect
                     the construction of any document mentioning or referring
                     to a point in time in connection with any of these purposes.
 References to             67. The expression “a.m.” indicates the period
 “a.m.” and
 “p.m.”.
                     between midnight and the following noon, and the
                     expression “p.m.” indicates the time between noon and the
                     following midnight; and where two such expressions occur
                     conjunctively in relation to any specified hour or in
                     conjunction with the word “sunrise”, they shall be
                     construed as relating to a consecutive period of time.
Provision where            68. Where no time is prescribed or allowed within
no time              which any thing shall be done, such thing shall be done
prescribed.
                     without unreasonable delay, and as often as due occasion
                     arises.
  9 of 1978, s. 3.
Computation of             69. In computing time for the purposes of any written
time.                law —
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                           (a) a period of days from the happening of any
                                 event or the doing of any act or thing shall be
                                 deemed to be exclusive of the day on which the
                                 event happens or the act or thing is done;
                           (b) if the last day of the period is a Sunday or public
                                 holiday the period shall include the next
                                 following day, not being a public holiday;
                     1
                      By S.I. 65/2006, the Governor-General, by order coming into operation on the 11th
                     March 2007, declared that “the period of summer time shall commence at 2 a.m. on the
                     morning of the second Sunday in March each year and shall expire at 2 a.m. on the
                     morning of the first Sunday in November each year”.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                                                   LRO 1/2008
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                             [CH.2 – 31


       (c) where any act or proceeding is directed or
            allowed to be done or taken on a certain day,
            then if that day is a Sunday or public holiday,
            the act or proceedings shall be considered as
            done or taken in due time if it is done or taken
            on the next following day, not being a Sunday or
            public holiday;
       (d) where an act or proceeding is directed or
            allowed to be done or taken within any time not
            exceeding six days, no Sunday or public holiday
            shall be reckoned in the computation of that
            time.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
       70. Where in any written law a time is prescribed         Power to extend
for doing any act or taking any proceeding and power is          time.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
given to a court, public body, public officer or other
authority, to extend such time, then the power may be
exercised by the court, public body public officer or other
authority although the application for the same is not made
until after the expiration of the time prescribed.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
       71. In the measurement of any distance for the            Distance.
purposes of any written law, that distance shall be              9 of 1978, s. 3.
measured in a straight line or a horizontal plane.
       72. Any summons, notice, warrant or other process         Warrants, etc.
may be issued, served or executed and any arrest, search or      valid on public
                                                                 holiday.
seizure may be carried out or made on any day, whether a
Sunday or public holiday or not, and at any hour of the day
or night.

                    PART XI
         FEES, PENALTIES, OFFENCES AND
                  PROCEEDINGS
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
      73. The imposition of a penalty or fine by or under        Imposition of
any written law shall not relieve any person from liability      penalty not to bar
                                                                 civil action.
to answer in damages to a person injured.                        9 of 1978, s. 3.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
      74. Where in any written law a penalty is prescribed       Penalties pre-
for an offence under that written law, such provision shall      scribed to be
                                                                 deemed maxi-
imply —                                                          mum penalties.
      (a) that such offence shall be punishable upon             9 of 1978, s. 3.
           conviction by a penalty not exceeding the
           penalty prescribed; and




––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
   CH.2 – 32]              INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


                            (b) if the amount of the fine is unspecified, that such
                                 offence shall, without prejudice to any law
                                 against excessive or unreasonable fines or
                                 assessments, be punishable by a fine of any
                                 amount within the jurisdiction of the court.
Summary
procedure.
                            75. Where by any Act or by any subsidiary
                     legislation made thereunder it is provided that any offence
                     shall be prosecuted summarily, or any sum of money is
                     directed or authorized to be recovered summarily, or where
                     a magistrate is authorized to order or require a person to do
                     or abstain from doing any act or thing other than the
                     payment of money, or where anything is declared capable
                     of being enforced summarily, or by summary order, or
                     where any amount is declared to be recoverable summarily
Ch. 54.              as a civil debt, the Magistrates Act and any Act amending
                     the same shall apply accordingly, and such expressions as
                     aforesaid shall mean and include that Act and any Act
                     amending the same and any subsequent Act repealing the
                     Magistrates Act and conferring jurisdiction on a magistrate
                     to do any of the acts and things above set out in a summary
                     manner.
Evidence of                 76. Where the fiat, authorization, sanction, consent
signature of fiat,   or authority of the Attorney-General or any other Minister
etc.                 is necessary before any prosecution or action is
                     commenced, or for any purpose whatsoever in connection
                     with any proceeding, any document purporting to bear the
                     fiat, authorization, sanction, consent or authority of the
                     Attorney-General or any other Minister shall, until the
                     contrary is proved, be received as evidence in any
                     proceeding without proof being given that the signature to
                     such fiat, authorization, sanction, consent or authority is
                     that of the Attorney-General or any other Minister.
Disposal of                 77. (1) Where under any written law any movable
forfeits.            property is adjudged by any court or other authority to be
9 of 1978, s. 3.     forfeited, it shall be forfeited to the Crown, and the net
                     proceeds thereof, if it is ordered by a competent authority
                     to be sold, shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund, unless
                     other provision is made.




   STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                  [Original Service 2001]
      INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES                              [CH.2 – 33


      (2) Nothing in this section shall affect any provision      9 of 1978, s. 3.
in any written law whereby any portion of any forfeit or of
the proceeds of any forfeit is expressed to be recoverable
by any person or may be granted by any authority to any
person.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
      78. (1) Where by any written law the signature of          Collection of
the Governor-General or of any public officer is required to     fees.
                                                                 9 of 1978, s. 3.
any certificate, authorization, consent, licence, permit or
exemption, or any alteration, transfer or renewal thereof,
addition thereto or endorsement thereon, or any copy of the
same, and no fee for such signature is prescribed by written
law, there shall be payable for such signature such fee as
the Governor-General may prescribe by notice in the
Gazette.
      (2) Where any written law requires or authorizes the       9 of 1978, s. 3.
issue of any document by a public officer, such public
officer may, subject to any discretion of the Governor-
General, issue a duplicate of such document, upon payment
of such fee as may be prescribed by written law or as the
Governor-General may prescribe by notice in the Gazette if
no fee is prescribed by written law.
      (3) Where any written law requires or authorizes           9 of 1978, s. 3.
any alteration, transfer, or endorsement of or addition to
any certificate, authorization, consent, licence, permit or
exemption by a public officer, such fee shall be payable
therefor as may be prescribed by written law or as the
Governor-General may prescribe by notice in the Gazette if
no fee is prescribed by written law.
      (4) Where an extract of any document, book, record         9 of 1978, s. 3.
or instrument may be properly certified by a public officer
as a true extract of such document book, record or
instrument, such fee shall be payable for the certifying of
the extract by such officer as may be prescribed by written
law or as the Governor-General may prescribe by notice in
the Gazette if no fee is prescribed by written law.

                       PART XII
                    MISCELLANEOUS
      79. (1) The Attorney-General may, by order                 Rectification of
published in the Gazette, rectify any clerical or printing       errors.
error appearing in any written law.



––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––
[Original Service 2001]                    STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS
CH.2 – 34]                 INTERPRETATION AND GENERAL CLAUSES


9 of 1978, s. 3.            (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid
                     before the Senate and the House of Assembly without
                     unreasonable delay, and section 32 of this Act shall apply
                     to any such order.
 9 of 1978, s. 3.
Reprint of                  80. The Government Printer may, with the authority
written laws.        of the Governor-General, print copies of any written law
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                     with all additions, omissions, substitutions and
                     amendments effected by any amending written law and
                     such copies shall be deemed to be authentic copies of the
                     written law so amended as at the date of such printing.
  9 of 1978, s. 3.
Performance of              81. (1) Where any person, public officer,
acts for which       Government Department or public body is required to do
payment
required.
                     anything for which a fee is to be paid or a charge made
9 of 1978, s. 3.
                     under any written law, such person, public officer,
                     Government Department or public body may decline to do
                     that thing until the fee or charge is paid or, where the
                     precise amount of the payment to be made cannot be
                     ascertained until the thing is done, until there be paid such
                     amount as may be estimated to be the correct amount by
                     the person, public officer or the responsible officer of the
                     Government Department or public body required to do the
                     thing.
                            (2) Where a thing has been done for which an
                     estimated amount shall have been paid, such amount shall
                     be adjusted to the correct amount either by means of a
                     further payment or by a refund of the amount overpaid.

                                        SCHEDULE (Section 3)
                             BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY OF NASSAU
                           All that part of New Providence bounded on the north by
                     the Harbour of Nassau, on the east by Mackey Street, on the
                     south by an imaginary line starting at a point approximately
                     three hundred and eighty yards to the south of the junction of
                     Mackey Street and Shirley Street and continuing in a straight
                     line to the south-east corner of the grounds of the Princess
                     Margaret Hospital, thence south-westerly to Prison Lane, thence
                     to the division wall between the Barracks and the Prison, thence
                     in a straight line westwardly to the junction of Dillet Street and
                     Blue Hill Road and following the centre of Dillet Street and
                     Meeting Street to Nassau Street, and on the west by Nassau
                     Street.
                          The City of Nassau shall also include the whole of Paradise
                     Island, also Potters Cay and all other islets and cays in the
                     Harbour of Nassau.


STATUTE LAW OF THE BAHAMAS                                        [Original Service 2001]
