                                                                                                                   ISPM 32




INTERNATIONAL STANDARD FOR PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES 32
                                                                                                                    ENG




                                                             Categorization of
                                                       commodities according to
                                                                 their pest risk




                                                                              Produced by the Secretariat of the
                                                               International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC)
This page is intentionally left blank
               INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS FOR
                   PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES




          ISPM 32

Categorization of commodities
 according to their pest risk




                           Produced by the Secretariat of the
                    International Plant Protection Convention
                             Adopted 2009; published 2016




                                                © FAO 2009
FAO encourages the use, reproduction and dissemination of material in this
information product. Except where otherwise indicated, material may be copied,
downloaded and printed for private study, research and teaching purposes, or for
use in non-commercial products or services, provided that appropriate
acknowledgement of FAO as the source and copyright holder is given and that
FAO’s endorsement of users’ views, products or services is not implied in any
way.
When this ISPM is reproduced, it should be mentioned that current adopted
versions of ISPMs are available for download on www.ippc.int.
All requests for translation and adaptation rights, and for resale and other
commercial use rights should be made via www.fao.org/contact-us/licence-
request or addressed to copyright@fao.org.
FAO    information    products are             available on    the  FAO    website
(www.fao.org/publications) and can             be purchased   through publications-
sales@fao.org.
The designations The designations employed and the presentation of material in
this information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on
the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or
of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The
mention of specific companies or products of manufacturers, whether or not these
have been patented, does not imply that these have been endorsed or
recommended by FAO in preference to others of a similar nature that are not
mentioned. The views expressed in this information product are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of FAO.




Publication history
This is not an official part of the standard
2004-04 ICPM-6 added topic Classification of commodities (2004-031)
2004-04 SC approved Specification 18 Classification of commodities by
   phytosanitary risk related to level of processing and intended use
2005-02 EWG developed draft text
2006-05 SC revised draft text and steward requested comments via email
2007-05 SC revised draft text and approved for MC
2007-06 Sent for MC
2007-11 SC-7 revised draft text and requested further study and review by TPPT
2008-05 SC-7 revised draft text and approved for MC
2008-06 Sent for MC
2008-11 SC revised draft text
2009-03 CPM-4 adopted standard
ISPM 32. 2009. Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk. Rome,
   IPPC, FAO.


2012-08 IPPC Secretariat corrected editorial errors in Annex 1.
2015-07 IPPC Secretariat incorporated ink amendments and reformatted
   standards following revoking of standards procedure from CPM-10 (2015).
Publication history last modified: 2015-12.
Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk                                                                                        ISPM 32



CONTENTS

Adoption ...................................................................................................................................................4

INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................4
Scope ........................................................................................................................................................4
References ................................................................................................................................................4
Definitions ................................................................................................................................................4
Outline of Requirements ..........................................................................................................................4

BACKGROUND ......................................................................................................................................5

REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................................................................................6
1.     Elements of Categorization of Commodities according to their Pest Risk .......................................6
       1.1      Method and degree of processing before export ...............................................................6
       1.2      Intended use of the commodity .........................................................................................7
2.     Commodity Categories .....................................................................................................................7
ANNEX 1: Methods of commercial processing with resultant commodities that do not remain
   capable of being infested with quarantine pests ...............................................................................9
ANNEX 2: Methods of commercial processing with resultant commodities that remain capable of
   being infested with quarantine pests ...............................................................................................11
APPENDIX 1: Flow chart illustrating categorization of commodities according to their pest risk .......13
APPENDIX 2: Examples of commodities within Category 1 ................................................................14




International Plant Protection Convention                                                                                                       ISPM 32-3
ISPM 32                                            Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk




Adoption
This standard was adopted by the Fourth Session of the Commission on Phytosanitary Measures in
March–April 2009.


INTRODUCTION

Scope
This standard provides criteria for national plant protection organizations (NPPOs) of importing
countries on how to categorize commodities according to their pest risk when considering import
requirements. This categorization should help in identifying whether further pest risk analysis is
required and if phytosanitary certification is needed.
The first stage of categorization is based on whether the commodity has been processed and, if so, the
method and degree of processing to which the commodity has been subjected before export. The
second stage of categorization of commodities is based on their intended use after import.
Contaminating pests or storage pests that may become associated with the commodity after processing
are not considered in this standard.


References
The present standard refers to International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (ISPMs). ISPMs are
available on the International Phytosanitary Portal (IPP) at https://www.ippc.int/core-
activities/standards-setting/ispms.
IPPC. 1997. International Plant Protection Convention. Rome, IPPC, FAO.

Definitions
Definitions of phytosanitary terms used in the present standard can be found in ISPM 5 (Glossary of
phytosanitary terms).


Outline of Requirements
The concept of categorization of commodities according to their pest risk takes into account whether
the product has been processed, and if so, the method and degree of processing to which it has been
subjected and the commodity’s intended use and the consequent potential for the introduction and
spread of regulated pests.
This allows pest risks associated with specific commodities to be assigned to categories. The objective
of such categorization is to provide importing countries with criteria to better identify the need for a
pathway-initiated pest risk analysis (PRA) and to facilitate the decision-making process regarding the
possible establishment of import requirements.
Four categories are identified, which group commodities according to their level of pest risk (two for
processed commodities, two for unprocessed commodities). Lists of the methods of processing and the
associated resultant commodities are provided.




ISPM 32-4                                                      International Plant Protection Convention
Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk                                      ISPM 32




BACKGROUND
As a result of the method of processing to which some commodities moving in international trade have
been subjected, the probability of entry of pests has been removed and so should not be regulated (i.e.
phytosanitary measures and phytosanitary certificates are not required). Other commodities, after
processing, may still present a pest risk and so may be subject to appropriate phytosanitary measures.
Some intended uses of commodities (e.g. planting) result in a much higher probability of introducing
pests than others (e.g. processing) (further information is contained in ISPM 11 (Pest risk analysis for
quarantine pests), in relation to the probability of transfer to a suitable host).
The concept of categorization of commodities according to their pest risk firstly takes into account if
the commodity is processed or not and if so, the effect of the method and degree of processing to
which a commodity has been subjected. Secondly, it takes into account the intended use and
consequent potential as a pathway for introduction of regulated pests.
The objective of this standard is to categorize commodities according to their pest risk to provide
national plant protection organizations (NPPOs) of importing countries with criteria to identify more
accurately whether there is a need for a pathway-initiated PRA and facilitate the decision-making
process.
Article VI.1(b) of the IPPC states: “Contracting parties may require phytosanitary measures for
quarantine pests and regulated non-quarantine pests, provided that such measures are … limited to
what is necessary to protect plant health and/or safeguard the intended use ….” This standard is based
on the concepts of intended use of a commodity and the method and degree of its processing, which
are also addressed in other ISPMs as outlined below.
Method and degree of processing:
-    ISPM 12 (Phytosanitary certificates). NPPOs of the importing countries should not require
     phytosanitary certificates for plant products that have been processed to the point where they
     have no potential for introducing regulated pests.
-    ISPM 15 (Regulation of wood packaging material in international trade). Low risk articles are
     exempted from the requirements in the standard due to the method and degree of processing.
-    ISPM 23 (Guidelines for inspection). Inspection may be used to verify the degree of processing.
Intended use:
-     ISPM 11. The intended use is considered when analysing the probabilities of transfer of pests to
      a suitable host and of their spread after establishment.
-     ISPM 16 (Regulated non-quarantine pests: concept and application). Risk of economically
      unacceptable impact varies with different pests, commodities and intended use.
-     ISPM 21 (Pest risk analysis for regulated non-quarantine pests). Uses the concept of intended
      use extensively.
Method and degree of processing together with intended use:
-    ISPM 12. Different phytosanitary requirements may apply to the different intended end uses or
     degree of processing as indicated on the phytosanitary certificate.
-    ISPM 20 (Guidelines for a phytosanitary import regulatory system). A commodity may be
     classified by its degree of processing and/or its intended use.
-    ISPM 23. The commodity type and intended use are taken into account to decide the use of
     inspection as a phytosanitary measure.




International Plant Protection Convention                                                     ISPM 32-5
ISPM 32                                                  Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk



REQUIREMENTS
The use of the categories by NPPOs in determining any phytosanitary regulations should take into
account, in particular, the principles of technical justification, pest risk analysis, managed risk,
minimal impact, harmonization and sovereignty.
When the import requirements for a commodity need to be determined, the importing country may
categorize the commodity according to its pest risk. Such categorization may be used to distinguish
between groups of commodities for which further analysis is required from those that do not have the
potential to introduce and spread regulated pests. In order to categorize the commodity, the following
should be considered:
-     method and degree of processing
-     intended use of the commodity.
Having evaluated the method and degree of processing taking into account the intended use, the NPPO
of the importing country makes a decision on the import requirements for the commodity.
This standard does not apply to cases of deviation from intended use after import (e.g. grain for
milling used as seed for sowing).


1.     Elements of Categorization of Commodities according to their Pest Risk
To identify a commodity’s associated pest risk, the method and degree of processing to which a
commodity has been subjected should be considered. The method and degree of processing, by itself,
could significantly change the nature of the commodity, so that it does not remain capable of being
infested with pests. Such a commodity should not be required by an NPPO of an importing country to
be accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate1.
However, if, after processing, a commodity may remain capable of being infested with pests, the
intended use should then be considered.

1.1    Method and degree of processing before export
The primary objective of the processes addressed in this standard is to modify a commodity for other
than phytosanitary purposes, but processing may also have an effect on any associated pest, and hence
affect the potential of the commodity to be infested with quarantine pests.
In order to categorize a given commodity, NPPOs of the importing countries may require information
on the method of processing undertaken from NPPOs of exporting countries. In some cases it is also
necessary to know the degree of processing (e.g. temperature and heating duration) that affects the
physical or chemical properties of the commodity.
Based on the method and degree of processing, commodities can be broadly divided into three types as
follows:
-     processed to the point where the commodity does not remain capable of being infested with
      quarantine pests
-     processed to a point where the commodity remains capable of being infested with quarantine
      pests
-     not processed.

1
  The presence of contaminating pests, as defined in ISPM 5 (Glossary of phytosanitary terms), or infestation by
other pests that may become associated with the commodity after processing (e.g. storage pests) is not
considered in the pest risk categorization process outlined in this standard. However, it is important to note that
the methods of processing described in this standard will, in most cases, render the commodity free of pests at
the time of processing, but that some such commodities may have the capacity to become subsequently
contaminated or infested. Common contaminating pests may be detected during inspection.

ISPM 32-6                                                             International Plant Protection Convention
Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk                                       ISPM 32



If an assessment of the method and degree of processing concludes that a commodity does not remain
capable of being infested with quarantine pests, there is no need to consider intended use and the
commodity should not be regulated. However, if an assessment of the method and degree of
processing concludes that a commodity remains capable of being infested with quarantine pests, the
intended use should then be considered.
For non-processed commodities the intended use should always be considered.

1.2    Intended use of the commodity
Intended use is defined as the declared purpose for which plants, plant products or other articles are
imported, produced or used (ISPM 5). The intended use of a commodity may be for:
-     planting
-     consumption and other uses (e.g. crafts, decorative products, cut flowers)
-     processing.
The intended use may affect a commodity’s pest risk, as some intended uses may allow for the
establishment or spread of regulated pests. Some intended uses of the commodity (e.g. planting) are
associated with a higher probability of a regulated pest establishing than others (e.g. processing). This
may result in the application of different phytosanitary measures for a commodity based on its
intended use (e.g. soybean seed for sowing and soybean grain for human consumption). Any
phytosanitary measures applied should be proportional to the pest risk identified.


2.     Commodity Categories
NPPOs may categorize a commodity by taking into account if it has been processed or not, the method
and degree of processing and where appropriate the intended use.
Each commodity category is described below, along with guidance on the need for phytosanitary
measures.
The analytical process outlined in this ISPM is illustrated in the flow chart of Appendix 1.
Category 1. Commodities have been processed to the point where they do not remain capable of being
infested with quarantine pests. Hence, no phytosanitary measures should be required and such a
commodity should not be deemed to require phytosanitary certification with respect to pests that may
have been present in the commodity before the process. Annex 1 provides examples of processes and
the resultant commodities that can meet the criteria for Category 1. Furthermore, Appendix 2 provides
some illustrative examples of commodities meeting the criteria for Category 1.
Category 2. Commodities have been processed but remain capable of being infested with some
quarantine pests. The intended use may be, for example, consumption or further processing. The
NPPO of the importing country may determine that a PRA is necessary. Annex 2 provides examples
of processes and the resultant commodities that can meet the criteria for Category 2.
Although commodities in Category 2 have been processed, the processing method may not completely
eliminate all quarantine pests. If it is determined that the method and degree of processing do not
eliminate the pest risk of quarantine pests, consideration should then be given to the intended use of
the commodity in order to evaluate the probability of establishment and spread of the quarantine pests.
In this case, a PRA may be needed to determine this.
To facilitate the categorization, exporting countries should, on request, provide detailed information
on method or degree of processing (such as temperature, exposure time, size of particles) in order to
assist importing countries in determining to which category the commodity should be assigned.



International Plant Protection Convention                                                      ISPM 32-7
ISPM 32                                            Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk



In cases where the evaluation of the effect of the method and degree of processing has determined that
the processed commodity presents no pest risk and therefore should not be subject to phytosanitary
measures, the commodity should be reclassified into Category 1.
Category 3. Commodities have not been processed and the intended use is for a purpose other than
propagation, for example, consumption or processing. PRA is necessary to identify the pest risks
related to this pathway.
Examples of commodities in this category include some fresh fruits and vegetables for consumption
and cut flowers.
Because commodities in Categories 2 and 3 have the potential to introduce and spread quarantine
pests, determining phytosanitary measures may be required based on the result of a PRA. The
phytosanitary measures determined through a PRA may differ depending on the intended use of the
commodity (e.g. consumption or processing).
Category 4. Commodities have not been processed and the intended use is planting. PRA is necessary
to identify the pest risks related to this pathway.
Examples of commodities in this category include propagative material (e.g. cuttings, seeds, seed
potatoes, plants in vitro, micropropagative plant material and other plants to be planted).
Because commodities in this Category 4 are not processed and their intended use is for propagation or
planting, their potential to introduce or spread regulated pests is higher than that for other intended
uses.




ISPM 32-8                                                      International Plant Protection Convention
Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk - Annex 1                                        ISPM 32


                                   This annex is a prescriptive part of the standard.


ANNEX 1: Methods of commercial processing with resultant commodities that do not
remain capable of being infested with quarantine pests
COMMERCIAL                   DESCRIPTION                     EXAMPLE OF                   ADDITIONAL
PROCESS                                                      RESULTANT                    INFORMATION
                                                             COMMODITY
Carbonization                Anoxic combustion of an         Charcoal
                             organic material to
                             charcoal
Cooking (boiling, heating,   Preparing food items for        Cooked items                 Frequently involves
microwaving, including       consumption by heating,                                      chemically transforming a
rice parboiling)             primarily transforming the                                   food, thus changing its
                             physical structure of items                                  flavour, texture,
                                                                                          appearance, or nutritional
                                                                                          properties
Dyeing                       Colouring of textile fibres     Dyed vegetable fibres and
                             and other materials by          textiles
                             which the colour becomes
                             an integral part of the fibre
                             or material under the
                             influence of pH and
                             temperature changes plus
                             interaction with chemical
                             products
Extraction                   Physical or chemical            Oils, alcohol, essences,     Normally done under high
                             process to obtain specific      sugar                        temperature conditions
                             components from plant-
                             based raw materials,
                             usually through mass-
                             transfer operations
Fermentation                 Anaerobic or anoxic             Wines, liquors, beer and     May be combined with
                             process changing                other alcoholic beverages,   pasteurization
                             food/plant material             fermented vegetables
                             chemically, often involving
                             micro-organisms
                             (bacteria, moulds or
                             yeasts) and e.g.
                             converting sugars to
                             alcohol or organic acids
Malting                      A series of actions             Malted barley
                             allowing the germination
                             of cereal seeds to develop
                             enzymatic activity to
                             digest starchy materials
                             into sugars and cessation
                             of enzymatic activity by
                             heating
Multi-method processing       A combination of multiple      Plywood, particle board,
                             types of processing such        wafer board
                             as heating, high pressure
Pasteurization               Thermal processing in           Pasteurized juices,          Often combined with
                             order to kill undesirable or    alcoholic beverages          fermentation and followed
                             harmful micro-organisms         (beer, wine)                 by refrigeration (at 4 °C)
                                                                                          and proper packaging and
                                                                                          handling. Process time
                                                                                          and temperature depends
                                                                                          on type of product.



International Plant Protection Convention                                                                 ISPM 32-9
ISPM 32                                        Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk - Annex 1



COMMERCIAL                   DESCRIPTION                    EXAMPLE OF                  ADDITIONAL
PROCESS                                                     RESULTANT                   INFORMATION
                                                            COMMODITY
Preservation in liquid       Process of preserving          Preserved fruits,           Proper conditions of pH,
                             plant material in a suitable   vegetables, nuts, tubers,   salinity, etc. must be
                             liquid medium (e.g. in         bulbs                       maintained
                             syrup, brine, oil, vinegar
                             or alcohol) of a particular
                             pH, salinity, anaerobic or
                             osmotic state
Pureeing (including          Making homogenized and         Pureed items (fruits,       Normally combined with
blending)                    spreadable fruit and/or        vegetables)                 pulping of fruits or
                             vegetable tissues, e.g. by                                 vegetables and methods
                             high-speed mixing,                                         to preserve the puree
                             screening through a sieve                                  (e.g. pasteurization and
                             or using a blender                                         packing)
Roasting                     Process of drying and          Roasted peanuts, coffee
                             browning foods by              and nuts
                             exposure to dry heat
Sterilization                Process of applying heat       Sterilized substrates,      Sterilization may not
                             (vapours, dry heat or          juices                      change the condition of
                             boiling water), irradiation                                the commodity in an
                             or chemical treatments in                                  evident way, but
                             order to destroy micro-                                    eliminates micro-
                             organisms                                                  organisms
Sterilization (industrial)   Thermal processing of          Canned vegetables,          Process time and
                             foods that leads to shelf-     soups; UHT (ultra-high      Temperature for canned
                             stable products in             temperature) juices         products depends on type
                             containers by destruction                                  of product, treatment and
                             of all pathogenic, toxin-                                  geometry of container.
                             forming and spoilage                                       Aseptic processing and
                             organisms                                                  packaging involves
                                                                                        industrial sterilization of a
                                                                                        flowing product and then
                                                                                        packaging in sterile
                                                                                        environment and
                                                                                        package.
Sugar infusing               Action of coating and          Crystallized fruit, fruit   Usually combined with
                             infusing fruits with sugar     infused with sugar, nuts    pulping, boiling, drying
                                                            coated with sugar
Tenderizing                  Process to rehydrate           Tenderized fruits           Usually applied to a dried
                             dried or dehydrated items                                  commodity. Can be
                             by the application of                                      combined with sugar
                             steam under pressure or                                    infusing.
                             submerging in hot water




ISPM 32-10                                                             International Plant Protection Convention
Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk - Annex 2                                         ISPM 32


                                   This annex is a prescriptive part of the standard.


ANNEX 2: Methods of commercial processing with resultant commodities that remain
capable of being infested with quarantine pests
COMMERCIAL                   DESCRIPTION                     EXAMPLE OF                   ADDITIONAL
PROCESS                                                      RESULTANT                    INFORMATION
                                                             COMMODITY
Chipping (of wood)           Wood reduced to small           Chipped wood                 The probability of
                             pieces                                                       infestation is related to the
                                                                                          species of wood, the
                                                                                          presence of bark, and the
                                                                                          size of the chips
Chopping                     To cut into pieces              Chopped fruit, nuts,
                                                             grains, vegetables
Crushing                     Breaking plant material         Herbs, nuts                  Usually applied to dried
                             into pieces by application                                   products
                             of mechanical force
Drying/dehydration (of       Removal of moisture for         Dehydrated fruit,
fruits and vegetables)       preservation, or to             vegetables
                             decrease weight or
                             volume
Painting (including          To coat with paint              Painted wood and canes,
lacquering, varnishing)                                      fibres
Peeling and shelling         Removal of the outer or         Peeled fruits, vegetables,
                             epidermal tissues or pods       grains, nuts
Polishing (of grain and      To make smooth and              Polished rice and cocoa
beans)                       shiny by rubbing or             beans
                             chemical action removing
                             the outer layers from
                             grains
Post-harvest handling (of    Operations such as              Graded, sorted, washed,      Usually carried out in
fruits and vegetables)       grading, sorting, washing       or brushed and/or waxed      packing houses
                             or brushing, and/or             fruit and vegetables
                             waxing fruits and
                             vegetables




International Plant Protection Convention                                                                ISPM 32-11
ISPM 32                                               Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk - Annex 2


Annex 2 contd.
COMMERCIAL                         DESCRIPTION                      EXAMPLE OF                   ADDITIONAL
PROCESS                                                             RESULTANT                    INFORMATION
                                                                    COMMODITY
Quick freezing                     Cooling quickly, ensuring        Frozen fruits and            Recommended
                                   that the temperature             vegetables                   international code of
                                   range of maximum ice                                          practice for the
                                   crystallization is passed                                     processing and handling
                                   as quickly as possible to                                     of quick frozen foods,
                                   preserve the quality of                                       1976 CAC/RCP 8-1976
                                   fruits and vegetables                                         (Rev 3, 2008), Codex
                                                                                                 Alimentarius, FAO, Rome,
                                                                                                 states that “food which
                                                                                                 has been subjected to a
                                                                                                 quick freezing process,
                                                                                                 and maintained at −18 ºC
                                                                                                 or colder at all points in
                                                                                                 the cold chain, subject to
                                                                                                 permitted temperature
                                                                                                 tolerance.”
                                                                                                 Quick freezing of fruits
                                                                                                 and vegetables kills
                                                                                                 insects in particular.
                                                                                                 Frozen fruits and
                                                                                                 vegetables are prepared
                                                                                                 for direct consumption
                                                                                                 and will decay quickly
                                                                                                 after thawing. Therefore
                                                                                                 the pest risks associated
                                                                                                 with such products is
                                                                                                 considered very low1.
1
    It is recommended that countries do not regulate frozen fruits and vegetables.




ISPM 32-12                                                                       International Plant Protection Convention
Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk - Appendix 1                                          ISPM 32


                This appendix is for reference purposes only and is not a prescriptive part of the standard.


APPENDIX 1: Flow chart illustrating categorization of commodities according to their
pest risk




International Plant Protection Convention                                                                      ISPM 32-13
ISPM 32                                       Categorization of commodities according to their pest risk - Annex 2


             This appendix is for reference purposes only and is not a prescriptive part of the standard.


APPENDIX 2: Examples of commodities within Category 1




ISPM 32-14                                                               International Plant Protection Convention
This page is intentionally left blank
IPPC
The International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) is an
international plant health agreement that aims to protect
cultivated and wild plants by preventing the introduction and
spread of pests. International travel and trade are greater than
ever before. As people and commodities move around the
world, organisms that present risks to plants travel with them.

Organization
++ There are over 180 contracting parties to the IPPC.

++ Each contracting party has a national plant protection

   organization (NPPO) and an Official IPPC contact point.
++ Nine regional plant protection organizations (RPPOs) work

   to facilitate the implementation of the IPPC in countries.
++ IPPC liaises with relevant international organizations to

   help build regional and national capacities.
++ The Secretariat is provided by the Food and Agriculture

   Organization of the United Nations (FAO).




International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC)
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00153 Rome, Italy
Tel: +39 06 5705 4812 - Fax: +39 06 5705 4819
Email: ippc@fao.org - Web: www.ippc.int
