                                         VIRGIN ISLANDS




                      FUMIGATION OF PLANTS ACT


                                      Revised Edition
                             showing the law as at 1 January 2023

         This is a revised edition of the law, prepared by the Law Revision Commissioner
         under the authority of the Law Revision Act 2014.


This edition contains a consolidation of the following laws—
                                                                                           Page
FUMIGATION OF PLANTS ACT                                                                     3
  Act 5 of 1967 .. in force 5 November 1907
   Amended by Act: 33 of 1961
                                         VIRGIN ISLANDS




                      FUMIGATION OF PLANTS ACT


                                      Revised Edition
                             showing the law as at 1 January 2023

         This is a revised edition of the law, prepared by the Law Revision Commissioner
         under the authority of the Law Revision Act 2014.


This edition contains a consolidation of the following laws—
                                                                                           Page
FUMIGATION OF PLANTS ACT                                                                     3
  Act 5 of 1967 .. in force 5 November 1907
   Amended by Act: 33 of 1961
                            Published in 2023
   On the authority and on behalf of the Government of The Virgin Islands
                                   by
                The Regional Law Revision Centre Inc.

                        For information contact—

                    Attorney General’s Chambers
                   Government of the Virgin Islands
                           P.O. Box 242
                             Road Town
                          Tortola, VG1110
                         British Virgin Islands

                          Tel: (284) 468-2960
                          Email: agc@gov.vg


Printed on the authority and on behalf of the Government of The Virgin Islands
                                   by
                  The Regional Law Revision Centre Inc.
                      P.O. Box 1626, 5 Mar Building,
                      The Valley, AI-2640, Anguilla

                         Tel: (264) 497-7572
                     Website: https://lawrevision.ai

               Authorised Printers for this Revised Edition
       LAW OF
    VIRGIN ISLANDS                  Fumigation of Plants Act          3
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2023




                                FUMIGATION OF PLANTS ACT

                                ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
    SECTION
          1.      Short title
          2.      Interpretation
          3.      Ports of entry
          4.      All imported plants to be fumigated
          5.      Plants to be delivered to the Financial Secretary
          6.      Place of landing
          7.      Fumigating apparatus
          8.      Process of fumigation
          9.      Removal of plants after fumigation
         10.      Disposal of plants after fumigation
         11.      Expenses of removal
         12.      Penalty
         13.      Regulations
         14.      Procedure and penalty
       LAW OF
    VIRGIN ISLANDS              Fumigation of Plants Act                            5
Revision Date: 1 Jan 2023




                            FUMIGATION OF PLANTS ACT
                              (Acts 5 of 1967 and 33 of 1961)

    Commencement
    [5 November 1907]

    Short title
         1. This Act may be cited as the Fumigation of Plants Act.

    Interpretation
         2. In this Act––
    “Agricultural Authority” means the Chief Agricultural Officer, and includes any
          person acting in his aid or under his direction;
    “Financial Secretary” includes any Officer of Customs;
    “imported” means brought into the Territory by any channel whatsoever,
          including the “parcels post”;
    “importer” includes the owner and his agents and servants;
    “packages” includes boxes, coverings, wrappers or anything whatever in which
          plants are imported;
    “plants” includes growing plants, cuttings, buts and grafts, bulbs, roots and
           seeds, and also fruit and vegetables intended for propagation and not for
           consumption as food;
    “port of entry” means the Port of Road Town and any other port or place in the
           Territory appointed by the Governor for the importation of plants.

    Ports of entry
       3. The Governor may by proclamation appoint one or more places (besides
    the port of Road Town) as ports of entry for the importation of plants.

    All imported plants to be fumigated
      4. All plants imported into the Territory, together with the packages in
    which they are contained shall, subject to the discretion of the Agricultural
    Authority, be fumigated.

    Plants to be delivered to the Financial Secretary
       5. All plants so imported shall be delivered up by the importer to the
    Financial Secretary who shall cause them to be conveyed to the place of
    fumigation there to be dealt with by the Agricultural Authority.

    Place of landing
         6. No imported plants shall be landed elsewhere than at a port of entry.
                                                                         LAW OF
6                          Fumigation of Plants Act                   VIRGIN ISLANDS
                                                                    Revision Date: 1 Jan 2023


Fumigating apparatus
   7. Suitable apparatus for the fumigation of plants shall be provided by the
Government at such place or places as may from time to time be appointed by
the Governor for use at the port of Road Town and also at any other port of entry
appointed by the Governor for the importation of plants; and such apparatus shall
be under the care, control and management of the Agricultural Authority.

Process of fumigation
   8. The process of fumigation shall be carried out in such manner and under
such conditions as the Agricultural Authority may consider adequate for the
destruction of any vegetable or insect pests which may possibly be on such
plants, subject to any regulations made by the Governor in that behalf.

Removal of plants after fumigation
   9. All plants shall be removed by the owner from the fumigation place after
disinfection immediately upon his being required to do so by the Agricultural
Authority.

Disposal of plants after fumigation
   10. The Agricultural Authority may require the importer to keep him
informed as to the disposal of any plants after fumigation, and may visit and
examine them at any time, if necessary.

Expenses of removal
   11. The expenses of removal to the place of fumigation (except it be in large
quantities) and of the fumigation of plants shall be at the expense of the
Government, but the Government shall incur no liability in respect of any risk
attending fumigation.

Penalty
   12. Any plants imported contrary to the provisions of this Act shall be
forfeited.

Regulations
   13. The Governor shall have power to make regulations for more effectually
carrying out the provisions and intentions of this Act.

Procedure and penalty
   14. Any person accused of having committed any offence against the
provisions of this Act may, notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, be
prosecuted on complaint before a Magistrate in the manner prescribed by the
Magistrate’s Code of Procedure Act, and shall upon conviction be liable to pay a
fine not exceeding two hundred and forty dollars or to be imprisoned with or
without hard labour for any term not exceeding six months.
                                 ____________
