          Official Gazette of
                 Iraq
‫محتويات‬




                Agricultural Quarantine
                           No. (76) Of 2012


           ‫قانون الحجر الزراعي مع تعديالته‬



  Translated in
  Ministry Of Justice
  Iraqi Gazette Office
  Translation department
  2020

                                  1
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
In the name of people
The Presidency


                                                       Resolution no. (77)
Pursuant to what had been approved by parliament in accordance with the provisions
of Clause (First) of the Article (61) and Clause (third) of the Article (73) of the
constitution:

The President of the Republic decided on (18/ 10/ 2012)

To issue the following law:



                                                         No. (76) Of 2012
                                           Agricultural Quarantine Law


Article 1
For the purpose of this law, the following phrases mean the meanings shown opposite
to it:

First: The Department: The Plant Protection Department in the Ministry of
                       Agriculture. (1)

Second: Agricultural quarantine employee: The technical employee authorized by the
                                             ministry of agriculture to carry out

‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                        Date: 08/ 04/20132                        Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                                                                    tasks assigned to him/ her under the
                                                                                    provisions of this law.

Third: Plants: Living plants or parts thereof, including seeds or plant genetic material.

Fourth: Plant products: Products of plant origin those prepared in a way that has not
                            diverted them from their plant nature.

Fifth: Pest: Any species, strain, or biological pattern belonging to the plant or animal
             kingdom or any pathogen that harms plants or their products. Dead
             organisms that do not cause any infection are not considered as pest.

Sixth: Stone pest: A pest that has potential negative impacts on the economy and
                   poses a threat to plant production and does not exist in the
                   Republic of Iraq.

Seventh: Non-stone pest: A pest is found in the Republic of Iraq, and its entry
                        negatively affects the economy as it affects plants and their
                        products.

Eight: Plant quarantine station: It is the place designated for monitoring imported
                                     plants for scientific research.

Ninth: Genetically modified organisms: Any organism that has undergone changes in
                                           its genetic material.

Tenth: Beneficial organisms: Any living organism, including fungi, yeasts, bacteria,
                               viruses, and invertebrates those declared by the
                               ministry of agriculture as plants beneficial for plants
                               or for plant production.

Eleventh: The quarantine: An official impounding of items or materials subject to
                          phytosanitary instructions in order to place them under

‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                        Date: 08/ 04/20133                        Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                                supervision or conduct research on them or to continue
                                                inspecting them for testing or treatment.

Twelfth: Consignment: Any material that enters the Republic of Iraq from abroad and
                      accompanied by an agricultural health certificate subject to
                      the law.

Thirteen: Agricultural health certificate: A document template designed in
                                           accordance with the international plant
                                           protection convention, annexe no. (1)
                                           attached to this law.

Fourteen: Importer: Any natural or legal person who has the right to trade and import
                     any of the plants and their products, beneficial organisms, soil
                     or plant packaging materials.

Fifteen: Exporter: Any natural or legal person who has the right to export any of the
                   plants and their products, beneficial organisms, soil or plant
                   packaging materials.

Sixteen: Soil: The material partially or completely extracted from the top layer of the
                earth's crust, which can feed the plant.

Seventeen: Packaging material: Any plant material used to package and contain
                              plants.

Eighteenth: Agricultural quarantine points: The airports, seaports, land border
                                          crossings, railway stations and post
                                          offices.

Ninetieth: License: The approval issued by the ministry of agriculture in accordance
                    with the forms it prepares.

‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                        Date: 08/ 04/20134                        Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
Twenty: Extermination: The elimination of pests using one of the control methods
                       used or adopted locally and internationally.

Twenty one: Destruction: The disposal of consignments coming from outside the
                          Republic of Iraq by means determined by the
                          agricultural quarantine committee for each case
                          separately.

Twenty two: Disinfection: Treating the consignment before export in order to get rid
                           of pests.

Twenty three: Internal quarantine: Putting a specific area or areas under control by
                                    the competent department to avoid the spread of
                                    the pest.

Twenty four: quarantined area: The site where the pest first spread or an eruption
                               occurred in a pest already present in the Republic of
                               Iraq.

Twenty five: The rejected material: The material that does not meet the conditions
                                    stipulated in this law.

Twenty six: Transit consignments: The passage of consignments in Iraqi territory.

Twenty seven: Internal safety certificate: A document template that includes
                                        specifications for the consignments
                                        transport carried out outside the
                                        quarantined area inside the Republic of
                                        Iraq.

Twenty eight: The national inquiry point: The ministry of commerce or the body
                                          authorized by it, which represents the
                                          government of the Republic of Iraq. It is
‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                        Date: 08/ 04/20135                        Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                                                             responsible for answering inquiries and
                                                                             sending and receiving international
                                                                             information from the world trade
                                                                             organization, provided that the ministry
                                                                             of commerce submits periodic reports to
                                                                             the general secretariat of the council of
                                                                             ministers on the activities and
                                                                             mechanisms of work that it undertakes in
                                                                             this regard.

Twenty nine: Internal inquiry point: The body authorized by the ministry of
                                     agriculture to submit reports and answer
                                     international inquiries submitted to the
                                     national inquiry point and coordinate with it
                                     in this field.

Thirty: The committee: (The agricultural quarantine committee).

Article 2
This law aims to perform the following:

First: Regulating the import, export and circulation of plants and their products and
       beneficial organisms.

Second: Preventing the entry, spread and localization of agricultural pests to the
        extent necessary to protect plant production from their dangers.

Third: Protecting plant production from the threat of agricultural pests and preventing
       their spread.



‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                        Date: 08/ 04/20136                        Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
Article 3
The ministry shall achieve the objectives of this law by following means:

First: Examining the plant consignment and their products at their point of entry into
       the Republic of Iraq.

Second: Quarantine polluted agricultural areas in the Republic of Iraq.

Third: Issuing certificates and licenses of safety from agricultural pests for all plants
        and their products exported outside Iraq in accordance with international
        standards.

Article 4
The department shall assume the following tasks:

First: Preventing or limiting the import, export, sale, cultivation, propagation or
        transfer of any plant and its products, pest, beneficial organism, genetically
        modified organisms, soil, or any other material capable of harbouring or
        spreading a pest.

Second: Allowing the import of any plant and its products, a beneficial organism or
         any other material whether prohibited or restricted, for the purposes of
         scientific research and conducting experiments in a manner that suits the
         basic goal of importing them and the conditions required to protect public
         health, agricultural production and the environment in Iraq.

Third: Locating plant quarantine stations.

Fourth: Placing plants and their products, pests, beneficial organisms or genetically
        modified organisms, soil, or anything else imported for the purposes of
        scientific research and scientific experiments which can carry pests when
        necessary in a plant quarantine station that determined by the department
‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                        Date: 08/ 04/20137                        Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
               and under the supervision of the technicians working in it, for a period of
               time determined according to scientific standards for the case.

Fifth: Allowing entry of some plants and plant products stipulated in the instructions
       for identifying plants and their products that are banned from entering after the
       minister's approval for a specified period of time, provided that all their pest
       and stages are completely exterminated and in the methods decided by the
       committee and at the importer's expense.

Sixth: Proposing examination fees, fumigation and other expenses required for the
       implementation of this law in accordance with the instructions in force.

Seventh: Defining checkpoints on the main roads that link the quarantined area with
         other areas, the administrative authorities shall facilitate the task of internal
         plant quarantine procedures.

Eight: Coordinating with the relevant authorities to determine the procedures
       necessary to contain the damage.

Ninth: Eliminating the internal quarantine from the quarantined area after obtaining
       the approval of the minister at the request of the general authority for the
       protection of crops in the ministry of agriculture.

Article 5
First: A committee shall be formed in the ministry called (the agricultural quarantine
       committee) headed by one of the undersecretaries of the ministry named by the
       minister and with the membership of each of the following:

a. Representatives from the ministry, none of whom                                                   two members

    Shall be less than a director

b. One representative from the ministry of higher                                                     one member

‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                        Date: 08/ 04/20138                        Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
  Education and scientific research, his/ her rank

    not less than assistant professor

c. A representative from the ministry of science                                                      one member

    and technology, entitled researchers chief

d. A representative from the ministry of the                                                          one member

  Interior, with a rank of no less than

    a Lieutenant-colonel

e. A representatives from the ministry of commerce                                                    one member

  their ranks are not less than a director

f. A representative from the ministry of finance\                                                     one member

    General Authority of Customs with a rank not less

    than a director

g. A representative from the ministry of environment                                                one member with a rank not
   less than a direct

h. A representative from the ministry of the national                                                 one member

    Security Service with a rank not less than a director

i. A representative from the ministry of health                                                       one member

    with a rank not less than a director




‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                        Date: 08/ 04/20139                        Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
J. A representative of the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources in the
   Kurdistan Region whose address is no less than a director.

                                                                                                                                    Member. (2

Second: One of the agricultural quarantine employees who have experience in this
         field shall be the rapporteur of the committee.

Third: The committee shall undertake the following:

a. Laying the ministry's policy in the field of agricultural quarantine and its
   applications after the approval of the minister.

b. Determining the plants and their products that are not allowed to be imported or
   entered into the Republic of Iraq, or allowing to be imported in accordance with
   instructions issued by the minister.

Fourth: The workflow in the committee and its meeting, how to take decisions and
       recommendations, its quorum and any other matters required by the nature of
       its work shall be determined by the minister.

Article 6
First: Plants, their products and other materials subject to import instructions shall be
       subject to examination by the agricultural quarantine employee at the point of
       entry or at the last place of container's arrival or that specified by the
       department.

Second: The importer shall bear the responsibility and all costs resulting from the
         measures taken, including the costs of loading, unloading, transporting, re-
         exporting, processing, rechecking and destroying.

Third: Customs and other responsible authorities shall not allow consignments to
       enter except under a license from an agricultural quarantine officer.

‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      Date: 08/ 04/201310                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
Article 7
First: Any consignment from plants, plant products, beneficial organisms or other
       materials subject to import instructions under this law may not entered, except
       under an import license and an agricultural health certificate issued by the plant
       protection authority in the exporting country stating its safety from harmful
       pests.

Second: The department shall specify the conditions that must be met before
        importing consignments of plants, plant products or beneficial organisms.

Third: The importer must declare upon the arrival of the consignment to the point of
       entry for plants, plant products, beneficial organisms and other materials
       subject to import instructions under this law.

Article 8
First: Every person who enters Iraq with plants, plant products, beneficial organisms
       or any materials covered by the provisions of this law shall declare them with
       the customs authority at the point of entry and shall inform the agricultural
       quarantine officer of that for the purpose of taking the necessary measures.

Second: Customs workers who impound any of the materials stipulated in Clause
        (First) of this article shall not allow its entry except with the approval of the
        agricultural quarantine employee in accordance with the law.

Article 9
First: The materials of perfumery, tanning, and non-imported consignments for
        agriculture received by mail, accompanied by travelers or shipped shall be
        exempted from the agricultural health certificate, provided that their weight
        does not exceed (10) Ten kilograms, and provided that it does not conflict
        with the provisions and controls related to public health.
‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      Date: 08/ 04/201311                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
Second: Seed samples submitted to the National Committee for the Registration,
        Approval and Protection of Agricultural Varieties for the purpose of
        registration shall be exempted from the import license, after determining
        their quantity by the said committee and in a manner that does not conflict
        with the laws in force.

Third: Materials that do not require an examination certificate from the country of
      origin shall be subject to examination in the agricultural quarry. (3)

Article 10
First: Plants, plant products, beneficial organisms or other materials subject to export
       instructions under this law from Iraq may not be exported, except after granting
       them an agricultural health certificate issued by the department.

Second: The exporter shall package the shipment of materials exported under law
        tightly with packaging materials and shall be sealed with the seal of the
        agricultural quarantine department.

Third: The exporter shall bear the fees for the export examination under provisions of
       this law.

Fourth: The shipment shall be exported within (10) ten days from the date of issuing
        the agricultural health certificate, and the department may extend the export
        period in accordance with the type of shipment, storage conditions and
        transportation requirement no more than (20) twenty days.

Fifth: The exporter shall carry out the purification operations decided by the
       legislation of the importing countries for agricultural consignments at the
       Agricultural Quarantine Department or the authority authorized by the
       department and under the supervision of the aforementioned department,
       except for the Iraqi dates, it shall be owned by the Iraqi Company for

‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      Date: 08/ 04/201312                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
             Manufacturing and Marketing Dates, under the supervision of the Agricultural
             Quarantine.

Sixth: The exporter shall bear the costs of the procedures for transporting
       consignments for examination and clearance.(4)

Article 11
First: Transited consignments shall be accompanied by an agricultural health
       certificate from the country of origin.

Second: The importer shall specify the consignment's entry and exit port in
       accordance with which the agricultural quarantine employee shall determine
       the necessary period for the consignment's exit from Iraq.

Third: The entry and exit of transited consignments shall be through agricultural
       quarantine points, and the agricultural quarantine officer shall at the first
       transit point organize a form for transited consignments clarifying all their
       data.

Article 12
The conditions specified by this law shall be applied to transited consignments if they
are found to contain a pest that endangers agricultural production.

Article 13
First: The consignments refused to cross the lands of the Republic of Iraq by its
       importer in implementation of the provisions of this law shall be re-exported
       within (7) seven days from the date of notification of the rejection decision;
       otherwise, the agricultural quarantine officer shall destroy the consignment at
       the expense of its importer without compensation

‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      Date: 08/ 04/201313                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
Second: The minister may, upon the recommendation of the agricultural quarantine
        committee, decide to destroy the transited consignment that its entry refused
        or transited before the end of the period stipulated in Clause (First) of this
        article if its presence poses a threat to crops.

Article 14
First: The consignments that are prohibited from entering Iraq in accordance with the
        provisions of this law may not cross, except that they are inside refrigerators
        or tightly closed iron containers and packaged to prevent the leakage, entry
        and spread of pests during their transit and shall be stamped with a seal of
        agricultural quarantine at the point of entry, and may not be opened during its
        transit through Iraqi territory, and shall be verified by the quarantine
        employee at the exit point.

Second: The importer and the carrier of the consignment shall be required to inform
        the department in the event of any accident or emergency occurs while the
        consignment passes within the territory of the Republic of Iraq.

Article 15
First: Whoever desires to export consignment of plants, plant products, beneficial
       organisms or materials subject to the provisions of this law shall meet the
       following:

a. Obtaining an export license and the approval of the ministry of agricultural on the
   type and quantity of the consignment and the authority to which the consignment is
   to be shipped.

b. Submitting an application for each material included in the consignment exported
   to one party.


‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      Date: 08/ 04/201314                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
c. Notifying the agricultural quarantine department in the event that the consignee has
   been replaced (7) seven days before shipment.

Second: The agricultural health certificate of the consignment that is permitted to be
         exported shall be granted only if the exporter submits an official document
         proving that the shipping procedures for the consignment have been
         completed in accordance with the form stipulated in appendix no.(1)
         accompanied with this law.

Article 16
First: The ministry shall determine the following:

a. Areas infected with a pest registered for the first time in Iraq or any existing pest
   spreads and has rapid reproduction leading to major economic damage to the
   vegetation and this area shall be considered quarantined.

b. The botanical family and its products prohibited from moving from the quarantined
   areas.

c. quarantine's procedures and duration.

Second: The botanical family and its products specified in paragraph (b) of item
        (First) of this article may not transfer from the restricted areas to other areas
        during the quarantine period.

Third: The agricultural quarantine employee shall examine the plant family and its
       products not covered by the provisions of Clause (Second) of this article to
       ensure their safety and freedom from injury, and clearance operations shall be
       carried out if that happens and in accordance with the opinion of the
       competent authority before allowing them to leave the area, and the person
       concerned shall bear the cost of disinfection, provided that they are provided
       with a permit supports allowing it to leave the restricted area.

‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      Date: 08/ 04/201315                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
Article 17
First: Without prejudice to any more severe punishment mentioned in the laws in
       force, whoever plants, owns, sells, offers for sale, transfers or distributes any
       material contrary to the provisions of this law shall be punished by
       imprisonment for a period of no less than (6) six months and not exceeding (3)
       three years or a fine of no less than (1000000) one million dinars and not
       exceeding (10,000,000) ten million dinars or both and confiscating the
       consignment the subject of the violation.

Second: Whoever commits one of the following acts shall be punished by
       imprisonment for a period not exceeding (6) six months or by a fine of no
       less than (1000000) one million dinars or both:

      a. Obstructing or abusing the work of an agricultural quarantine employee during
         the exercise of his/ her duties under this law.

    b. Not declaring in the points of entry into the Iraqi lands for plants, plant products
       and other materials subject to import according to the provisions of this law.

Third: Whoever violates the provisions of article (15) of this law shall be punished
       with imprisonment for a period of no less than (6) six months or a fine of no
       less than (2000000) two million dinars or both.

Article 18
An internal inquiry point shall be formed in the ministry that shall undertake the
coordination with the national inquiry point, and its association, formations and tasks
shall be determined by instructions issued by the minister.




‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      Date: 08/ 04/201316                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
Article 19
The employees of the Agricultural Quarantine Department and the supporting
employees of the same department shall be granted (10%) ten percent of the wages
collected under the instructions for wages of inspection and fumigation no. (1) For
the year 2006 and distributed by a decision of the Minister. (5)

Article 20
The minister of agriculture shall determine the fees for examination, fumigation and
other expenses required for the implementation of this law and the conditions for
exemption from them, by instructions the minister issued in coordination with the
minister of finance.

Article 21
The agricultural quarantine law no. (17) of 1966 shall be cancelled, and the
instructions issued pursuant to it shall remain in force in a manner that does not
conflict with the provisions of this law, until the issuance of what replaces or cancels
it.

Article 22
The minister of agriculture shall issue instructions to facilitate the implementation of
the provisions of this law.

Article 23
This law shall be published in the gazette and shall be implemented after (30) thirty
days from the date of its publishing.

Jalal Talabani
The President of the Republic
‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                       Date: 08/ 04/201317                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
Laws
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
References
      (1) It was deleted based on parliament's resolution No. (3), in accordance with the
          provisions of Item (First) of Article (61) and Item (Third) of Article (73) of
          the Constitution. On January 26, 2020, pursuant to the President of the
          Republic's decision, First Amendment to the Law of Agricultural Quarantine
          No. (76) of 2012, official Gazette's Issue no. 4577, on 10/ 2/ 2020, Article 1.
     (2) It was added based on parliament's resolution No. (3), in accordance with the
          provisions of Item (First) of Article (61) and Item (Third) of Article (73) of
          the Constitution. On January 26, 2020, pursuant to the President of the
          Republic's decision, First Amendment to the Law of Agricultural Quarantine
          No. (76) of 2012, official Gazette's Issue no. 4577, on 10/ 2/ 2020, Article 2.
     (3) It was added based on parliament's resolution no. (3), in accordance with the
          provisions of Item (First) of Article (61) and Item (Third) of Article (73) of
          the Constitution. On January 26, 2020, pursuant to the President of the
          Republic's decision, First Amendment to the Law of Agricultural Quarantine
          No. (76) Of 2012, official Gazette's Issue no. 4577, on 10/ 2/ 2020, Article 3.
      (4) It was added based on parliament's resolution no. (3), in accordance with the
          provisions of Item (First) of Article (61) and Item (Third) of Article (73) of
          the Constitution. On January 26, 2020, pursuant to the President of the
          Republic's decision, First Amendment to the Law of Agricultural Quarantine
          No. (76) Of 2012, official Gazette's Issue no. 4577, on 10/ 2/ 2020, Article 4.
      (5) It was added based on parliament's resolution no. (3), in accordance with the
          provisions of Item (First) of Article (61) and Item (Third) of Article (73) of
          the Constitution. On January 26, 2020, pursuant to the President of the
          Republic's decision, First Amendment to the Law of Agricultural Quarantine
          No. (76) of 2012, official Gazette's Issue no. 4577, on 10/ 2/ 2020, Article 5.




‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      Date: 08/ 04/201318                         Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273)
‫‪Laws‬‬
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬




                                           ‫)‪Appendix No. (1‬‬
                 ‫‪Agricultural Health Certificate‬‬




‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      ‫‪Date: 08/ 04/201319‬‬                         ‫)‪Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273‬‬
‫‪Laws‬‬
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬




‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      ‫‪Date: 08/ 04/201320‬‬                         ‫)‪Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273‬‬
‫‪Laws‬‬
  ‫ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬




‫ـــــــــــــــــــــتـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ‬
                                      ‫‪Date: 08/ 04/201321‬‬                         ‫)‪Official Gazette of Iraq. Issue No. ( 4273‬‬
