ÄGYPTEN

Verordnung 562/2019 der Pflanzenquarantänebestimmungen Ägyptens vom 11.05.2019

Quelle: https://www.ippc.int/en/countries/egypt/reportingobligation/4, aufgerufen am 06.09.2019

(Verwendung des Entwurfs Ägyptens in englischer Sprache und grober Vergleich der arabischen
Fassung mit dem Entwurf in arabischer Sprache, Julius Kühn-Institut, Bundesforschungsinstitut für
Kulturpflanzen, Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit,
20.07.2020)

Übersetzung und Wiedergabe erfolgen ohne Gewähr.


                             Ministry of Agriculture & Land Reclamation

                                        Draft Ministerial Decree
                                Concerning Egypt's Plant Quarantine
                                         Rules & Regulations

                               The Minister for Agriculture and Land Reclamation, after reviewing:
-   Law No 53 of 1966, promulgating the Law of Agriculture,
-   the Criminal Procedure Code,
-   the Anti-narcotics Law No 182 of 1960, amended by Law No 122 of 1989, schedules attached
    thereunto and all the amending and implementing resolutions thereof,
-   the Decree of the Minister for Justice No 1124 of 1971, amending Article 1 of the Decree No 51 of
    1967 granting to certain members of staff of the Ministry of Agriculture the capacity of judicial
    control officers,
-   the Decree of the Minister for Agriculture and Land Reclamation No 3007 of 2001 concerning
    quarantine rules and the amendments thereof,
-   Inter-ministerial Decree No 824 of 2010 and the amendments thereof,
-   Inter-ministerial Decree No 670 of 2017,
-   Ministerial Decree No 154 of 2018,
-   the International Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) and
-   the recommendations of the Plant Quarantine Committee (PQC) convened on ...

                                 has reached the following decision:
                                            Chapter One
                                          General Provisions
Article 1: The following terms and phrases, whenever mentioned in this Decree, shall have the
        meanings assigned to them and stated in Annex 1.
Article 2:
    1- The Competent Authority (the National Plant Protection Organisation represented in Egyptian
        Plant Quarantine) shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Decree and
        subsequent amendments under the following legislative framework:
        •     the Egyptian Law on Agriculture and the amendments thereunto,
        •     the current Ministerial Decree regulating quarantine arrangements,
        •     various resolutions of the Plant Quarantine Committee (PQC),


                 Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      1/81
        •    bilateral and multilateral memoranda of understanding and Protocols,
        •    the terms and requirements of relevant international and regional organisations and
             agreements; and all the (competences and functions) stated herein and annexes thereof
             shall be exclusive functions for the Egyptian Plant Quarantine in its capacity of a National
             Plant Protection Organisation within the meaning of Article IV of the International Plant
             Protection Convention (IPPC).
    2- Any decisions related to the work system and functions of Plant Quarantine shall be issued by
        the Minister for Agriculture and upon the recommendation of the PQC.
    3- The competent authority shall be competent for technical functions as well as those set out in
        Annex 2.
Article 3: Wortlaut tw. geändert
    1- Egyptian Plant Quarantine shall represent the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation in
       all matters related to quarantine and other measures taken in respect of all regulated articles,
       whether they are exported, imported or in transit through any internal or external bodies.
    2- Egyptian Plant Quarantine shall, with full supervisory control, seek the assistance of any
       authority to perform the plant quarantine tasks pursuant to cooperation protocols of fixed-term
       and assignment, provided that such protocols have not been concluded by the Head of the
       competent authority until it has received the approval of the PQC.
Article 4:
    1- The remit of Egyptian Plant Quarantine is to perform and complete the quarantine processes
       of all plants and agricultural products whether natural or processed, which do not prevent
       infestation with pests and other regulated articles.
    2- Egyptian Plant Quarantine shall preserve the country's agricultural sector and the reputation of
       Egyptian agricultural exports; and shall minimize the adverse effects on international trade to
       the minimum level concerning the phytosanitary requirements through the implementation of
       procedures and measures and the application of international requirements and standards
       that prevent the entry or spread of any quarantine pest.
    3- Plant quarantine inspectors shall be experts in the functions and have the technical knowledge
       set out in Annex 3.
Article 5: A committee named "Plant Quarantine Committee" shall be established under the
        chairmanship of the Head of the Competent Authority (Egyptian Plant Quarantine) with the
        membership of:
    •   the Head of Agricultural Services and Follow-up Sector,
    •   the Head of the Central Administration of Pest Control,
    •   the Director of the Plant Protection Research Institute (PPRI),
    •   the Director of the Plant Pathology Research Institute (PPATHRI),
    •   the Chairman of the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Committee of the Ministry,
    •   the Director of the Weed Research Central Laboratory (WRCL ),
    •   the Director-Generals of the Public Administrations of Plant Quarantine,
    •   the Director of the Technical Office of the Plant Quarantine,
    •   the Director of the Exporters Service Department,
    •   the Supervisor of the Phytosanitary Unit at the Egyptian Plant Quarantine,
    •   the Director-General for Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Agriculture.
        The committee’s chairman shall be entitled to seek the assistance of whomever he deems
        appropriate to perform the committee’s works. The PQC shall be convened at the behest of
        the committee chairman, and the meeting shall not have a quorum unless attended by at least
        five members. Decisions shall be taken by a majority vote. In the event of a tied vote, the


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                       2/81
        chairman shall have the casting vote. Decisions shall only be effective after the approval of the
        Minister for Agriculture. A technical secretariat shall be established in order to complete the
        committee’s functions, under the chairmanship of one of the competent engineers of the
        competent authority. The committee shall discharge the functions set out in Annex 4.
    •   Allowances for meetings and activities of this committee shall be funded from the financial
        allocations of the Plant Quarantine.
Article 6: Wortlaut tw. geändert
        Inspectors of Egyptian Plant Quarantine shall have the capacity of a judicial control officer in
        respect of their work and within the scope of work of the competent authority. If an inspector
        suspects that regulations, conditions and procedures implemented for the quarantine actions
        have been infringed, he shall be entitled to undertake all procedures necessary to corroborate
        such actions; the rest of the legal proceedings shall be completed by the knowledge of the
        competent authority and the Ministry officials in contact with the various bodies concerned.
        They shall decide among themselves on the mechanisms to be used in such cases; and they
        shall facilitate the task of the quarantine inspector to achieve the purposes of the work
        entrusted to him so as to ensure the national security of the agricultural economy of the
        country and the reputation of exports of plant products.
Article 7: The Plant Quarantine Samples Coding Unit shall receive, prepare and encode the various
        samples, and send them to the bodies accredited by Plant Quarantine for the laboratory
        examination as set out in Annex 5.
Article 8: Quarantine parcel expenses shall be collected as set out in Annex 6. Any of the Plant
        Quarantine actions shall not be carried until the payment of due costs is settled, and the
        expenses shall be reviewed and updated periodically by the PQC.
Article 9: A full financial statement shall be issued for the collection and disbursement of all necessary
        expenses and allowances. The appropriate means of transportation shall be provided for
        those who carry out various quarantine actions and shall be binding for the concerned parties
        or representatives thereof.
Article 10: Without prejudice to penalties set forth in the Agricultural Law, measures set out in
        Annex 7 shall be applied for each specific violation.
Article 11: Requirements for phytosanitary measures contained in ISPM 15 on wood packaging
        materials used in international trade shall be complied with.
Article 12: All the annexes referred to herein shall be an integral part of the articles hereof.
                                             Chapter Two
                                         Import and Processing
Article 13: Import and entry of plant and agricultural products parcels from a country of origin
        accredited by plant quarantine shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions and rules
        set forth in Annex 8.
Article 14: Importation of any regulated article from any origin for the first time shall be prohibited
        except on the basis of pest risk analysis results. The adoption of a new origin and/or the re-
        evaluation of a current origin in accordance with the requirements and controls is described in
        Annex 9.
Article 15: A consignment shall not be permitted to enter the country except under an import permit
        specifying the requirements to be complied with, issued prior to the shipment from the
        exporting country, or unless it is accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate issued by the
        exporting country’s competent authority. One or both of those conditions may be waived in the
        cases described in Annex 10.
Article 16: Plants and agricultural products infested with quarantine pests listed in Table 1 of
        Annex 11 shall be refused entry into Egypt.
Article 17: Plants and agricultural products infested with pests recorded in Egypt and listed in Table 1
        of Annex 11 shall not be permitted to enter Egypt unless they are treated with techniques
        approved by Plant Quarantine and carried out under its terms and supervision and under the
        responsibility and at the expense of the party concerned.


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                        3/81
Article 18: Plants and agricultural products listed in Table 1 of Annex 11 may be permitted entry if
        they were infested with the pests specified for each of them, after they have been treated with
        the eradication techniques specified for each respectively under the terms and supervision of
        Plant Quarantine and under the responsibility and at the expense of the party concerned.
Article 19: Seed parcels and plants for cultivation or propagation purposes shall be permitted entry
        into Egypt if they conform to the rules and conditions set forth in Annex 12, provided that they
        are completely free from the pests listed in Table 4 in addition to any of the pests listed in
        Table 1 of Annex 11.
Article 20: An unidentified pest shall be treated as the pest listed in Table 1 unless all of its species
        are listed in Table 2. In such a case, the provisions of Article 17 herein shall apply.
Article 21: A dead pest shall not be regarded as a quarantine pest. It shall not prevent the entry of
        plant and plant products consignments into the country. Fumigation is a prerequisite if and
        when the accompanied phytosanitary certificate indicates that fumigation has been completed
        in the country of origin.
Article 22: Pursuant to the international standards and conventions regarding the completion of the
        pre-shipment inspection and the facilitation of international trade, the Plant Quarantine
        Committee shall have the right to approve the application of some phytosanitary measures in
        the country of origin for certain agricultural commodities and/or from some origins. It may also,
        upon the request of the concerned party, apply some of such measures in the country of origin
        as described in Annex 13.
Article 23: Potato tubers shall be imported in accordance with the requirements prescribed in Annex
        14.
Article 24: The import of cotton products such as ginned cotton, ginned cotton waste, commercial
        cotton samples, cottonseed for pressing and cottonseed meal shall be permitted; while the
        import of lint cotton shall be limited to military factories in accordance with the conditions set
        forth in Annex 15.
Article 25: Some plants and/or parts or certain categories thereof shall be refused entry into Egypt,
        with the exception of some or parts thereof under conditions listed in Annex 16.
Article 26: Imported agricultural products shall be permitted to enter the free zones after being
        inspected at the port of arrival; and a report on the measures carried thereupon shall be
        issued.
Article 27: Transit passage of plants and agricultural products consignments shall not be permitted to
        enter Egypt except under the conditions set out in Annex 17.
Article 28:
        1- Bees shall not be imported, except bumblebees and queens that are genetically modified
           (Carniolan and Italian) which may be imported under a prior import permit issued by the
           Plant Quarantine in accordance with the technical requirements of the Plant Protection
           Research Institute, provided that they are initially inspected by a joint committee
           consisting of Plant Quarantine and representatives of the competent institute respectively.
           When the consignments are proven to be free from diseases, they shall be transferred
           under a reservation and shall be placed in a quarantine area by the importer and the Bee
           Research Department. They shall be followed up by a specialised committee from the
           Plant Protection Research Institute for one month, until the assurance of their being free
           of diseases and then they are to be released permanently.
        2- Eggs, cocoons and larvae of silkworm or nonwoven silkworms shall be imported under a
           prior import permit from the Plant Quarantine in accordance with the technical
           requirements of the Plant Protection Research Institute, provided that they are initially
           inspected by a joint committee consisting of Plant Quarantine and the representatives of
           the competent institute respectively.
Article 29: Growing medium shall not be imported except under a prior import permit issued by the
        Plant Quarantine in accordance with the requirements of the competent research institutes.
Article 30: Governmental entities engaged in scientific research may be permitted to import prohibited
        materials under the following conditions:


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                          4/81
            1.       The applicant entity shall provide the Plant Quarantine with an application
                     including the consignor's name and the consignee's names and addresses.
            2.       The application must specify the species to be imported, the quantities, source
                     and region of origin, purpose of importation and the type of research to be
                     conducted.
            3.       The importing entity must abide by all the precautions and procedures, which the
                     Plant Quarantine deems appropriate before and after the parcel leaves the
                     customs circuit so as to ensure that no pest infiltrates therefrom.
            4.       Plant Quarantine may annul the import permit if and when it becomes evident that
                     the importation of such material may pose a threat to Egypt's plantations.
Article 31: the imported plant consignments shall be treated in accordance with the conditions and
        procedures set out in Annex 18.
Article 32: Shipments that are refused entry in Egypt or transit passage through its territories shall be
        subject to measures and procedures stated in Annex 19.
Article 33: Returned shipments shall be regarded as imported plant consignments after notifying the
        competent authority to issue the relevant instructions thereof.
                                             Chapter Three
                                                Export
Article 34: Quarantine articles permitted to be exported and specified in the special form prepared for
        such purpose shall be submitted to the quarantine specialists to determine the measures to be
        taken in this regard. Plant Quarantine decision shall be final after the export permit conditions
        and the compliance with the importing country requirements are met in accordance with the
        measures stated in Annex 20.
Article 35: A Phytosanitary Certificate or Re-export Certificate (a soft copy or a hard copy) and the
        required attachments thereof shall be issued for each plant products consignment exported or
        re-exported from the Arab Republic of Egypt in accordance with the relevant international
        standards and in conformity with the regulations set forth in Annex 21.
Article 36: Inspection and recording of sites subject to export quarantine measures shall be approved
        as per the regulations set forth in Annex 22.
Article 37: Non-quarantine articles shall be exempted from the submission to Plant Quarantine unless
        the concerned party requests a phytosanitary certificate based on an affidavit issued by the
        importing country.
Article 38: Agricultural crop seeds are permitted to be exported upon the approval of the Agricultural
        Crops Committee, provided that the exported seeds comply with the conditions and
        procedures set forth in Annex 23.
Article 39: Silkworm eggs, silk cocoons, bumblebees and honeybees are permitted to be exported
        under an export permit issued by the Plant Protection Research Institute, provided that they
        are inspected by a joint committee consisting of the Plant Quarantine and representatives of
        the Institute, each in its respect.
Article 40: Agricultural products and articles stated in Annex 24 shall not be permitted to be exported
        unless they fulfil the conditions set to each respectively.
Article 41: All provisions which challenge or are in conflict with the provisions of the present decree
        are hereby abrogated.
Article 42: This decree shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be enforced as of its date
        of publication.
Issued on: 11.05.2019

                                                Minister for Agriculture and Land Reclamation

                                                          Prof. Dr. Ezz Al-Din Abu Setit




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                       5/81
                                              Annex 1
                              Regarding Article 1 – General Provisions
                                Phytosanitary Terms and Definitions

             Term                                             Definition
 The competent minister         …
 The competent authority        The national plant protection organisation represented by Egyptian
                                Plant Quarantine.
 National Plant Protection      An official department established by a government to achieve the
 Organisation (NPPO)            functions defined by the International Plant Protection Convention
                                (IPPC), represented in Egypt by Egyptian Plant Quarantine.
 International Plant            International Plant Protection Convention, as deposited in 1951
 Protection Convention          with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
 (IPPC)                         Nations (FAO) in Rome and as subsequently amended.
 Plant Quarantine               All activities aimed at preventing the entry or spread of regulated
                                quarantine pests and to ensure that they are subject to official
                                control.
 International Standard for     International standards approved by the FAO Conferences, the
 Phytosanitary Measures         Interim Commission on Phytosanitary Measures or the Commission
 (ISPM)                         on Phytosanitary Measures, established under the International Plant
                                Protection Convention (IPPC).
 Phytosanitary measures         Any legislation, regulation or official procedure having the purpose to
                                prevent the introduction and/or spread of quarantine pests, or to limit
                                the economic impact of regulated non-quarantine pests.
 Phytosanitary legislation      Basic laws that grant legal authority to NPPO to protect the plants
                                and on which phytosanitary regulations can be based.
 Phytosanitary regulation       An official rule with the purpose of preventing the introduction and/or
                                spread of quarantine pests, or of limiting the economic impact of
                                regulated non-quarantine pests; and including the establishing of
                                schemes for phytosanitary certification.
 Phytosanitary procedures       Any approach officially established for the application of
                                phytosanitary measures, including inspection, testing, control and
                                treatment of regulated pests.
 Phytosanitary actions          An official action such as examination, inspection, testing,
                                supervision and/or treatment, taken to apply a phytosanitary
                                measure.
 Judicial control officer       Plant Quarantine inspector who has the right of judicial control under
                                the Decree No 1124 of 1971 of the Minister of Justice.
 Inspector                      A person authorized by the Egyptian Plant Quarantine to carry out
                                the tasks assigned thereto.
 Phytosanitary certificate      An official (soft copy or hard copy) document consistent with the
                                IPPC certificate forms stating that the consignment meets the
                                phytosanitary requirements of the importing countries.
 Additional declaration         A statement to be entered on a phytosanitary certificate that is
                                required by an importing country and which provides specific
                                additional information pertaining to the phytosanitary condition of a
                                consignment in terms of regulated pests or regulated articles.
 Import permit                  An official document authorizing importation of a commodity in
                                accordance with specified phytosanitary requirements.
 Pest                           Any species, strain or biotype of plant, animal or pathogenic agent,
                                injurious to plants or plant products.


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                        6/81
 Quarantine pest             A pest having a potential economic importance to a threatened area
                             but not yet present in the area, or already present in an area but not
                             widespread and subject to official control.
 Entry (of a pest)           The entry in an area of a pest where it is not yet present, or where it
                             is already present but not widespread and subject to official control.
 Infestation (of a           The presence in a plant or plant product commodity of a living pest.
 commodity)                  Infestation includes infection.
 Regulated article           Any plant, plant product, storage place, packaging, means of
                             transport, container, soil and any other organism, object or material
                             capable of harbouring or spreading pests, and deemed to require
                             phytosanitary measures, in particular where international
                             transportation is involved.
 Consignment                 A quantity of plants, plant products and/or other articles being moved
                             from one country to another and covered, when required, by a single
                             phytosanitary certificate (a consignment may be composed of one or
                             more commodities or parcels).
 Consignments in transit     A consignment which passes through a country without being
                             imported (by the country), and that may be subject to phytosanitary
                             measures.
 Re-exported consignment     A consignment which has been imported into a country and then
                             exported. The consignment may be left as is, split up, combined with
                             other consignments or have its packaging changed.
 Lot                         A number of units of a single commodity, identifiable by the
                             homogeneity of its composition, origin etc. and forming part of a
                             consignment.
 Mark                        An official seal recognized internationally that is placed on a
                             regulated article to certify its phytosanitary condition.
 Country of origin           The country where the plants and the plants from which plant
                             products were derived were grown.
 Plants                      Living plant and parts thereof, including seeds.
 Plant products              Unprocessed material originating from plant (including seeds) and
                             manufactured products which, by their nature or their processing,
                             may cause the introduction or/and spread of pests.
 Plants for planting         Plants intended to remain planted, to be planted or replanted
 Growing medium              Any material in which plant roots are growing or intended for that
                             purpose.
 Point of entry              Airport, seaport or land border point officially designated for the
                             importation of consignments, and/or the entrance of individuals.
 Regulated area              An area into which, within which and/or from which plants, plant
                             products and other regulated articles are subjected to phytosanitary
                             regulations or procedures in order to prevent the introduction and/or
                             spread of quarantine pests or to limit the economic impact of
                             regulated non-quarantine pests.
 Quarantine area             An area within which a quarantine pest is present and subject to an
                             official control.
 Place of production         A specified production site which is separately managed for
                             phytosanitary purposes.
 Pest free area              An area in which a specific pest does not occur as demonstrated by
                             scientific evidence and in which, where appropriate, this condition is
                             being officially maintained


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     7/81
 Survey                      An official procedure conducted over a defined period of time to
                             determine the characteristics of a pest population or to determine
                             which species occur in an area.
 Pest risk analysis          The process of evaluating biological or other scientific and economic
                             evidence so as to determine whether an organism is a pest, whether
                             it should be regulated, and the effectiveness of any NPPO
                             phytosanitary measures to fight it.
 Emergency measures          Phytosanitary measures or regulations established as a matter of
                             urgency in a new or unexpected phytosanitary situation. An
                             emergency measure may or may not be a provisional measure.
 Emergency action            A prompt phytosanitary action undertaken in a new or unexpected
                             phytosanitary situation.
 Official control            The active enforcement of mandatory phytosanitary regulations and
                             the application of mandatory phytosanitary procedures with the
                             objective of eradicating or containing quarantine pests or towards the
                             management of regulated non-quarantine pests.
 Inspection                  An official visual examination of plants, plant products or other
                             regulated articles to determine if pests are present and/or to
                             determine compliance with phytosanitary regulations.
 Visual examination          The physical examination of plants, plant products, or other
                             regulated articles using the unaided eye, lens, stereoscope or
                             microscope to detect pests or contaminants without testing or
                             processing.
 Pre-clearance               Phytosanitary certification and/or clearance in the country of origin,
                             performed by or under the regular supervision of the National Plant
                             Protection Organisation of the country of destination.
 Release (of a               The authorization of entry after clearance.
 consignment)
 Refusal                     The banning of the entry of a consignment or other regulated article
                             when it fails to comply with phytosanitary regulations.
 Quarantine                  The official confinement of regulated articles for observation and
                             research or for further inspection, testing and/or treatment.
 Prohibition                 A phytosanitary regulation forbidding the importation or movement of
                             specified pests or commodities.
 Treatment                   The official procedure for the killing, inactivation or removal of pests,
                             or for rendering pests infertile or for their devitalization.
 Fumigation                  A treatment with a chemical agent that reaches the commodity
                             wholly or primarily in a gaseous state.
 Wood packaging material     Wood or wood products (excluding paper products) used in
                             supporting, protecting or carrying a commodity, including dunnage.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     8/81
                                            Annex 2
                            Regarding Article 2 – General Provisions
                 Functions and technical competence of the competent authority
The competent authority (the National Plant Protection Organisation represented by the Egyptian
Plant Quarantine) shall assume the tasks and responsibilities assigned thereto and required to
protect the country's agricultural sector from pests. It shall preserve the reputation of Egyptian
agricultural exports and shall minimize the adverse effects on international trade under the Egyptian
Agricultural Law, its amendments, articles of International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC),
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS), and relevant international agreements by means of the
following:
1. Representing the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation in all matters related to the
   quarantine measures and other measures taken on all regulated articles, whether they are
   exported, imported or in transit through any internal or external bodies.
2. Monitoring and inspecting all the regulated plant consignments and articles to ensure their
   compliance with the required quarantine requirements, whether they are exported, imported or in
   transit or entering with passengers or whether they are postal and return parcels.
3. Approving, inspecting and examining all places and equipment of production, preparation,
   inspection, storage and treatment aiming at ensuring the compliance with the required quarantine
   requirements.
4. Declaring the regulated quarantine and non-quarantine pests.
5. Preventing the introduction of quarantine pests from outside the country by taking all necessary
   measures to regulate the importation of plants, plant products and regulated articles.
6. Regulating the exportation of plants, plant products and regulated articles to meet the
   requirements of importing countries in accordance with the international conventions.
7. Defining the sites that are used as regulated areas to complete the procedures required for
   agricultural exports and imports.
8. Applying the approved quarantine treatments for imported, exported and in transit consignments.
   The competent authority shall have the right to eliminate or dispose of the consignment at the
   expense and under the responsibility of the concerned party if and when the consignments’
   presence poses a threat to crops without any compensation.
9. Taking necessary measures on consignments which are refused entry or transit through the
   country by re-exporting or elimination as described herein.
10. Conducting survey and monitoring for pests.
11. Conducting Pest Risk Analyses (PRA).
12. Adopting initial emergency measures and procedures should a pest posing a threat to the
    Egyptian agricultural wealth be detected until the QPC, after being informed, decides on the
    actions to be taken.
13. Reporting the detection of new pests.
14. Conducting periodic reviews of legislation, regulations or official procedures aimed at
    phytosanitary compliance to prevent the introduction and/or spread of pests.
15. Disseminating information on regulated pests, how to prevent their entry and spread and how to
    control them.
16. Developing a technical guide on the import and export of plants and plant products as well as
    regulated articles.
17. Designating particular points of entry for some consignments.
18. Coordinating and cooperating with international and regional organisations and the entering
    protocols with them towards phytosanitary cooperation
19. Liaising with relevant bodies related to quarantine for coordination and to ensure the proper flow of
    work.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      9/81
20. Developing and organising training programs, seminars, conferences and workshops periodically
    to review the status of pests and to reach out to and educate the community about the importance
    of phytosanitary measures through various media.
21. Recommending the establishment of branches of Plant Quarantine as required.
22. Performing any other quarantine tasks pertaining to the competent authority in the implementation
    of the provisions hereof.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                  10/81
                                           Annex 3
                           Regarding Article 4 – General Provisions
                Functions and technical competence of the Quarantine Inspector
With a view to implementing this Decree, the quarantine inspector shall have the powers, functions
and responsibilities necessary for such purpose, including:
    1- Inspecting, examining and monitoring all plant consignments and regulated articles, whether
       they are exported, imported or in transit, and postal parcels to ensure their compliance with
       the required quarantine legislation.
    2- Inspecting and examining all places and equipment of production, preparation, inspection,
       storage and treatment to ensure their compliance with the necessary quarantine requirements.
    3- Inspecting goods accompanying passengers to ensure that they do not violate the quarantine
       legislation.
    4- Obtaining, preparing and encoding different samples and sending them to bodies accredited
       by Plant Quarantine for laboratory examination.
    5- Checking that the ISPM 15 requirements on wood packaging materials are applied.
    6- Issuing and signing off all necessary phytosanitary certificates and attachments and all
       quarantine documents necessary to complete the quarantine procedures.
    7- Supervising the processing, elimination or re-export of plant parcels and other regulated
       articles.
    8- Supervising the collecting and elimination of the waste resulting from any quarantine
       processing.
    9- Supervising the processing of regulated transportations, machinery and equipment to ensure
       compliance with the necessary quarantine requirements.
    10- Suspending and inspecting any regulated articles, equipment or places within the country
        suspected of being non-compliant with the quarantine legislation, keeping them under
        reservation if there is evidence of a violation. A report shall necessarily be issued and the
        Administration shall be informed of the incident so as to take all necessary actions.
    11- Determining the expenses due towards the various quarantine tasks in accordance with the
        laws and decisions thereof.
    12- Cooperating with the relevant bodies of the different parties to apply the quarantine
        requirements.
    13- Performing any other tasks assigned by the competent authority.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      11/81
                                          Annex 4
                          Regarding Article 5 – General Provisions
        Functions and technical competence of the Plant Quarantine Committee (PQC)
The Plant Quarantine Committee (PQC) shall be competent in studying the issues related to
phytosanitary matters assigned to Plant Quarantine by the present Decree and in evaluating proposals
aiming to develop phytosanitary measures and procedures within the framework of Plant Quarantine,
including the following:
   1- Examining proposals submitted by its members on quarantine requirements stated herein,
      whether they would result in addition, deletion or modification.
   2- Examining proposals submitted from inside or outside parties regarding the adoption of new
      treatments against regulated pests.
   3- Deciding on quarantine requirements specified by a country wishing to open its markets to
      Egyptian exports.
   4- Examining requests submitted by inside or outside parties on technical obstacles faced by
      plant consignments and regulated articles, whether they are for import or export.
   5- Defining procedures and conditions to evaluate and approve new origins and/or to re-evaluate
      and approve current origins.
   6- Specifying phytosanitary measures in a country of origin.
   7- Deciding on emergency measures to address threats to Egyptian plantations if pests could
      enter or are already present in the country.
   8- Updating the Plant Quarantine legislation.
   9- Reviewing and updating on a regular basis the costs of quarantine actions.
   10- Setting the procedures and analysis of results of pest inventories and of the monitoring plan
       for Egyptian agriculture.
   11- Debating on proposed protocols submitted by the head of the competent authority seeking the
       assistance of any party to perform tasks related to quarantine actions under full supervision,
       provided that such cooperation protocols shall be for a period limited in time and restricted to
       specific tasks.
   12- Examining any other proposals submitted thereto relating to quarantine action.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                   12/81
Annex 5
Regarding Article 7 – General Provisions
Sampling and encoding
Samples shall be taken from plant consignments and other regulated articles to ensure the
compliance with quarantine legislation after completing the visual examination procedure for
the whole consignment. Based on the foregoing, the samples are divided into:
      1- Selective samples: Samples of a quarantine pest in any of its development phases are sent
         to the authorities accredited by Plant Quarantine if the quarantine inspector cannot identify it
         or suspects its presence.
      2- Random samples: The search for the existence of a quarantine pest in regulated items is
         conducted; random samples are collected and representative samples are prepared and sent
         to the authorities accredited by Plant Quarantine so as to assess the pest’s infestation rate or
         to detect damage.
Procedure for taking, processing and encoding samples according to the regulated items:
First: procedure for the visual examination:
•     Samples shall be taken from the consignment by the quarantine inspectors, using a zigzagging or
      diagonal method; the units removed for examination shall be taken from the top, bottom, middle
      and in all directions. The inspectors shall also determine the distances between units or the
      number between each unit from which samples are collected according to the following equation:
X=N/n
X is the distance or number separating each unit from which samples are collected to complete the
examination.
N is the total number of units of the consignment under examination.
n is the number of units to be sampled (according to the table shown below).
The first unit shall be determined at random between the number 1 and the value X resulting from the
previous equation. The second unit shall be determined by adding X to the number of the first unit and
so on until the number required for the sampling is reached according to the consignment size and the
sample size specified in the following tables:
       1- Consignments imported or exported for the purpose of consumption or manufacturing;
    such as fruit, fresh vegetables, grains, cut flowers for ornamentation, wood consignments and
                                                                                          others.
•     For consignments made of packages of homogeneous weight and shape, such as boxes,
      containers or bags.
The number of samples to be examined in relation to the number of consignments or packages
shall be determined according to the following table:

     Number of consignments or parcel packages                             Sample size
                                     Less than 10 units                     All the units
                                         11 to 100 units                 At least 10 units
                                      101 to 1000 units                  At least 30 units
                                     1001 to 5000 units                  At least 100 units
                                  More than 5000 units                   At least 200 units

                      •    For cut flowers, sampling shall be done according to the following table:

       Number of cut flowers (flower, package,                 Number of units to be examined
      consignment or weight unit based on the
               examination request)
                                 Less than 100 units                    At least 10 units



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                       13/81
                                  101 to 500 units                   At least 30 units
                                 501 to 2000 units                   At least 70 units
                             More than 2000 units                    At least 150 units

                                                                     •   Bulky (solid) consignments:
Initial samples shall be taken from bulky (solid) consignments by selecting random points with
sampling probe after completion of a visual examination of the vessel or the containers as follows:

     Total bulky (solid) consignments            Number of points from which initial samples are
                                                                     taken
                         Less than 500 tons                       At least 30 points
                      501 tons to 1500 tons                       At least 50 points
                        More than 1501 tons                      At least 100 points

             2- Consignments imported or exported for the purpose of planting or propagation:
•   If the samples are homogeneous for an item and its quantity under a specific lot number, sampling
    shall be made according to the following table:

         Units number in the lot of propagation                           Units number for each lot
                   consignments
                                              1 to 100 units                     At least 1 unit
                                           101 to 300 units                     At least 5 units
                                           301 to 750 units                     At least 8 units
                                          751 to 1500 units                    At least 12 units
                                         1501 to 3000 units                    At least 20 units
                                         3001 to 5000 units                    At least 30 units
                                     More than 5000 tons                       At least 50 units

•   In case the consignments for propagation are in the form of separated units (seedlings – knots –
    bulbs and others), sampling shall be as follows:

    Number of consignments units (seedling – knot –                  Number of units taken for samples
                  bulbs and others)
                   Less than 1000 units                                        At least 100 unit
                    1001 to 5000 units                                         At least 250 units
                   More than 5000 tons                                         At least 500 units

•   The examination process of the samples taken shall be completed by inspecting the units outside
    and inside, as well as the containment places included in the consignment by means of a visual
    examination, using appropriate means such as lenses, cutters, sieves, etc. to ensure that they are
    free from pests and other material prohibited according to the quarantine legislation.
•   In the event of any unidentified or suspected pests by the quarantine inspectors, samples of such
    pests shall be prepared and sent to the Plant Quarantine Coding Department prior to sending
    them to the authorities accredited by Plant Quarantine.
Second: Sampling for laboratory analysis:
1- Should the consignments, after completion of the visual examination, require samples to be
   removed for laboratory examination, subsamples of the samples that were taken and examined
   visually by the quarantine inspectors shall be taken from at least 10% of each unit or quantity. In
   addition, such consignments shall be homogeneous. The number of samples needed for
   laboratory analysis shall be taken as regulated by the quarantine regulations and legislation. The


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      14/81
      weight of the laboratory samples shall be determined based on the consignment type and
      according to the following table:

 Sr.                     Item                    Sample's weight (kg)              Analysis type

 First: Exported Consignments:
 1       Herbs and spices                       0.500 kg                     Residues of pesticides

 2       Herbs, spices, grains and seeds        1 kg                         Determination of the
                                                                             percentage of weed
                                                                             seeds
 3       Grains and seeds                       1 kg                         Residues of pesticides

 4       Peanuts                                1-     If the consignment    Aflatoxin
                                                       is 25 tons or more,
                                                       the sample's weight
                                                       shall be 20 kg,
                                                       divided into two
                                                       packages of 10 kg
                                                       each.
                                                2-     If the consignment
                                                       is less than 25 Kg,
                                                       the reference shall
                                                       be made to the
                                                       instructions issued
                                                       in this respect.
 5       Chili                                  2 kg                         Residues of pesticides +
                                                                             Sudan dyes + Aflatoxin
 6       Sesame                                 2 kg                         Residues of pesticides +
                                                                             Aflatoxin
 7       Fruit and vegetables                   3 kg to 5 kg                 Residues of pesticides

 8       Exported potatoes                      200 tubers/lot               Analysis of brown mold in
                                                                             potatoes
 9       Honey bees                             2 kg                         Residues of pesticides

 Second: Imported Consignments
 10      All consignments of grains and seeds   2 kg                         Plant diseases
         (wheat –soybean – corn – lentils –     2 kg                         Estimation of the
         beans – etc.)                                                       proportion of grass seeds
         The consignment is 20 000 tons or
         less
 11      All consignments of grains and seeds   3 kg                         Plant diseases
         (wheat –soybean – corn – lentils –     3 kg                         Estimation of the
         beans – etc.)                                                       proportion of grass seeds
         The consignment is more than 20
         000 tons.
 12      Peat moss                              2 to 3 kg                    -   Plant diseases
                                                2 to 3 kg                    -   Analysis of brown
                                                                                 mold in potatoes
 13      Apples                                 3 to 5 kg/lot                Residues of pesticides

 14      Seeds (according to type)              5 g to 1000 g                Plant diseases




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      15/81
 15    Potato tubers (seeds –                 200 tubers/lot              Analysis of brown mold in
       manufacturing)                                                     potatoes
 16    Honey                                  2 kg                        Plant diseases

 17    All imported seeds and grains for      2 kg for the entire         Ensuring the absence of
       purposes other than planting and       consignment                 germination rate therein
       prolongation

2- Reference samples shall be isolated from the same original samples which were taken
   during the random sampling from the imported consignments and which were prepared for
   sending to the bodies accredited by Plant Quarantine. These reference samples shall be
   sealed, secured with lead and preserved in the Plant Quarantine Samples Coding Unit for
   reference when necessary.
Third: Procedure for Encoding Samples:
1- The sample taken shall be put in a sample bag that cannot be opened once it has been closed. A
   bar code from the Samples Directorate shall be written down; and the form indicating how the
   sample is taken shall be put in the place specially allocated in the bag by the committee of
   examination.
2- The samples shall be delivered to the Plant Quarantine Samples Coding Unit. The Unit shall be
   responsible for registering the data thereof, anonymising the samples by giving them a new
   identification, issuing other forms onto which special data of the Samples Coding Unit shall be
   written down. The samples shall be then sent to the bodies accredited by Plant Quarantine, and
   with which a bilateral protocol for conducting the necessary tests were concluded and signed.
3- Tests results, when known, shall be sent to the Plant Quarantine Samples Encoding Unit to re-
   identify the unidentifiable samples and inform the Plant Quarantine Departments responsible for
   the sampling to complete the rest of quarantine procedures.
4- Reference samples shall be disposed of, in an appropriate manner, one week after the result are
   known and if and when the concerned party does not submit a claim against the test results to the
   competent authority.
5- Should the concerned party submit a claim against the results for the original samples, the
   reference samples shall be considered after the payment of all required costs; in any case, no new
   sample shall be taken. The result of the tests on the reference samples shall be final and
   irrevocable.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                 16/81
                                              Annex 6
                              Regarding Article 8 – General Provisions
                               Costs collected for regulated articles

                       Procedure                                                Due costs
 First: Inspection costs of imported consignments
 Imported consignments of all plant items except the       50 piasters/100 kg or its fractions by 5 pounds/ton
 items stated hereinafter                                  with a minimum of 50 pounds
 …
 Wood consignments imported without any                    50 piasters/100 kg or its fractions by 5 pounds/ton
 information of weight, inspection costs will be           with a minimum of 50 pounds
 collected, considering that size will be (used to
 calculate) weight.
 Wood packaging materials subject to ISPM 15 (for          50 piasters/100 kg or its fractions by 5 pounds/ton
 pallets, containers, boxes, wooden beams, etc.). For      with a minimum of 50 pounds
 imported and in transit consignments, inspection
 costs shall be collected only on the weight of the
 wood minus the metal parts or goods contained
 therein, if a list of such components is attached;
 otherwise the costs shall be collected for one quarter
 of the total weight in the absence of a wood weight
 statement.
 For imported and in transit consignments containing       50 piasters/100 kg or its fractions by 5 pounds/ton
 wooden parts, inspection costs shall be collected         with a minimum of 50 pounds
 only on the weight of the wood minus metal parts or
 goods contained therein if a list of such components
 was attached; otherwise the costs shall be collected
 for one quarter of the total weight in the absence of a
 wood weight statement.
 Dehydrated or fresh fruit and vegetables                  5 pounds/100 kg or its fractions by 50 pounds/ton
 consignments                                              with a minimum of 50 pounds
 Walnuts, peanuts, almonds, nuts, pistachios, pine         5 pounds/100 kg or its fractions by 50 pounds/ton
 nuts, coconut fruits, grated, carob, tamarind, kestrel,   with a minimum of 50 pounds
 cocoa beans, coffee, cashew nuts and others.
 Second: Inspection costs of consignments in transit
 All consignments in transit submitted to Plant            25 piasters/100 kg or its fractions by 2.5 pounds/ton
 Quarantine                                                with a minimum of 50 pounds
 If the consignment is transferred from a consignment      The value of the inspection costs shall be determined
 in transit to an import consignment, the final release    on the basis of the value of the inspection costs for
 of the consignment shall be permitted only after the      imports and according to the type of consignment.
 set costs difference has been collected according to
 the type of the consignment transferred from in
 transit to import status.
 Third: Inspection costs of exported consignments
 All exported consignments submitted to Plant              25 piasters/100 kg or its fractions by 2.5 pounds/ton
 Quarantine                                                with a minimum of 5 pounds
 Exported cotton consignments (lint and waste)             One pound/bale with a minimum of 5 pounds
 Fourth: Processing costs for exported and imported consignments or those that require the
 completion of treatment procedures under the supervision of Plant Quarantine.
 1-   Treatment inside the institution and station of Plant Quarantine
 Treatment costs of imported consignments shall be         2.5 pounds /100 kg or its fractions by 10 pounds/ton
 collected for each separate process, even if it           with a minimum costs of 100 pounds


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     17/81
                      Procedure                                                 Due costs
 requires more than one type of treatment approved
 by Plant Quarantine.
 Treatment costs of exported consignments shall be        1 pound /100 kg or its fractions by 25 pounds/ton with
 collected for each separate process, even if the         a minimum costs of 200 pounds
 regulated article requires more than one type of
 treatment approved by Plant Quarantine.
 The above-mentioned costs shall apply if the concerned party provides the substances to be used in
 one of the treatment methods such as methyl bromide for fumigation or any other substances
 involved in any other method of chosen treatment. If Plant Quarantine provides the treatment
 substance, the costs of the quantity of substance provided and consumed shall be added to the costs
 collected from the concerned party according to the price of the supply for the Ministry of Agriculture.
 When the same consignment undergoes repeat treatment, the same costs as before shall be charged
 The concerned party or its representative shall be       5 pounds per each 100 kg/bale, with a minimum cost
 obliged to transfer the consignment treated in the       of 500 pounds
 Plant Quarantine stations within 24 hours as of the
 end of the treatment, otherwise, he shall pay for
 flooring and storage expenses for the first 24 hours
 or parts thereof after the deadline. The storage
 expenses shall be doubled for every following 24
 hours or parts thereof.
 2-   Supervision of a treatment outside the institution and Plant Quarantine station
 Treatment costs of imported consignments shall be        1 pound/100 kg or its fractions by 10 pounds/ton with
 collected for each separate process, even if it          a minimum cost of 100 pounds (one hundred pound)
 requires more than one type of treatment approved
 by Plant Quarantine.
 Treatment costs of exported consignments shall be        50 piasters /100 kg or its fractions by 5 pounds/ton
 collected for each separate process, even if the         with a minimum cost of 30 pounds
 regulated article requires more than one type of
 treatment approved by Plant Quarantine.
 The above-mentioned costs shall apply if the concerned party provides the substances needed for
 one of the treatment methods; however, should Plant Quarantine provide the treatment substance,
 the costs of the quantity of substances provided and consumed shall be added to the costs collected
 from the concerned party according to the price of supply for the Ministry of Agriculture.
 When the same consignment undergoes repeat treatment, the same costs as before shall be charged
 Fifth: The following costs shall be collected in return for the different following procedures:
 Inspection costs for each single inspection operation    500 pounds
 conducted under the knowledge of the quarantine
 inspector for any of the warehouses, silos, granaries,
 mills or factories or other facilities requiring
 inspection as a result of the execution of one of the
 quarantine operations on the whole plant
 consignment or part thereof.
 Inspection costs for heat treatment, cooling and other   500 pounds
 once a year for the purpose of determining their
 validity in the implementation of the phytosanitary
 measures prescribed as part of the quarantine
 legislation.
 Inspection costs for farms and/or stations for the       500 pounds
 preparation and processing of agricultural crops once
 per season and/or for each crop in order to determine
 their validity in the implementation of phytosanitary


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                    18/81
                       Procedure                                                Due costs
 measures prescribed in accordance with quarantine
 legislation.
 Costs of taking and preparing samples to be sent to       200 pounds/sample
 the bodies accredited by Plant Quarantine for
 analysis and identification of all exporting and
 importing consignments
 PRA costs per study carried out on agricultural           10 000 pounds
 commodities alleged to be imported; it shall be
 conducted for each agricultural commodity from a
 single origin for the first time
 Expenditure due for the approval of the disposal of       25 piasters per 1 kg; with a maximum cost of 300
 fumigant substances for licensed companies carrying       pounds
 their work under the supervision of Plant Quarantine.
 Expenses for controlling the transfer of cotton lint or   10 pounds/consignment; with a minimum cost of 300
 seed per package (ballet or mobile)                       pounds
 Sixth: the following costs shall be collected in return for each separate Plant Quarantine action
 carried out, in whole or partially (for each bill of lading), on regulated items within and outside of
 official working hours. These costs will be added to the costs collected for each action being carried
 out.
 First shift                                               50 pounds for the period from 6:00 a.m. to 12 p.m.
                                                           (midday)
 Second shift                                              50 pounds for the period from 12:00 p.m. (midday) to
                                                           6 p.m.
 Third shift                                               75 pounds for the period from
                                                           06:00 p.m. to 12:00 p.m. (midnight)
 Fourth shift                                              75 pounds for the period from
                                                           06:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. (midnight)
 Seventh: costs that shall be collected in return for the issuance of the corresponding documents
 alongside each item:
 Issuance fees for the original copy of the import         500 pounds
 permit for an agricultural commodity, per permit
 issued for the first time for a single consignment
 Fees for renewing the import permit of un-used            250 pounds
 agricultural commodities
 Issuance fees for a copy of import permit of an           10 pounds
 agricultural commodity
 Issuance and delivery fees for a phytosanitary            100 pounds
 certificate
 Issuance fees for phytosanitary certificate addition      50 pounds
 Issuance fees for phytosanitary certificate copy          20 pounds
 Issuance fees for a phytosanitary certificate             20 pounds
 additional copy
 Issuance fees for a replacement in lieu of damage,        500 pounds
 loss, or data amendments to the original copy of the
 phytosanitary certificate
 Issuance fees for a replacement in lieu of damage,        250 pounds
 loss, or data amendments to the phytosanitary
 certificate addition


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                    19/81
                        Procedure                                          Due costs
 Issuance fees of a replacement in lieu of damage,            50 pounds
 loss, or data amendments to the copy of the
 phytosanitary certificate
 Issuance fees for a replacement in lieu of damage,           50 pounds
 loss, or data amendments to the phytosanitary
 certificate addition copy
 Issuance fees for the original copy of the treatment         100 pounds
 certificate (fumigation - disinfection - cooling - hot air
 and other approved treatment methods)
 Issuance fees for the copy of the treatment certificate      50 pounds
 (fumigation - disinfection - cooling - hot air and other
 approved treatment methods)
 Issuance fees for a replacement in lieu of damage,           200 pounds
 loss, or data amendments to the original copy of the
 treatment certificate (fumigation - disinfection -
 cooling - hot air and other approved treatment
 methods)
 Issuance fees for a replacement in lieu of damage,           100 pounds
 loss, or data amendments to the copy of the
 treatment certificate (fumigation - disinfection -
 cooling - hot air and other approved treatment
 methods)
 Issuance fees for data certificate of the consignment        100 pounds
 and the quarantine measures conducted thereunder
 upon the request of the concerned party to be
 submitted to any other body.
 Issuance fees for a certificate of accreditation whose       200 pounds
 validity has been determined. The application of the
 quarantine requirements shall be valid for one year
 as of the date of issue.
 Fees for issuance and approval of the registration           200 pounds
 record of export of agricultural crops that are
 processed in the approved stations or packaging
 stations equipped for such purpose for a single
 export season
 Fees for issuance and approval of follow-up record of        300 pounds
 the treatment of consignments that are processed for
 one year
 Issuance fees for a certificate of examination of            10 pounds
 imported, exported and transit consignments.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                         20/81
                                             Annex 7
                             Regarding Article 10 – General Provisions
                Adopted procedures in the event of violations of quarantine legislation
In the event of quarantine regulations and legislation being violated, the quarantine inspector shall
issue a statement of facts (record) outlining the violation on the relevant form. The inspector may also
take the necessary actions to retain the violation in question, and may seek the assistance of the
competent authority where necessary; and he may refer the matter thereafter to the head of the
competent authority to take the necessary action on the violations according to the following:
-     For violations that cannot be promptly addressed, the quarantine actions over the entity subject to
      the violation shall be suspended and all documents and records of the quarantine actions shall be
      withdrawn until the technical investigation is completed by the competent authority within seven
      days at most.
-     For violations that can be promptly addressed, the quarantine actions of the entity subject to the
      violation shall not be suspended, provided that the technical investigation into the violation in
      question is completed after the application of the appropriate procedure according to the level of
      violation and in accordance with the following violation list:

                        Violation                                         Procedure
    1- Non-compliance of different exporting               A statement of facts (record) shall be issued
    entities with the implementation of the                 by the committee in charge of the work for
    quarantine instructions (export and import              such entity. All the documents of the
    offices - export companies - stations of sorting        quarantine actions existing in this entity
    and packaging of agricultural crops - collection        shall be withdrawn, and the quarantine
    centres etc.)                                           actions shall be suspended and the
                                                            necessary investigation shall be carried out
                                                            by the competent authority on the
                                                            circumstances of the incident.
    2- Manipulation of the imported consignments           A statement of facts (record) shall be issued
    for the purpose of influencing the results of the       in addition to reporting to the competent
    examination in favour of the concerned                  authority to take the necessary legal
    authorities before submitting them to the Plant         procedures by informing the concerned
    Quarantine                                              authority.
    3- Amending, counterfeiting or altering any of         A statement of facts (record) shall be issued
    the documents and files on the quarantine               in addition to reporting to the competent
    works.                                                  authority to take the necessary legal
                                                            procedures by informing the concerned
                                                            authority.
    4- Manipulating in any way the identification of       All the quarantine procedures carried out
    the exported consignments before they are               shall be cancelled; and the consignment
    completely inspected.                                   shall be re-inspected as if it were a new
                                                            consignment.
    5- Non-compliance with the implementation of           A statement of facts record shall be issued
    the quarantine instructions in performing the           in addition to suspending the approval
    quarantine treatments.                                  issued by the competent authority until the
                                                            end of the investigations.
    6- If the party concerned or its representative        The inspection application shall be rejected,
    asks for the inspection of an exported plant            and the consignments shall not be
    consignment, and if, on inspection, it becomes          inspected again until 7 days have elapsed
    obvious that they are not completely ready for          as of the rejection date.
    the final inspection or that the consignments are
    not where it is stated in the inspection
    application.

     In all cases, the procedures will not be engaged for the violations stated until such violations
             have been approved by a technical investigation with the knowledge of the competent
                                                                                           authority.


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                       21/81
                                           Annex 8
                      Regarding Article 13 – Importation and Treatment
 Conditions and rules for permitting the import and introduction of plants and plant products
  1- Whoever wishes to import plant consignments or agricultural products must apply to the
     nearest competent quarantine port for an import permit before shipping the consignment from
     the country of origin. The import permit shall be obtained for one category and shall be from
     one of the places of origin approved by the Egyptian Plant Quarantine; and it shall relate to one
     consignment only and shall be valid for three months as of the date of issuance, provided that
     the shipping is carried out during the period in question. The concerned party shall notify the
     exporting country of the import permit issued for the consignment by the Egyptian Plant
     Quarantine to perform its role in assuring that Egyptian Plant Quarantine’s requirements stated
     therein are met, providing that the import permit number is included in the phytosanitary
     certificate accompanying the consignment. The competent authority shall have the right to
     annul the import permit without giving reasons. Should the importer submit an application to
     import a consignment of plants or plant products from some unaccredited origin, the importer
     shall undertake to pay the PRA costs for the new origin to be approved.
  2- After receiving the consignment, the concerned party shall submit an application to the Plant
     Quarantine on the form prepared for that purpose within 72 hours after the arrival and receipt
     of the consignment. The data mentioned in the form and the following documents for the
     consignment shall be attached:
       •   The original copy of the import permit.
       •   The original copy of the phytosanitary certificate.
       •   The original copy of any treatment certificate for the consignment (where necessary).
       •   Manifesto
       •   Bill of lading.
       •   Customs certificate.
       •   Certificate of origin.
       •   Delivery permit.
       •   Personal identification copy of the concerned party under a power of attorney or a valid
           bank authorization.
       •   Copy of the importer's record of the importing company.
       •   Any other documents required to be provided as per each regulated article.
  3- Quarantine inspector shall review the consignment's documents and set all the due costs
     according to the consignment's documents; such costs shall be collected before commencing
     the application of any of the quarantine procedures required for each consignment.
  4- Necessary actions requiring the submission of the manifesto issued by the maritime services to
     Plant Quarantine and translated within 36 hours as of the arrival of imported and transit
     consignments shall be taken.
  5- Quarantine inspectors may inspect the consignment on their own initiative upon its arrival if
     there is a possibility it is infested by pests that pose a threat to agriculture.
  6- The consignment shall be registered under the registration number recorded on the imported
     consignments registry.
  7- A committee of plant quarantine inspectors shall be established by the supervisor of the Import
     Department of Plant Quarantine to verify the identity of the consignment, to complete the visual
     quarantine inspection, to ascertain the extent of compliance with the Egyptian Plant Quarantine
     legislation and to remove the samples for laboratory examination if necessary.
  8- If the inspection lasts several days for a single consignment, the portions which have
     undergone inspection shall be recorded in the form prepared for such purpose and the
     inspections on the following day(s) on the form(s) prepared for such purpose. The inspected



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                  22/81
      quantities and the final inspection result shall be recorded in addition to the collection of the
      expenses that are due in advance.
  9- When examining plant consignments in which pests (pathogens - insects – grass seeds ,
     anomalous strange seeds etc.) are found and not identified, or are suspected to exist, by the
     quarantine inspectors, the samples shall be packed in appropriate packages, sealed and
     leaded with the seal of Plant Quarantine. A letter addressed to the Plant Quarantine Samples
     Coding Unit shall be attached to each sample in accordance with the form prepared for such
     purpose so as to send the samples to the authorities accredited by Plant Quarantine pursuant
     to the protocols concluded to determine their quarantine condition.
  10- The inspection committee shall, after completion of the visual examination, removal of the
      required samples and approving all requirements necessary for the consignment, tightly pack
      the consignment to ensure it will not be manipulated until the final results have been received.
      The concerned party shall provide all necessary supplies and all necessary facilities, and shall
      notify all concerned parties of the procedures to prove the case.
  11- All kinds of seeds, grains and plant parts imported for purposes other than cultivation or
      propagation that can be planted or propagated, such as zucchini kernel, bean seeds, carrot
      seeds, vicia calcarata seeds, etc., shall be released only after being treated with one of the
      approved methods to eliminate the embryo therein.
   Should the concerned party submit any indication that the consignment has been treated with one
   of the anti-germination methods, then samples shall be taken and sent for analysis to ensure that
   germination has been halted . In the light of the results, the necessary procedures should be
   taken.
  12- Upon examination of the imported consignments and if there is suspicion that they contain
      seeds of narcotic plants mixed therewith, a sample thereof shall be taken and sent to the
      Horticulture Research Institute - Department of flora and plant taxonomy for identification.
      Based on the analysis results, samples shall be disposed of as follows:
       -   Should the seeds concern a non-narcotic plant, the consignment shall be released only
           after completion of the screening process, the separation of those seeds from the
           consignment and the disposal of all the waste resulting therefrom under the supervision of
           quarantine inspectors.
       -   Should the seeds concern one of the narcotic plants, the consignment shall not be
           released; and the General Administration of the Narcotics Control and Port Authority shall
           be notified. The captain and the concerned party or its representative shall not open,
           change the features or dispose of the consignment until reception of the decision from the
           prosecutor and from the Plant Quarantine.
  13- If the consignment is infested with a dead quarantine (pest) and if the phytosanitary certificate
      includes evidence indicating that the fumigation process in the country of origin has been
      carried out, the consignment may be allowed to be released after all quarantine procedures
      have been completed. If there is no evidence on the phytosanitary certificate indicating that the
      fumigation process in the country of origin has been completed, the consignment shall be re-
      fumigated and the remaining quarantine procedures shall be carried out.
  14- If cotton seeds are found to be mixed with different agricultural consignments, such
      consignments shall be definitively rejected.
  15- If it is difficult to complete the quarantine procedures on an imported diplomatic parcel
      incoming at the port of arrival, there is no objection its being transferred under the quarantine
      reservation with the completion of all the procedures at the final receipt point. If the
      consignment fails to comply with the quarantine regulations, it shall be disposed of or re-
      exported at the expense of the party concerned.
  16- In the event of a safe agricultural consignment complying with quarantine legislation, there is
      no objection to its being granted a quarantine release visa upon the request of the party
      concerned or its representative to obtain a final release visa for the whole or part of the
      consignment; provided that the loading and storage of the consignment is carried out under the
      responsibility and knowledge of the party concerned inside or outside of the customs circuit.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                       23/81
  17- If the agricultural consignment complies with the quarantine legislation and was stored inside
      the customs circuit and the party concerned or its representative did not request the visa for
      the quarantine release and if it remained for more than 60 days as of the date of completion of
      the unloading, the consignment shall be re-inspected summarily (without taking samples) in
      order to ensure that it is free from any live insect infestation. However, if the consignment
      proves to be infested with live pests, it shall be processed according to the quarantine
      legislation. Samples may be taken for laboratory examination in the event that the presence of
      any other pests is suspected during the re-examination so as to ensure that the consignment
      was not infected during the storage period inside the customs circuit. The visual examination
      procedures shall be re-carried out, either for the entire consignment or part thereof, after 60
      days have elapsed for the consignment stored inside the customs circuit.
  18- Consignments that are reserved under the quarantine inside or outside the customs circuit and
      for which the final release is not required shall be examined summarily (without sampling) to
      ensure that they are free from live insects after 60 days have elapsed since the completion of
      the unloading, whether for the entire consignment or part thereof; provided that the inspection
      shall be re-carried out every 60 days while the reserved consignment is stored inside or
      outside the customs circuit.
  19- Should the party concerned make an official complaint about the result of the basic sample,
      the reference sample shall be used as basic sample after payment of all the necessary
      expenses. In any case, no new sample shall be taken and the result of the reference sample
      shall be final and irrevocable.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                  24/81
                                           Annex 9
                      Regarding Article 14 – Importation and Treatment
Controls for the adoption of new point of origin and/or re-evaluation of current points of origin
Phytosanitary requirements shall be established based on the pest risk analysis (PRA) of the
regulated items that are imported for the first time from a new origin or imported from an open origin if
the phytosanitary status has changed for this origin due to a change in the applicable requirements for
that origin. The pest risk evaluation shall be carried out under ISPMs as follows:
First, procedures for opening new point of origin:
New points of origin shall be opened upon the request of the competent authority of the country
wishing to export, the competent authority in the country wishing to import (Egyptian Plant Quarantine)
or that of any other authority wishing to import as follows:
    •   The exporting country shall submit a complete technical file of the commodity to be exported
        based on the questionnaire sent by the Central Administration of Plant Quarantine (CAPQ)
        and in accordance with Article VIII (1) (c) of the IPPC.
    •   The pests risk analysis (PRA) shall be carried out and the elements of risk management shall
        be determined in order to specify the phytosanitary requirements of importation.
    •   In case a field visit to the exporting country is needed to complete the PRA examination and to
        verify the adopted procedures and the phytosanitary system enforced in the country, the party
        wishing to export/import (to open the market) shall bear all the expenses for travelling,
        accommodation and travel allowances for the delegation carrying out the field visit.
    •   The findings of the PRA and field visit shall be submitted to the Plant Quarantine Committee
        for approval for finalizing the procedures of opening an origin.
Second, Revaluation of current points of origin:
A revaluation of an opened origin shall be made in the following cases:
1- To renew the importation of a faulty shipment infected with a pest of quarantine importance to the
   Egyptian counterpart.
2- In the event of a pest outbreak at regional or international level, the competent authority is entitled
   to suspend the import and re-evaluate the risks of the country of origin.
3- In the case of a change of route of the imported shipments.
4- Changes in the nature of the current origin due to manufacturing operations that do not prevent
   the infection of pests.
5- To import a new plant product from the point of origin.
In all such cases, the Egyptian Plant Quarantine is entitled to re-evaluate the origin and carry
out the above procedures.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      25/81
                                          Annex 10
                      Regarding Article 14 – Importation and Treatment
              Cases exempted from import permit and/or phytosanitary certificate

 Sr.                    Case                          Import permit         Phytosanitary
                                                                             certificate
   1   Imported wheat consignments              Import permit must be        exempted
                                                issued to avoid the
                                                importation of
                                                consignments from
                                                unaccredited origin
   2   Manufactured plant consignments          Import permit must be        exempted
       such as dehydrated onions or garlic      issued to avoid the
       and etc.                                 importation of
                                                consignments from
                                                unaccredited origin
   3   Manufactured wood consignments           Exempted                     exempted
       such as; MDF, HDF and Plywood
       only.
   4   Commercial cotton samples                Import permit must be        exempted
                                                issued to avoid the
                                                importation of
                                                consignments from
                                                unaccredited origin
   5   Ornamental plants seeds with a           Exempted                     exempted
       maximum of 50 g or 5 seeds and
       imported as parcels or accompanied
       by passengers, subject to the
       approval of the Horticulture Research
       Institute
   6   Wood packaging materials                 Exempted                     exempted
   7   Embedded consignments that have          Exempted                     exempted
       wooden parts such as sewing
       machines - hand tools, household
       items and others
   8   Exploitation consignments, seizures      Exempted                     exempted
       and customs clearance when items
       are allowed to be imported
   9   Shipwrecks (rafters, jars, etc.)         Exempted                     exempted
  10   Transient consignments (except if        Exempted                     exempted
       they concern free zones for
       manufacturing)
  11   Consignments for personal use when       Exempted                     exempted
       the items are allowed to be imported
       provided that their weight is not more
       than 50 kg except for propagation
       materials
  12   Returned consignments                    Exempted                     exempted




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                              26/81
                                Annex 11 - Importation and Treatment
                                    Tables of Quarantine Pests
                                       Table 1 – Article 16
                         Quarantine pests not allowed to enter into Egypt
  •    Table (1/a): Quarantine pests that are not recorded in Egypt and refused entry into Egypt:
                                          First: Insect pests

 No.          Scientific Name                  Common Name              Family         Order
  1    Aelia rostrata Boheman, 1852 Wheat bug                      Pentatomidae    Hemiptera
  2    All members of Family                                       Cynipidae       Hymenoptera
       Cynipidae
       Ampedus nigricollis (Herbst,    Nigrescent click beetle
  3                                                                Elateridae      Coleoptera
       1806)
  4    Anastrepha spp.                                             Tephritidae     Diptera
       Anomala flavipennis
  5                                                                Scarabaeidae    Coleoptera
       Burmeister, 1884
  6    Anthonomus spp.                                             Curculionidae   Coleoptera
  7    Aphis pomi DeGeer, 1773         Apple aphid                 Aphididae       Hemiptera
       Araecerus fasciculatus
  8                                    Coffee weevil               Anthribidae     Coleoptera
       (DeGeer, 1775)
  9    Bactrocera dorsalis (Hendel,    Oriental fruit fly          Tephritidae     Diptera
       1912)
       Bactrocera invadens Drew,
 10                                    Tropical fruit fly          Tephritidae     Diptera
       Tsuruta & White , 2005
 11    Blissus leucopterus (Say,       Chinch bug                  Blissidae       Hemiptera
       1832)
 12    Brochymena parva Rucke,         Rough stink bug             Pentatomidae    Hemiptera
       1946
       Brochymena quadripustulata      Four-humped stink bug
 13                                                                Pentatomidae    Hemiptera
       (Fabricius, 1775)
 14    Busseola fusca (Fuller, 1901)   African maize stalk borer   Noctuidae       Lepidoptera
       Calligrapha scalaris (LeConte,
 15                                   elm calligrapha              Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
       1824)
 16    Calligrapha similis Rogers,                                 Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
       1854
       Carpophilus lugubris (Murray,
 17                                  Dusky Sap beetle              Nitidulidae     Coleoptera
       1864)
 18    Cephus spp.                                                 Cephidae        Hymenoptera
 19    Ceratitis spp.                                              Tephritidae     Diptera
       Chelymorpha cassidea            Argus tortoise beetle
 20                                                                Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
       (Fabricius, 1775)
 21    Chilo spp.                                                  Crambidae       Lepidoptera
 22    Chinavia hilaris (Say, 1831)    Green stink bug             Pentatomidae    Hemiptera
       Conotrachelus nenuphar
 23                                    Plum curculio               Curculionidae   Coleoptera
       (Herbst, 1797)




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                               27/81
      Cosmopolites sordidus
 24                                   Banana weevil                Curculionidae   Coleoptera
      (Germar, 1824)
      Cryptocephalus vittatus         Trivittatus leaf beetle
 25                                                                Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
      Fabricius, 1775
      Cryptorhynchus goniocnemis      Mango twig Weevil
 26                                                                Curculionidae   Coleoptera
      (Marshall, 1926)
      Cydia nigricana (Fabricius,     Pea moth
 27                                                                Tortricidae     Lepidoptera
      1794)
 28   Cydia caryana (Fitch, 1856)     Hickory shuckworm moth       Tortricidae     Lepidoptera
      Cydia strobilella (Linnaeus,    Spruce seed moth
 29                                                                Tortricidae     Lepidoptera
      1758)
 30   Dacus spp.                                                   Tephritidae     Diptera
      Daktulosphaira vitifoliae
 31                                                                Phylloxeridae   Hemiptera
      (Fitch, 1855)
 32   Dasineura spp.                                               Cecidomyiidae   Diptera
      Deloyala guttata (Olivier,      Mottled Tortoise beetle
 33                                                                Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
      1790)
 34   Diabrotica spp.                                              Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
      Diaspidiotus perniciosus        San Jose scale
 35                                                                Diaspididae     Hemiptera
      (Comstock, 1881)
      Diaspis bromeliae (Kerner,      Pineapple scale
 36                                                                Diaspididae     Hemiptera
      1778)
 37   Diatreae spp.                                                Crambidae       Lepidoptera
      Duplaspidiotus tesseratus       Tessera scale
 38                                                                Diaspididae     Hemiptera
      (Grandpré & Charmoy, 1899)
 39   Dysdercus spp.                                               Pyrrhocoridae   Hemiptera
      Dysmicoccus grassii             Dysmicoccus grassii
 40                                                                Pseudococcidae Hemiptera
      (Leonardi, 1913)
      Dyspessa ulula (Borkhausen,     Garlic moth borer
 41                                                                Cossidae        Lepidoptera
      1790)
      Epidiaspis leperii (Signoret,   European pear scale
 42                                                                Diaspididae     Hemiptera
      1869)
      Epilachna varivestis Mulsant,   Mexican bean beetle
 43                                                                Coccinellidae   Coleoptera
      1850
      Epiphyas postvittana (walker,   Light brown apple moth
 44                                                                Tortricidae     Lepidoptera
      1863)
      Epitrix cucumeris (Harris,      Potato flea beetle
 45                                                                Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
      1851)
      Epitrix subcrinata (LeConte,    Western potato flea beetle
 46                                                                Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
      1857)
 47   Epitrix tuberis Gentner, 1944   Tuber flea beetle            Chrysomelidae   Coleoptera
      Eulecanium tiliae (Linnaeus,    Nut soft scale
 48                                                                Coccidae        Hemiptera
      1758)
      Eumerus strigatus (Fallén,      Lesser bulb fly
 49                                                                Syrphidae       Diptera
      1817)




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                               28/81
      Eupoecilia ambiguella             Vine moth
 50                                                              Tortricidae       Lepidoptera
      (Hübner, 1796)
      Eurygaster alternata (Say,        Sunn bug, wheat bug
 51                                                              Scutelleridae     Hemiptera
      1828)
      Eurygaster austriaca              wheat shield bug
 52                                                              Scutelleridae     Hemiptera
      (Schrank, 1776)
      Eurygaster integriceps Puton, Sunn pest, Senn pest
 53                                                              Scutelleridae     Hemiptera
      1881
      Eurygaster maura (Linnaeus,       shield-backed bug
 54                                                              Scutelleridae     Hemiptera
      1758)
 55   Foreign Epilachna spp.                                     Coccinellidae     Coleoptera
 56   Foreign Eurytoma spp.             Liger Eurytomid wasps    Eurotomidae       Hymenoptera
 57   Foreign Phylloxera spp.           Oak phylloxera           Phylloxeridae     Hemiptera
      Frankliniella cestrum Moulton, American flower thrips
 58                                                              Thripidae         Thysanoptera
      1926
      Frankliniella occidentalis        Western flower thrips
 59                                                              Thripidae         Thysanoptera
      (Pergande, 1895)
      Gastrophysa polygoni              Knotweed Leaf beetle
 60                                                              Chrysomelidae     Coleoptera
      (Linnaeus, 1758)
      Grapholita funebrana              plum fruit moth
 61                                                              Tortricidae       Lepidoptera
      (Treitschke, 1835)
      Grapholita inopinata              Manchurian fruit moth
 62                                                              Tortricidae       Lepidoptera
      (Heinrich, 1928)
      Grapholita molesta (Busck,        Oriental fruit moth
 63                                                              Tortricidae       Lepidoptera
      1916)
      Grapholita packardi (Zeller,      Cherry fruit worm
 64                                                              Tortricidae       Lepidoptera
      1875)
      Grapholita prunivora (Walsh,      plum moth
 65                                                              Tortricidae       Lepidoptera
      1868)
      Graphosoma rubrolineatum          Striped shield bug
 66                                                              Pentatomidae      Hemiptera
      (Westwood, 1837)
 67   Harmolita tritici (Fetch, 1859)   Wheat joint worm         Eurytomidae       Hymenoptera
      Hemiberlesia palmae               Tropical palm scale
 68                                                              Diaspididae       Hemiptera
      (Cockerell, 1893)
      Hemiberlesia popularum            Poplar scale
 69                                                              Diaspididae       Hemiptera
      (Marlatt, 1908)
      Keiferia lycopersicella           Tomato pinworm
 70                                                              Gellechiidae      Lepidoptera
      (Walsingham, 1897)
 71   Larinus spp.                                               Curculionidae     Coleoptera
 72   Laspeyrisia spp.                                           Tortricidae       Lepidoptera
      Lepidosaphes pistaciae            Yellow pistachio scale
 73                                                              Diaspididae       Hemiptera
      Archangelskaya, 1930
      Leptinotarsa decemlineata         Colorado potato beetle
 74                                                              Chrysomelidae     Coleoptera
      (Say, 1824)
 75   Leptoglossus spp.                                          Tephritidae       Diptera




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                               29/81
      Leucoptera malifoliella (Costa, Pear leaf blister moth
 76                                                              Lyonetiidae       Lepidoptera
      1836)
      Linepithema humile (Mayr,       Argentine ant
 77                                                              Formicidae        Hymenoptera
      1868)
      Macrodactylus subspinosus       Rose chafer
 78                                                              Scarabaeidae      Coleoptera
      (Fabricius, 1775)
      Mayetiola destructor (Say,      Hessian fly
 79                                                              Cecidomyiidae     Diptera
      1817)
      Melolontha melolontha           White grub cockchafer,
      (Linnaeus, 1758)                Cockchafer May bug,
 80                                                              Scarabaeidae      Coleoptera
                                      Common European
                                      cockchafer
      Merodon equestris (Fabricius, Narcissus bulb fly
 81                                                              Syrphidae         Diptera
      1794)
      Murgantia histrionica (Hahn,    Harle quin bug
 82                                                              Pentatomidae      Hemiptera
      1834)
 83   Otiorhynchus spp.                                          Curculionidae     Coleoptera
      Oulema melanopus                Cereal leaf beetle
 84                                                              Chrysomelidae     Coleoptera
      (Linnaeus, 1758)
      Oulema oryzae (Kuwayama,        Rice leaf beetle
 85                                                              Chrysomelidae     Coleoptera
      1931)
      Palmicultor palmarum            Palm, mealybug
 86                                                              Pseudococcidae Hemiptera
      (Ehrhorn, 1916)
      Pangaeus bilineatus (Say,       Burrowing, bug (USA)
 87                                                              Cydnidae          Hemiptera
      1825)
      Paralipsa gularis (Zeller,      Stored nut moth
 88                                                              Pyralidae         Lepidoptera
      1877)
      Pelidnota punctata (Linnaeus, grapevine beetle
 89                                                              Scarabaeidae      Coleoptera
      1758)
      Phyllopertha horticola          Garden chafer
 90                                                              Scarabaeidae      Coleoptera
      (Linnaeus, 1758)
      Phyllotreta nemorum             Striped flea beetle
 91                                                              Chrysomelidae     Coleoptera
      (Linnaeus, 1758)
 92   Phylloxera spp.                                            Phylloxeridae     Hemiptera
      Planococcus kraunhiae           Japanese Mealybug
 93                                                              Pseudococcidae Hemiptera
      (Kuwana, 1902)
      Popillia japonica Newman,       Japanese beetle, velvety
 94                                                              Scarabaeidae      Coleoptera
      1841                            chafer
 95   Rhagoletis spp.                                            Tephritidae       Diptera
 96   Rhopalosiphoninus spp.                                     Aphididae         Hemiptera
 97   Rhynchites spp.                                            Curculionidae     Coleoptera
 98   Rhynchophorus spp.                                         Curculionidae     Coleoptera
      Scirtothrips dorsalis Hood,     Cilli thrips or
 99                                                              Thripidae         Thysanoptera
      1919
                                      yellow tea thrips
 100 Sesamia spp.                                                Noctuidae         Lepidoptera



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                               30/81
        Setomorpha rutella Zeller,       Tropical tobacco moth
 101                                                                 Tineidae             Lepidoptera
        1852
        Spodoptera eridania (J.E.        Southern armyworm
 102                                                                 Noctuidae            Lepidoptera
        Smith, 1797) Added
        Spodoptera exempta (Walker, African armyworm
 103                                                                 Noctuidae            Lepidoptera
        1856) Added
        Spodoptera frugiperda (Stoll,    Fall armyworm
 104                                                                 Noctuidae            Lepidoptera
        1781) Added
        Sternochetus frigidus            Mango pulp weevil
 105                                                                 Curculionidae        Coleoptera
        (Fabricius, 1787)
        Sternochetus gravis              Mango pulp weevil
 106                                                                 Curculionidae        Coleoptera
        (Fabrisius, 1775)
        Sternochetus mangifera           Mango seed weevil
 107                                                                 Curculionidae        Coleoptera
        (Fabrisius, 1775)
        Targionia yuccarum               Armored scale
 108                                                                 Diaspididae          Hemiptera
        (Cockerell, 1898)
        Temnocheila virescens            bark-gnawing beetles
 109                                                                 Trogositidae         Coleoptera
        (Fabricius, 1775)
        Tetramesa maderae (Walker,       Wheat straw worm
 110                                                                 Eurotomidae          Hymenoptera
        1849)
        Thaumatotibia leucotreta         false codling moth
 111                                                                 Tortricidae          Lepidoptera
        (Meyrick, 1913)
        Thrpis palmi Karny, 1925         Melon thrips and oriental
 112                                                                 Thripidae            Thysanoptera
                                         thrips
        Trionymus utahensis              Utah Grass mealy bug
 113                                                                 Pseudococcidae Hemiptera
        (Cockerell, 1916)
 114 Trioza buxtoni Laing, 1924          Fig wax scale               Triozidae            Hemiptera
        Typophorus nigritus nigritus     Sweet potato leaf beetle
 115                                                                 Chrysomelidae        Coleoptera
        (Fabricius, 1801)
        Unaspis evonymi (Comstock,       Euonymus scale
 116                                                                 Diaspididae          Hemiptera
        1881)

                                             Second: Mites

 No.            Scientific Name                    Common Name                   Family            Order
        Acalitus phloeocoptes (Nalepa,     Plum tree bud mite
    1                                                                     Eriophyidae          Prostigmata
        1890)
    2 Aculops fuchsiae Keifer, 1972        Fuchsia gall mite              Eriophyidae          Prostigmata
        Brevipalpus chilensis Baker,       Chilean false red mite
    3                                                                     Tenuipalpidae        Prostigmata
        1949
        Eotetranychus carpini              Yellow spider mite
    4                                                                     Tetranychidae        Prostigmata
        (Oudemans, 1905)
        Eotetranychus populi (Koch,        Yellow poplar mite
    5                                                                     Tetranychidae        Prostigmata
        1838)
        Eotetranychus pruni                Garden spider mite
    6                                                                     Tetranychidae        Prostigmata
        (Oudemans, 1931)
        Eotetranychus sexmaculatus
    7                                      Six spotted spider mite        Tetranychidae        Prostigmata
        (Riley, 1890)



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                    31/81
 No.               Scientific Name                        Common Name            Family          Order
          Eotetranychus willamettei (Mc-
      8                                          Willamette mite             Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          Gregor, 1917)
          Oligonychus perditus Pritchard         Tetranychid mite
      9                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          & baker, 1955
          Phyllocoptruta musae Keifer,           Banana rust mite
     10                                                                      Eriophyidae     Prostigmata
          1955
          Schizotetranychus andropogoni Bamboo spider mite
     11                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          Hirst, 1926
          Tetranychus canadensis (Mc-            Four- spotted spider mite
     12                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          Gregor, 1950)
          Tetranychus lambi Pritchard &          Banana spider mite
     13                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          baker, 1955
          Tetranychus mcdanieli Mc-              Mc.Daniel spider mite
     14                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          Gregor, 1931
          Tetranychus pacificus                  Pacific spider mite
     15                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          McGregor, 1919
          Tetranychus schoenei                   Schoene spider mite
     16                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          McGregor, 1941
          Tetranychus tumidus Banks,             Tumid spider mite
     17                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          1900
          Tetranychus viennensis                 Fruit tree spider mite
     18                                                                      Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
          (Zacher, 1920)

                                                Third: plant diseases
                                                1-   Bacterial diseases

1.        Acidovorax avenae subsp. avenae
2.        Burkholderia gladioli pv. alliicola
3.        Burkholderia glumae = Pseudomonas glumae
4.        Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. insidiosus
5.        Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. nebraskensis
6.        Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus
7.        Curtobacterium flaccumfaciens pv. flaccumfaciens
8.        Curtobacterium flaccumfaciens pv. oortii=corynebacterium oortii
9.        Dickeya chrysanthemi = Erwinia chrysanthemi
10.       Dickeya dadanti = Pectobacterium chrysanthemi biovar 3 p.p
11.       Dickeya dianthicola = Erwinia chrysanthemia pv. dianthicola
12.       Dickeya solani
13.       Liberibacter africanus
14.       Liberibacter americanus
15.       Liberibacter asiaticus was Candidatus Liberibacter
16.       Liberibacter solanacearum was Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum
17.       P. cannabina pv. alisalensis
18.       Pantoea stewartii subsp. stewartii
19.       Pectobacterium betavasculorum
20.       Pectobacterium carotovorum subsp. brasiliensis
21.       Pseudomonas amygdali


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                  32/81
22.   Pseudomonas cerasi
23.   Pseudomonas cichorii
24.   Pseudomonas fuscovaginae
25.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. actinidiae
26.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. allii
27.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. apii
28.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. aptata
29.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. atrofaciens
30.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. coronafaciens
31.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola
32.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. morsprunorum
33.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. papulans
34.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. persicae
35.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. pisi
36.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. porri
37.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato
38.   Pseudomonas tolaasii
39.   Ralstonia solanacearum (Race 2) = Pseudomonas solanacearum
40.   Ralstonia solanacearum race 3 biovar2
41.   Ralstonia syzygii subsp. celebesensis =Bacillus clebense
42.   Xanthomonas albilineans.
43.   Xanthomonas arboricola pv. corylina
44.   Xanthomonas arboricola pv. fragariae
45.   Xanthomonas arboricola pv. pruni
46.   Xanthomonas axonopodies pv. vasculorum = X. campestris pv. vasculoru
47.   Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. allii
48.   Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. dieffenbachiae
49.   Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. malvacearum = X. campestris pv. malvacearum
50.   Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. phaseoli was Xanthomonas campestris pv. phaseoli (Xcp)
51.   Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. poinsettiicola
52.   Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. punicae
53.   Xanthomonas campestris pv. viticola
54.   Xanthomonas citri pv. mangiferaeindicae (Xanthomonas campestris pv. mangiferaeindicae)
55.   Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri = X. campestris citri
56.   Xanthomonas euvesicatoria
57.   Xanthomonas fragariae
58.   Xanthomonas gardneri
59.   Xanthomonas hortorum pv. carotae
60.   Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae = X. campestris pv. oryzae
61.   Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzicola = X. campestris pv. oryzicola
62.   Xanthomonas perforans
63.   Xanthomonas translucens pv. translucens was Xanthomonas translucens pv. graminis
64.   Xanthomonas vasicola pv. holcicola = Xanthomonas campestris pv. holcicola
65.   Xanthomonas vesicatoria
66.   Xylella fastidiosa and all sub species




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                             33/81
                                         2-   Fungal diseases

1.    Alternaria burnsii
2.    Alternaria citri
3.    Alternaria mali
4.    Alternaria vitis
5.    Apiosporina morbosa A1/10
6.    Ascochyta fabae = Didymella fabae
7.    Botryosphaeria laricina
8.    Botryosphaeria stevensii = Botryosphaeria obtusa
9.    Botrytis elliptica
10.   Botrytis hyacinthi
11.   Briosia ampelophaga
12.   Calonectria morganii
13.   Calostilbe striispora
14.   Ceratocystis fimbriata
15.   Cercospora angolensis = Phaeoramularia angolensis now Pseudocercospora angolensis
16.   Cercospora menthicola
17.   Cercospora thujina
18.   Cladosporium carpophilum
19.   Claviceps gigantean
20.   Claviceps purpurea
21.   Claviceps sorghi
22.   Colletotrichum trichellum
23.   Colletotrichum fragariae
24.   Colletotrichum gossypii = Glomerella gossypii (sexual phase)
25.   Colletotrichum linicola = C. lini = C. linicolum
26.   Colletotrichum omnivorum, most probably same as C. gloeosporoides
27.   Colletotrichum psidii
28.   Coniella diplodiella = Coniothyrium diplodiella = Charrinia diplodiella = Phoma diplodiella
29.   Cylindrocladium parasiticum = Cylindrocladium crotalariae
30.   Cylindrocladium spathiphylli
31.   Cytosphaera mangifera
32.   Davidiella populorum = Mycosphaerella populorum= Septoria musiva
33.   Davidiella dianthi = Mycosphaerella dianthi=Cladosporium dianthi =Cladosporiumechinulatum
34.   Diaporthe helianthi
35.   Diaporthe perniciosa = now Diaporthe eres
36.   Diaporthe vaccinia = Phomopsis vaccinii
37.   Didymella lycopersici = Ascochyta lycopersici =Phoma lycopersici
38.   Elsinoe ampelina
39.   Elsinoe australis = Sphaceloma australis
40.   Elsinoe fawcetti = Sphaceloma fawcettii
41.   Erythricium salmonicolor = Botryobasidium salmonicolor = Corticium salmonicolor
42.   Fomes igniarius = Phellinus igniarius
43.   Fusarium oxysporum f. sp cubense
44.   Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. albedinis
45.   Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. basilici


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      34/81
46.   Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. canariensis
47.   Gaeumannomycesgraminis f. sp. tritici
48.   Glomerella ciingulata
49.   Glomerella lagenarium = Colletotrichum lagenarium
50.   Guignardia citricarpa = Phyllosticta citricarpa
51.   Gymnosporangium asiaticum = Roestelia koreaensis
52.   Gymnosporangium clavipes
53.   Gymnosporangium globosum
54.   Gymnosporangium juniperi-virginianae
55.   Gymnosporangium yamadae
56.   Heterosporium echinulatum = Davidiella dianthi
57.   Ilyonectria radicicola
58.   Macrophoma mangiferae
59.   Melampsora medusa
60.   Monilinia fructicola = Monilinia fructigena
61.   Monilinia laxa
62.   Mycosphaerella angulata
63.   Mycosphaerella fijiensis
64.   Mycosphaerella musicola
65.   Nectria cinnabarina
66.   Neofusicoccum mangiferae
67.   Neonectria galligena = Neonectria ditissima
68.   Ophiognomonia clavigignenti-juglandacearum
69.   Ophiosphaerella herpotricha
70.   Ophiostoma wageneri
71.   Peronospora farinosa f. sp. betae
72.   Pestalotiopsis versicolor
73.   Phakopsora euvitis
74.   Phellinus weirii
75.   Phialophora cinerescens = Verticillium cinerescens
76.   Phoma andigena(andina) = Stagonosporopsis andigena
77.   Phyllosticta ampelicida
78.   Phyllosticta concentrica
79.   Phyllosticta solitaria
80.   Phymatotrichopsis omnivore = Phymatotrichum omnivorum
81.   Physalospora zeae = Botryosphaeria zea
82.   Phytophthora kernoviae
83.   Phytophthora lateralis
84.   Phytophthora ramorum
85.   Plasmopara halstedii
86.   Pseudopezicula tracheiphila
87.   Puccinia asparagi
88.   Puccinia gladioli
89.   Puccinia hemerocallidis
90.   Puccinia horiana
91.   Puccinia pittieriana


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                     35/81
92.   Puccinia sessilis
93.   Ramichloridium musae = Periconiella musae
94.   Ramularia lamii
95.   Ramularia menthicola
96.   Ramularia vallisumbrosae
97.   Rhizoctonia tuliparum
98.   Rhytisma vitis
99.   Roesleria subterranean
100. Rosellinia bunodes
101. Rosellinia necatrix
102. Sclerophthora macrospora
103. Sclerotinia subarctica
104. Septoria lycopersici
105. Septoria lycopersici var. malagutii
106. Septoria nodorum = Parastagonospora nodorum)
107. Septoria passerinii
108. Septoria petroselini
109. Sphaceloma perseae = Elsinoe perseae
110. Sphaceloma rosarum = Elsinoe rosarum
111. Sphaceloma arachidis
112. Sphaceloma fawcettii var. Scabiosae = Elsinoë fawcettii
113. Sphaceloma mangiferae = Denticularia mangiferae = Elsinoë mangiferae
114. Sphacelotheca cruenta
115. Sphaeropsis tumefaciens var. citrum
116. Sphaerotheca pannosa var. persica = Podosphaera pannosa
117. Stegophora ulmea
118. Stenocarpella macrospora = Diplodia macrospora
119. Stenocarpella maydis
120. Stromatinia gladioli
121. Synchytrium endobioticum
122. Thecaphora solani
123. Tilletia caries
124. Tilletia controversa
125. Tilletia indica
126. Urocystis gladiolicola
127. Uromyces aecidiiformis
128. Ustilaginoidella oedipigera
129. Ustilago affinis
130. Ustilago cynodontis
131. Ustilago syntherismae
132. Valsa cincta, var leucostoma
133. Valsa persoonii = Leucostoma persoonia
134. Venturia inaequalis
135. Venturia pyrina
136. Wilsonomyces carpophilus




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                     36/81
                                           3-      Nematodes

1     Aphelenchoides fragariae
2     Ditylenchus destructor
3     Ditylenchus dipsaci
4     Globodera pallida
5     Globodera rostochiensis
6     Heterodera fici
7     Longidorus diadecturus
8     Meloidogyne chitwoodi
9     Meloidogyne enterolobii
10    Meloidogyne fallax
11    Xiphinema americanum sensu stricto
12    Xiphinema rivesi

                                         4-     Virus Diseases

1.    Blackeye cowpea mosaic potyvirus
2.    Blueberry leaf mottle virus
3.    Blueberry scorch virus
4.    Brome mosaic virus
5.    Carnation latent virus
6.    Carnation ringspot virus
7.    Carnation vein mottle virus
8.    Cherry rasp leaf virus
9.    Chrysanthemum chloroitc mottle viroid
10.   Chrysanthemum ringspot virus
11.   Chrysanthemum stem necrosis virus
12.   Chrysanthemum stunt viroid
13.   Citrus leaf rugose virus
14.   Citrus ringspot virus
15.   Citrus tatter leaf virus
16.   Citrus vein enation virus Enamovirus
17.   Cowpea green vein banding virus
18.   Cowpea ring spot virus
19.   Gladiolus ringspot virus = Narcissus latent macluravirus
20.   Grapevine chrome mosaic virus
21.   Grapevine corky bark-associated
22.   Grapevine fleck virus
23.   Iris mild mosaic virus
24.   Iris severe mosaic virus
25.   Maize chlorotic mottle virus
26.   Papaya mosaic virus
27.   Pea early browning virus
28.   Pea enation mosaic virus
29.   Peach Little Virus = probably Peach little
30.   Peach mosaic virus
31.   Peach wart virus = Peach wart agent


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                     37/81
32.   Peach X Virus
33.   Peach Yellow Bud Mosaic
34.   Pepino mosaic virus
35.   Plum Line Pattern Virus
36.   Potato Spindle Tuber viroid
37.   Potato yellow dwarf virus
38.   Potato yellow vein virus
39.   Potato yellowing virus
40.   Raspberry leaf curl virus
41.   Raspberry ringspot virus
42.   Strawberry crinkle virus
43.   Strawberry latent C virus
44.   Strawberry mild yellow edge virus
45.   Sugar cane dwarf virus = Sugarcane dwarf agent
46.   Sugar Cane Fiji Virus = Sugarcane Fiji disease Fijivirus
47.   Sunflower Rugose Mosaic Virus = Sunflower crinkle Umbravirus
                                             Phytoplasma
48.   Candidatus mali
49.   Candidatus pyri
50.   Candidatus solani
51.   Candidatus vitis
52.   Peach rosette phytoplasma
53.   Peach yellows phytoplasma
54.   Phytoplasma ulmi =Elm phloem necrosis
55.   Potato purple-top wilt phytoplasma
56.   Western X-disease phytoplasma = Phytoplasma pruni

                                           Fourth: weeds

1.    Acroptilon repens (Russian knapweed)
2.    Agrostemma githago (Corn Cockle)
3.    Ambrosia artemisiifolia (common ragweed)
4.    Ambrosia trifida (great ragweed)
5.    Calystegia sepium (great bindweed)
6.    Carpobrotus edulis (Hottentot fig)
7.    Coronilla varia L. (Crown Vetch)
8.    Cortaderias elloana ( pampas grass)
9.    Crotalaria spp. (Crotolaria)
10.   Hydrophila polysperma (dwarf hygrophila)
11.   Saponaria spp. (Cow Cockle)
12.   Sicyo sangulotus (burcucumber)
13.   Solidago Canadensis (Canada goldenrod)
14.   Sophora alopecurides L. (Sophora)
15.   Thlaspi arvense (Field pennycress)
                                             Drug weeds
1.    Argemone munita (Prickly poppy)
2.    Cannabis spp. (hemp)



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                     38/81
3.         Papavera spp. (Poppy) {except Papaver rhoeas}
                                                 Parasitic weeds
1.         Aeginetia spp. L (prosea)
2.         Alectra spp. Th. (yellow witchweed)
3.         Striga spp. (witch weed)

       •     Table (1/b): Quarantine pests that are recorded in Egypt and declined entry into Egypt:
                                               First: insect pests

 No.                 Scientific Name                      Common Name                   Family          Order
      1 Anarsia lineatella Zeller, 1839          Peach twig borer                  Gelechiidae      Lepidoptera
           Bectorecera zonata (Sounders,
      2                                          Peach fruit fly                   Tephritidae      Diptera
           1842)
           Cephus pygmeus (Linnaeus,             European wheat stem saw fly
      3                                                                            Cephidae         Hymenoptera
           1767)
           Ceratitis capitata (Wiedemann,        Mediterranean fruit fly
      4                                                                            Tephritidae      Diptera
           1824)
      5 Cydia pomonella (Linnaeus, 1758) Codling moth                              Tortricidae      Lepidoptera
      6 Dysaphis tulipae (Boyer, 1841)           Tulip bulb aphid                  Aphididae        Hemiptera
           Insignorthezia insignis (Browne,      Green house orthezia
      7                                                                            Ortheziidae      Hemiptera
           1887)
           Lobesia botrana (Denis &              Grape berry moth
      8                                                                            Tortricidae      Lepidoptera
           Schiffermüller, 1775)
           Myiopardalis pardalina (Bigot,
      9                                          Melon fly                         Tephritidae      Diptera
           1891)
           Nipaecoccus nipae (Maskell,           Coconut mealy bug or spiked
     10                                                                            Pseudococcidae Hemiptera
           1893)                                 mealybug
                                                 rhinoceros beetle scarabeid
     11 Oryctes boas (Fabricius, 1775)                                             Scarabaeidae     Coleoptera
                                                 oryctes boas
           Palmaspis phoenicis                   Desert pit scale or date palm pit
     12                                                                            Ortheziidae      Hemiptera
           (Ramachandra Rao, 1922)               scale
           Parabemisia myricae (Kuwana,          bayberry white fly
     13                                                                            Aleyrodidae      Hemiptera
           1927)
           Pseudococcus comstocki
     14                                          Comstock mealy bug                Psudococcidae    Hemiptera
           (Kuwana, 1902)
           Pseudococcus maritimus
     15                                          Grape and pear mealy bug          Pseudococcidae Hemiptera
           (Ehrhorn, 1900)
           Rhynchophorus ferrugineus
     16                                          Red palm weevil                   Dryophthoridae   Coleoptera
           (Olivier, 1790)
     17 Silba virescens Macquart, 851            Fig black fly                     Tephritidae      Diptera
           Sitona cylindricollis (Fabricius,     Sweet clover weevil
     18                                                                            Curculionidae    Coleoptera
           1840)
     19 Tuta absoluta (Meyrick, 1917)            South American tomato moth        Gelechiidae      Lepidoptera

                                                 Second: Mites

    No.              Scientific Name                               Common Name        Family            Order
1          Aceria sheldoni (Ewing, 1937)         Citrus bud mite                 Eriophyidae        Prostigmata


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                        39/81
      Brevipalpus lewisi (Mc Gregor,
2                                             Citrus flat mite      Tenuipalpidae   Prostigmata
      1949)
      Bryobia rubrioculus (Scheuten,
3                                             Brown mite            Tetranychidae   Prostigmata
      1857)
4     Epitrimerus pyri (Nalepa, 1892)         Pear rust mite        Eriophyidae     Prostigmata
      Phyllocoptruta oleivora
5                                             Citrus rust mite      Eriophyidae     Prostigmata
      (Ashmead, 1879)

                                         Third: plant diseases

                                          1- Bacterial diseases

1.    Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. vesicatoria and Xanthomonas vesicatoria
2.    Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis

                                         2-     Fungal diseases

 1.   Cochlioblus setariae
 2.   Ganoderma lucidm
 3.   Neoscytalidium dimidiatum
 4.   Tilletia barclayana

                                              3-    Nematodes

1.    Anguina tritici
2.    Aphelenchoides besseyi
3.    Ditylenchus angustus
4.    Helicotylenchus spp. and Helicotylenchus dihystera
5.    Heterodera glycines
6.    Hirschmanniella spp. other than H. gracilis de Man.
7.    Hoplolaimus spp
8.    Meloidogyne spp
9.    Paratrichodorus and Trichodorus spp
10.   Pratylenchus spp.
11.   Radopholus similis
12.   Rotylenchulus reniformis
13.   Xiphinema bricolense

                                         4-        Virus Diseases

1.    Apple chlorotic leaf spot virus
2.    Apple mosaic virus Ilavirus
3.    Arabis Mosaic Virus
4.    Banana bract mosaic virus
5.    Banana bunchy top virus
6.    Banana streak virus
7.    Barley stripe mosaic virus
8.    Bean common mosaic virus
9.    Bean yellow mosaic virus
10.   Beet necrotic yellow vein virus,
11.   Citrus tristeza virus
12.   Cucurbit yellow stunting disorder virus

Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                        40/81
13.   Fig Potyvirus
14.   Grapevine fanleaf virus
15.   Grapevine leaf-roll virus
16.   Olive latent ringspot virus Olive latent virus 1, 2 and 3
17.   Onion yellow dwarf virus
18.   Papaya ringspot virus
19.   Pea seed-borne mosaic virus
20.   Peach rosette mosaic virus
21.   Peanut mottle virus
22.   Plum pox virus
23.   Prune dwarf virus
24.   Prunus necrotic ringspot virus
25.   Red clover vein mosaic virus
26.   Strawberry ring-spot Virus
27.   Strawberry vein banding virus
28.   Tobacco ringspot virus
29.   Tomato ringspot virus
30.   Wheat dwarf virus
31.   Wheat streak rymovirus

                                              Phytoplasma

32.   Palm lethal yellowing phytoplasma = Phytoplasma palmae
33.   Phytoplasma prunorum (Apricot chlorotic leafroll phytoplasma)

                                            Fourth: weeds

                                         Parasitic weeds
1     Cuscuta spp (dodder) { except C. pedicellata, C. planiflora, C. epilinum and C. campestris }
2     Orobanche spp (Broomrape) { except O. crenata, O. aegyptiaca, O. ramosa, O. minor and O.
      cernua}




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                  41/81
                                       Table 2 – Article 17
             Plants and agricultural products infested with pests recorded in Egypt
                     that are refused entry to Egypt unless they are treated
                         with techniques approved by Plant Quarantine
                                           First: Insect pests

 No.            Scientific name                 Common name                 Family         Order
    1 Ahasverus advena (Waltl, 1834)         Dried stored beetle     Sivanidae          Coleoptera
    2 Alphitobius diaperinus (panzer,        Lesser meal             Tenebrionidae      Coleoptera
      1796)                                  worm & little beetle
    3 Alphitobius laevigatus (Fabricius,     Black fungus beetle     Tenebrionidae      Coleoptera
      1781)
    4 Aphodius lividus(Oiivier, 1789)        Dung beetle             Scarabaeidae       Coleoptera
    5 Apomyelois ceratoniae (Zeller,         Carob moth              Pyralidae          Lepidoptera
      1839)
    6 Asterolecanium pustulans               Oleander pit scale      Asteroiecaniidae   Hemiptera
      (Cockerell, 1892)
    7 Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius, 1889)       Silver leaf white fly   Aleyrodidae        Hemiptera
    8 Carpocoris purpureipennis (De          Black – shouldered      Pentatomidae       Hemiptera
      Geer, 1773)                            shield
    9 Ceroplastes floridensis Comstock,      Florida Soft scale      Coccidae           Hemiptera
      1881
  10 Ceroplastes rusci (Linnaeus, 1758) Fig scale                    Coccidae           Hemiptera
  11 Cryptoblabes gnidiella (Millière,       Citrus pyralid          Pyralidae          Lepidoptera
     1867)
  12 Cryptophagus affinis Sturm, 1845        Foreign grain beetle    Cryptophagidae     Coleoptera
  13 Drosophila melanogaster Meigen,         Common fruit fly        Drosophilidae      Diptera
     1830
  14 Egyptian members of family              Antlike flower beetle   Anthicidae         Coleoptera
     Anthicidae
  15 Egyptian members of family              Tiger beetle            Carabidae          Coleoptera
     Cicindelinae
  16 Egyptian members of family              Checkered beetle        Cleridae           Coleoptera
     Cleridae
  17 Egyptian members of family              Water Boatmen           Corixidae          Hemiptera
     Corixidae
  18 Egyptian members of family              Carpet and hide         Dermestidae        Coleoptera
     Dermestidae                             beetles
  19 Egyptian members of family              Predaceous diving       Dytiscidae         Coleoptera
     Dytiscidae                              beetles
  20 Egyptian members of family              Webspinners             Embidae            Embioptera
     Embidae                                 insect
  21 Egyptian members of family              True loopers            Geometridae        Lepidoptera
     Geomertridae                            measuring worms
  22 Egyptian members of family              Dung beetles            Histeridae         Coleoptera
     Histeridae




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                    42/81
  23 Egyptian members of family          Sap beetles              Nitidulidae          Coleoptera
     Nitidulidae
  24 Egyptian members of family          Scuttle Flies            Phoridae             Diptera
     Phoridae
  25 Egyptian members of family          Minute Black             Scatopsidae          Diptera
     Scatopsidae                         Scavenger Flies
  26 Egyptian members of family          Rove beetles             Staphylinidae        Coleoptera
     Staphylinidae
  27 Egyptian members of order                                    All families         Collembola
     Collembola
  28 Egyptian members of subfamily       Seed beetle              Chrysomelidae        Coleoptera
     Bruchinae
  29 Egyptian spp. attacking woolen                               Tineidae             Lepidoptera
     material from family Tineidae
  30 Egyptian spp. of Balaninus          Corn weevil              Curculionidae        Coleoptera
  31 Egyptian spp. of Calandra                                    Curculionidae        Coleoptera
  32 Egyptian spp. of Empoasca           Leaf hopper              Cicadellidae         Hemiptera
  33 Egyptian spp. of Ephestia           Stored product           Pyralidae            Lepidoptera
                                         moths
  34 Egyptian spp. of Laemophloeus       Rusty bark beetle        Laemophloeidae       Coleoptera
     spp.
  35 Egyptian spp. of order Psocoptera   Book & bark rice         All families         Psocoptera
  36 Egyptian spp. of order Thysanura    Silver fish              Egyptian families    Thysanura
                                         &bristle tails
  37 Egyptian spp. of Pyralis            Cotton seed moths        Pyralidae            Lepidoptera
  38 Egyptian spp. of Sitona                                      Curculionidae        Coleoptera
     (except Sitona cylendricollis       Root weevil
     (Fahr.)
  39 Egyptian spp. of Tribolum           flour beetles            Tenebrionidae        Coleoptera
  40 Egyptian spp. of wood borers                                 different Egyptian   Different
                                                                  families             orders
  41 Eristalis aeneus (Scopoli, 1763)    Aeneus fly               Syrphidae            Diptera
  42 Eristalis tenax (Linnaeus, 1758)    Drone fly or rattailed   Syrphidae            Diptera
                                         maggot
  43 Euborellia annulipes (Lucas, 1847) Ring legged earwing       Forficulidae         Dermaptera
  44 Eysarcoris ventralis (Westwood,     Til pod bug              Pentatomidae         Hemiptera
     1837)
  45 Forficula auricularia Linnaeus,     Common earwing           Forficulidae         Dermaptera
     1758
  46 Galleria mellonella (Linnaeus,      Greater wax moth or      Pyralidae            Lepidoptera
     1758)                               bee
  47 Gibbium psylloides (Czenpinski,     Spider beetle            Ptinidae             Coleoptera
     1778)
  48 Gnatocerus cornutus (Fabricius,     The broad – horned       Tenebrionidae        Coleoptera
     1798)                               flour beetle




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                   43/81
  49 Haplothrips cahirensis (Trybom,       Pit & soft scale      Phalaeothripidae   Thysanopte
     1911)                                                                          ra
  50 Imatismus vilosus                     Eucalyptus beetles    Tenebrionidae      Coleoptera
     (HaagRutenberg, 1870)
  51 Labidura riparia (Pallas, 1773)       Riparian earwing      Labiduridae        Dermaptera
  52 Lasioderma Serricorne (Fabricius,     Cigarette beetle      Ptinidae           Coleoptera
     1792)
  53 Latheticus oyrzae Waterhouse,         Long headed flour     Tenebrionidae      Coleoptera
     1880                                  beetle
  54 Latridius minutus (Linnaeus, 1767) Minute scavenger         Latridiidae        Coleoptera
                                        beetle
  55 Lyonetia clerkella (Linnaeus, 1758) Apple and peach leaf Lyonetiidae           Lepidoptera
                                         miner
  56 Maconellicoccus hirsutus (Green,      Pink hibiscus mealy   Pseudococcidae     Hemiptera
     1908)                                 bug
  57 Nezara viridula (Linnaeus, 1758)      Green stink bug       Pentatomidae       Hemiptera
  58 Nipaecoccus viridis (Newstead,        Globular mealy bug    Pseudococcidae     Hemiptera
     1894)
  59 Oryzaephilus surinamensis             Surinam beetle &      Silvanidae         Coleoptera
     (Linnaeus, 1758)                      Saw toothed grain
                                           beetle
  60 Palorus ratzeburgi (Wissmann,         Small – eyed flour    Tenebrionidae      Coleoptera
     1848)                                 beetle
  61 Palpita vitrealis (Rossi, 1794)       Olive leaf moth       Pyralidae          Lepidoptera
  62 Paropta l-nigrum (BethuneBaker,       Salix stem - barer    Cossidae           Lepidoptera
     1894)
  63 Phthorimea operculella (Zeller,       Potato tuber worm or Gelechiidae         Lepidoptera
     1873)                                 moth
  64 Planococcus citri (Risso, 1813)       Common mealy          Pseudococcidae     Hemiptera
                                           bug &
                                           citrus mealy bug
  65 Planococcus ficus (Signoret, 1875) Grape mealy bug          Pseudococcidae     Hemiptera
  66 Plodia interpunctella (Hübner,        Indian meal moth      Pyralidae          Lepidoptera
     1813)                                 or
                                           meal worm moth
  67 Pseudococcus longispinus              Targo & tozz.         Pseudococcidae     Hemiptera
     (Targioni Tozzetti, 1867)             Long- tailed mealy
                                           bug
  68 Sitotroga cerealella (Oliver, 1789)   Angormers Grain       Gelechiidae        Lepidoptera
                                           moth
  69 Stegobium paniceum (Linnaeus,         Bread beetle& drug    Ptinidae           Coleoptera
     1758)                                 store beetle
  70 Tenebrio molitor Linnaeus, 1758       Yellow meal worm      Tenebrionidae      Coleoptera
                                           beetle
  71 Tenebroides mauritanicus              Cadelle beetle        Tenebrionidae      Coleoptera
     (Linnaeus, 1758)
  72 Thrips simplex (Morison, 1930)        Gladiolus thrips      Thripidae          Thysanopte



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                             44/81
                                                                                       ra
     73 Thrips tabaci (Lindeman, 1889)         Cotton thrips or                        Thysanopte
                                               onion thrips           Thripidae        ra
     74 Typhaea stercorea (Linnaeus,           Hairy fungus beetle    Mycetophagidae   Coleoptera
        1758)
     75 Virachola livia (Klug, 1834)           Pomegranate worm       Lycanidae        Lepidoptera
     76 Vryburgia amaryllidis (Bouche,         Lily bulb mealy bug    Pseudococcidae   Hemiptera
        1837)
     77 Zeuzera pyrina (Linaeus, 1761)         Apple stem horned      Cossidae         Lepidoptera
                                               moth
     78 Zophosis abbreviate Solier, 1834       Abbreviation darkling Tenebrionidae     Coleoptera
                                               beetle
     79 Zophosis punctata Brulle, 1823         Punctual beetle        Tenebrionidae    Coleoptera

                                               Second: Mites

 No.               Scientific name                Common name               Family          Order
      1 Brevipalpus californicus (Banks,       Citrus flat mite       Tenuipalpidae     Prostigmata
        1904)
      2 Brevipalpus obovatus Donnadieu,        Scarlet tea mite       Tenuipalpidae     Prostigmata
        1875
      3 Brevipalpus Phoenicis (Geijskes,       False spider mite      Tenuipalpidae     Prostigmata
        1939)
      4 Cenopalpus lanceolatisetae (Attiah, Plum spider mite          Tenuipalpidae     Prostigmata
        1956)
      5 Cenopalpus Pulcher (Canestrini &       Scarlet flat mite      Tenuipalpidae     Prostigmata
        Fanzago, 1876)
      6 Colomerus vitis (Pagenstecher,         Grape erineum mite     Eriophyidae       Prostigmata
        1857)
      7 Eriophyes pyri (Pagenstecher,          Pear leaf blister mite Eriophyidae       Prostigmata
        1857)
      8 Eutetranychus africanus (Tucker,       Citrus brown mite      Tetranychidae     Prostigmata
        1926)
      9 Eutetranychus orientalis (Klein,       Oriental spider mite   Tetranychidae     Prostigmata
        1936)
     10 Panonychus ulmi (Koch, 1936)           European red mite      Tetranychidae     Prostigmata
     11 Rhizoglyphus echinopus (Fumouze Bulb mite                     Aceridae          Astigmata
        & Robin, 1868)
     12 Tetranychus urticae Koch, 1836         Beans mite             Tetranychidae     Prostigmata

                                               Third: weeds

                                           Weeds recorded in Egypt
(Its number shall not exceed 13 grains/kg whether for one of such types (separately or gathered)

1.      Avena fatua L. (wild oat)
2.      Avena sterilis L. (winter wild oat)
3.      Commelina diffusa (spreading dayflower)
4.      Convolvulus arvensis (bindweed)


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                 45/81
5.       Fallopia convolvalus (Black bindweed)
6.       Ipomoea (carica, eriocarpa,hederaceae and purpurea).
7.       Lolium temulentum (ryegrass).
8.       Oryza longistaminata (perennial wild rice)
9.       Sorghum halepense (L) Pers (Johnson grass)

                                          Table 3 – Article 18
Regulations for permitting the entry of the plant and plant products stated if they are infested with the
pests specified in the second column and after they have been treated with the eradication methods
                                    specified in the fourth column.

 Sr.           Host            Infestation            Treatment              Treatment specification
     1             Wheat    Infected with        mechanical separation   1. Carrying out the sifting or
                            sclerotia due to                                chromatography
                            fungi causing the                               separately or within the
                            argot disease by                                process of
                            not more than                                   manufacturing.
                            0.05%                                        2. Withdrawing the plant
                                                                            disease from the wheat
                                                                            through separate sifting,
                                                                            or by a rough thumping
                                                                            resulting in a form of
                                                                            sifting within the process
                                                                            of industrialization
                                                                            so as to make sure they
                                                                            are free of the fungus.
                                                                         3. If there is a match, the
                                                                            resulting waste shall be
                                                                            destroyed.
                            Infected with                                1. Carrying out the sifting
                            ambrosia seeds                                  separately.
                            by not more than                             2. Taking a sample of the
                            10 seeds per kg                                 wheat resulting from the
                                                                            sifting process to ensure
                                                                            that it is free from the
                                                                            ambrosia seeds.
                                                                         3. The waste resulting from
                                                                            the sifting process shall
                                                                            be destroyed.
                            Infected by more                             1- Carrying out the sifting
                            than 25 seeds                                   within the process of
                            per kg of a                                     manufacturing.
                            quarantine weed                              2- The waste resulting from
                            seeds listed in                                 the sifting process shall
                            Table 2 of Annex                                be destroyed
                            11
     2        yellow corn   1-Infected by        mechanical separation   1. Carrying out the sifting or
                            more than 25                                    chromatography
                            seeds per kg of                                 separately or within the
                            the quarantine                                  process of
                            weed seeds listed                               manufacturing.
                            in Table 2 in                                2. Withdrawing the plant
                            Annex 11                                        disease from the wheat
                                                                            through separate sifting,
                                                                            or by a rough thumping
                                                                            resulting in a form of
                                                                            sifting within the


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      46/81
 Sr.        Host              Infestation          Treatment             Treatment specification
                                                                         industrial process so as
                                                                         to make sure it is free of
                                                                         the fungus.
                                                                      3. If there is a match, the
                                                                         resulting waste shall be
                                                                         destroyed.
                           2- Infected with                           1. Carrying out the sifting
                           the ambrozia                                  separately.
                           seeds by not                               2. Taking a sample of the
                           more than 10                                  corn resulting from the
                           seeds per kg                                  sifting process to ensure
                                                                         that it is free from the
                                                                         ambrosia seeds.
                                                                      3. The waste resulting from
                                                                         the sifting process shall
                                                                         be destroyed.
   3        Soyabean       1- Infected with   mechanical separation   1- The sifting process shall
                              white mold                                 be conducted separately.
                              disease                                 2- Samples of the infected
                                                                         soyabean weeds after
                                                                         the sifting process shall
                                                                         be withdrawn to ensure
                                                                         that they are free from
                                                                         white mold disease.
                                                                      3- The waste resulting from
                                                                         the sifting process shall
                                                                         be destroyed.
                           2- Infected with                           1- The sifting process shall
                              ambrosia                                   be conducted separately.
                              seeds by not                            2- Samples of the infected
                              more than 10                               soybean weeds resulting
                              seeds per kg                               from the sifting process
                                                                         shall be withdrawn to
                                                                         ensure that they are free
                                                                         from ambrosia seeds.
                                                                      3- The waste resulting from
                                                                         the screening process
                                                                         shall be destroyed.
   4     Manufactured      A- Timber          Fumigation              Fumigation with methyl
                  wood        damaged by                              bromide gas:
         consignments         wood borers                             First: under conditions of
        (such as wood         or termite                              normal air pressure:
             slabs with                                               1- In rooms or under covers
            rhytidome,                                                    with a dose of 42 g/m³
       wood, furniture,                                                   for 16 h at 21° C or
                   etc.)                                                  more.
                                                                      2- 80 g/m³ for 16 h at from
                                                                          4.5° C to 20° C
                                                                      Second: under a pressure of
                                                                      66 cm Hg:
                                                                      1- 64 g/m³ for 3 h at 21° C
                                                                          or more.
                                                                      2- 64 g/m³ for 4 h at 4.5° C
                                                                          to 20 °C




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                 47/81
 Sr.           Host                Infestation          Treatment            Treatment specification
                              B- Timber           Fumigation in addition   Treatment by fumigation by
                                 damaged by       to one of the other      one of the previous methods
                                 powderpost       treatment methods        in A then:
                                 beetle                                    - Hot air treatment at
                                                                               80° C for 10 h.
     5                 Un-    Infested with any   Treatment by             Treatment by fumigation by
           manufactured       kind of wood        fumigation in addition   one of the previous methods
              timber logs     borers or termite   to one of the methods    in A then:
             (e.g., full or   breeder or          used for other cases     1- Supervision of the
             fragmented       combination of                                   manufacturing process
                    trees,    them                                             and waste disposal.
          uncircumcised                                                    2- Hot water treatment at
            or rhytidome                                                       80° C for 3 to 6 h.
                    trees)                                                 3- Hot air treatment at 80°
                                                                               C for 10 h.
                                                                           4- Hot water steam
                                                                               treatment at 21° C for
                                                                               10 h
     7       Commercial       ------------        fumigation               Fumigation by methyl
          cotton samples                                                   bromide at a dose of 64 g/m³
                                                                           for two hours at 66 cm Hg.
                                                                           Or under normal atmospheric
                                                                           pressure fumigation with
                                                                           methyl bromide at a dose of
                                                                           48 g/m³ for 24 h

                                       Table 4 – Article 19
     Pests that are banned from entering the country via seeds and plants for agriculture and
                                           propagation

      1- Bacterial

1.       Agrobacterium tumefaciens
2.       Agrobacterium vitis
3.       Burkholderia gladioli pv. gladioli
4.       Dickeya sp.
5.       Dickeya zeae = Erwinia chrysanthemi pv. zeae
6.       Erwinia amylovora
7.       Pectobacterium atrosepticum = Erwinia caratovora subsp. aroseptica
8.       Pectobacterium carotovorum subsp. carotovorum
9.       Pseudomonas savastanoi pv. savastanoi
10.      Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae
11.      Spiroplasma citri

      2- Fungi

1.       Ceratocystis paradoxa
2.       Cochliobolus carbonum = Drechslera carbonum = Helminthosporium carbonum
3.       Cochliobolus heterostrophus = Bipolaris maydis=Drechslera maydis=Helminthosporium maydis
4.       Colletotrichum dematium
5.       Colletotrichum gloeosporioides = Glomerella cingulata
6.       Colletotrichum graminicola = Glomerella graminicola
7.       Colletotrichum lindemuthianum = Glomerella lindemuthiana


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                    48/81
8.    Colletotrichum musae = Gloeosporium musarum = Myxosporium musae
9.    Colletotrichum truncatum = Vermicularia truncata
10.   Cryptosporella viticola = Diaporthe viticola = Diplodia viticola = Phoma viticola = Phomopsis
      viticola
11.   Cycloconium oleaginum = Spilocaea oleaginea = Fusicladium oleagineum
12.   Diaporthe phaseolorum var sojae = Phomopsis sojae
13.   Eutypa lata = Libertella blepharis (anamorph)
14.   Fusarium moniliforme var. subglutinans = Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans
15.   Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cepae
16.   Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lilii
17.   Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. psidii
18.   Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. apii
19.   Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. carthami
20.   Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cumini
21.   Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. dianthi
22.   Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. fragariae
23.   Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. gladioli
24.   Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. tulipae
25.   Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. vasinfectum
26.   Gibberella aveavenacea
27.   Gibberella zea
28.   Gloeosporium thuemenii
29.   Kabatiella caulivora = Gloeosporium caulivorum
30.   Kutilakesa pironii = Nectriella pironii
31.   Magnaporthe oryzae = Magnaporthe grisea = Pyricularia grisea= Pyricularia oryzae
32.   Mauginiella scaettae
33.   Mycosphaerella fragariae = Sphaerella fragariae
34.   Mycosphaerella linicola
35.   Mycosphaerella macrospora
36.   Mycosphaerella pyri
37.   Mycosphaerella zeae-maydis = Peyronellaea zeae-maydis
38.   Peronosclerospora maydis
39.   Peronosclerospora philippinensis
40.   Peronosclerospora sacchari
41.   Peronosclerospora sorghi
42.   Peronospora farinose f. sp. spinaciae
43.   Peronospora lamii
44.   Phoma tracheiphila
45.   Phomopsis obscurans
46.   Phyllosticta capitalensis = Guignardia mangiferae
47.   Phyllosticta dracaenae
48.   Phyllosticta musarum
49.   Phytophthora cactorum
50.   Phytophthora citricola
51.   Phytophthora citrophthora
52.   Phytophthora erythroseptica


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                   49/81
53.     Phytophthora fragariae
54.     Phytophthora nicotianae
55.     Phytophthora palmivora
56.     Plasmopara viticola
57.     Pleospora betae = Phoma betae = Phoma spinaciae = Phyllosticta betae = Phyllosticta
        spinaciae
58.     Podosphaera leucotricha = Sphaerotheca leucotricha
59.     Pseudocercospora rhapisicola
60.     Pseudocercospora vitis
61.     Sclerotinia bulborum
62.     Sclerotinia narcissicola
63.     Sclerotinia polyblastis
64.     Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
65.     Sclerotinia sclerotorum
66.     Septoria dianthi
67.     Septoria gladioli
68.     Septoria hydrangea
69.     Septoria iridis
70.     Septoria lavandulae
71.     Sphaceloma poinsettiae
72.     Spilocaea oleagina
73.     Stagonospora curtisii
74.     Uncinula necator = Erysiphe necator
75.     Urocystis agropyri
76.     Urocystis cepulae = Urocystis colchici
77.     Ustilago scitaminea = Sporisorium Scitamineum
78.     Ustilago segetum var. tritici
79.     Verticillium dahlia
80.     Villosiclava virens = Ustilaginoidea virens

      3- Virus diseases

1.      Alfalfa mosaic virus
2.      Broad bean mottle virus
3.      Broad bean stain virus
4.      Broad bean true mosaic virus
5.      Chrysanthemum ringspot virus
6.      Citrus blight agent
7.      Citrus leprosis virus
8.      Citrus yellow mosaic virus
9.      Coconut cadang-cadang viroid
10.     Cucumber mosaic virus
11.     Eggplant mosaic virus
12.     Gladiolus latent Virus
13.     Lettuce mosaic virus
14.     Peach (Moorpark) Mottle Virus
15.     Peanut Stunt Virus



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                50/81
16.   Rose mosaic virus
17.   Rose ring spot virus
18.   Rose streak virus
19.   Rose wilt virus
20.   Satsuma dwarf virus
21.   Soybean mosaic virus
22.   Tobacco mosaic virus
23.   Tomato mosaic virus
24.   Tomato yellow leaf curl virus
25.   Tulip breaking virus = Tulip mosaic virus
26.   Watermelon mosaic virus 1, 2




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                     51/81
                                             Annex 12
                         Regarding Article 19 – Importation and Treatment

    Rules and conditions for the importation of seed packages and plants for cultivation or
                                    propagation purposes
1. A prior technical import permit shall be obtained from Plant Quarantine, showing the approval
   number of the Agricultural Crop Seeds Committee and explaining the quarantine requirements for
   the items to be imported.
2. The approval of the Agricultural Crop Seeds Committee of the Ministry of Agriculture for the items
   to be imported shall be provided.
3. The consignment shall be accompanied by:
    •   A phytosanitary certificate issued by the competent official authorities indicating the country of
        origin and that the shipment is intended for agriculture and propagation purposes, that it
        complies with the requirements of the Egyptian Plant Quarantine and stating the import permit
        number of the shipment. The consignments that are re-shipped from a country other than the
        country of origin may be accepted, provided that they are accompanied by a phytosanitary
        certificate issued by the country of re-export. This phytosanitary certificate must indicate the
        country of origin and the number of the phytosanitary certificate issued by the country of
        origin, attached together with a certified copy of the original phytosanitary certificate issued by
        the country of origin in addition to the compliance by all countries of origin and shipping ports
        where the consignment has been opened. The consignments of bulbs, roots and other parts of
        plants intended for planting or propagation of species prohibited and with a maximum of ten
        pieces for a single shipment shall be exempted of phytosanitary certificate under the approval
        of the Agricultural Crop Seeds Committee.
    •   The bill of lading issued by the country of origin, provided that the country of origin is not
        prohibited from importing the item.
4. Such consignments shall be accompanied by a list indicating the name and quantity of the items
   and the country of origin in accordance with the approval of the Agricultural Crop Seeds
   Committee and the import permit issued by Plant Quarantine. In case of a difference of nature in
   the items or in their quantity with the permit issued, the competent authority shall have the right to
   refuse the entry of the supplementary quantity, unpermitted items or other country of origin.
5. Some propagation and planting consignments (annual and long-term) may be temporarily
   released if sufficient data on the entity or entities that will cultivate them are provided. Plant
   Quarantine in cooperation with the research authorities of the Ministry of Agriculture shall follow up
   their inspection at any time to verify their safety; provided that such consignments shall be finally
   released only after one year at least. Should some of such plants appear to have symptoms of a
   pest, they will be immediately destroyed using all necessary treatment procedures at the expense
   and under the responsibility of the party concerned.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                           52/81
                                             Annex 13
                        Regarding Article 22 – Importation and Treatment
         Controls of the application of the phytosanitary measures in a country of origin
Pursuant to the international requirements of the Preshipment Inspection Agreement of the World
Trade Organisation (WTO) and Annex 1 to ISPM 20 of the International Plant Protection Convention
(IPPC), the importing country is entitled to apply some phytosanitary measures to the imported
consignments in the country of origin.
At the request of the importer or its representative or in the light of the implementation of the decision
of the Plant Quarantine Committee, the Egyptian Plant Quarantine shall establish committees of the
quarantine inspectors to verify the conformity of the imported consignments to phytosanitary
requirements in the country of origin based on the following procedure:

First: Conditions for candidacy for external missions:
    1- Quarantine engineers who are appointed to travel must prove they have a work experience in
       the domain of plant quarantine for a period of at least 5 years and six months.
    2- If an engineer has taken leave (except regular leave – leave on personal grounds – sick leave
       - maternity leave – Hajj leave), the duration of the leave shall not be counted within the period
       prescribed above.
    3- Travel shall only be permitted after a Ministerial Decree is issued indicating the destination,
       product, quantity to be imported, importer and travel period.

Second: Rules for establishing a Travel Committee:
    1- Al least one of the members must have broad experience in the field of inspecting the product
       to be imported.
    2- The general health status (certified health certificate or certificate of good health) shall be
       taken into consideration for the Committee members in accordance with the requirements of
       the consignment to be imported.
    3- The engineer likely to travel shall pass an ad hoc interview to ensure that he is technically
       qualified to perform the phytosanitary measures required for the plant consignment for which
       he is applying.
    4- By the time the general directors of Plant Quarantine meet, the candidate must not have
       received an investigation-based penalty forthe year of his candidacy which would prevent him
       from serving for a period of 3 to 12 months depending on the wrongdoing.
    5- There must be no evidence that the candidate has previously misused the authority of Plant
       Quarantine through abuse of power in order for personal gain.
    6- The head of the Competent Authority may prevent the candidate finally from travelling abroad
       to complete any quarantine task in a country of origin after a conviction and punishment based
       on an investigation carried out by the administrative and public prosecutor into an offence
       against honour and integrity.

Third: General Procedures:
    1- The importer shall officially apply to Egyptian Plant Quarantine to request a committee so as
       to import a specific plant consignment from an accredited origin within a sufficient period prior
       to the committee's travel.
    2- The importer shall undertake to pay all the costs, travel allowances and transportations set as
       per the regulations issued in this regard, as well as to provide the health and life insurance
       documents required for this task.
    3- The importer shall undertake to provide the laboratories and appropriate places of
       examination for the committee’s work and to facilitate the work of the Plant Quarantine
       committee in the country of origin in the places and during phases of processing, examining
       and shipping of the consignments.
    4- The ministerial Decree shall include all the necessary data.


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                       53/81
   5- The Plant Quarantine committee shall, before commencing the work in the country of origin,
      convene a meeting with the shipping officials at the port to organise the committee's work,
      identify responsibilities with the importer's representative at the shipping port and a direct way
      of communication with Egyptian Plant Quarantine to follow up the work of the committee
      abroad.

Fourth: Requirements for work abroad:
   1- Necessary inspection tools for each inspector for the entire duration of the mission abroad.
   2- Permanent attendance of all the committee's members through all phases of the work.
   3- Obligation to complete the "findings" form for the samples examined during the shipment,
      approval and delivery with the mission report indicating the overall status of the shipment.
(a) Procedures of inspection of bulk consignments in the country of origin:
   1- The committee shall, in sufficient time prior to the commencement of the shipment, conduct a
      random inspection of the silos or warehouses from which the consignments will be shipped to
      the vessel and ensure that the consignment is consistent with quarantine legislation.
   2- The committee shall inspect the vessel's holds and shall verify their conformity for shipment as
      well as their state of cleanliness, the absence of metal rust, live insects or prohibited seeds.
   3- After ensuring the conformity of the vessel, the map of the ship (number of holds and capacity
      and size of each hold).
   4- The Plant Quarantine committee shall supervise the shipping process and shall remove
      required samples in appropriate ways throughout the shipping to conduct all the visual
      inspections to ensure that it is in conformity with the quarantine legislation.
   5- In case that the consignment does not comply with the quarantine legislation, the consignment
      shall be suspended immediately and the appropriate decision shall be taken either by
      re-emptying the infested part of the infected holds if possible, or else the consignment shall be
      refused and the reasons for the rejection shall be documented (photocopies and documents).
      A rejection notification shall be issued and shall be immediately sent to the Egyptian Plant
      Quarantine for necessary action.
   6- After completion of the inspection and supervision of the consignment shipping on the vessel
      and ensuring that the consignment complies with Egyptian phytosanitary requirements, the
      fumigation of the consignment shall be carried out by one of the fumigation companies in the
      country of origin in accordance with the rules adopted and under the supervision of the
      Egyptian Plant Quarantine Committee. Each hold shall be closed after the completion of the
      fumigation process.
   7- A copy of the fumigation report approved by the fumigation company in the country of origin
      and a certified copy of the map of the vessel showing the number of hold and quantity loaded
      in each hold and a copy of the bill of lading shall be sent to the committee.
   8- The committee shall complete the report of the mission on the relevant form, indicating that
      the consignment shipped complies with the Egyptian quarantine legislation and including all
      the necessary data.
   9- An original copy of the committee's report shall be sent to the vessel's captain or the
      company's representative and a receipt shall be signed by the recipient.
   10- After receiving the shipment at the port of arrival in Egypt, the importer shall submit to the
       import section of Plant Quarantine at the port of arrival the original consignment documents
       jointly with the mission report issued by the Plant Quarantine committee in the country of
       origin. The other phytosanitary measures shall be completed on the consignment according to
       Egyptian Plant Quarantine legislation and by the Plant Quarantine Committee.
   11- Should the consignment faily to comply with the Egyptian Plant Quarantine legislation at the
       port of arrival, the necessary quarantine measures shall be taken.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     54/81
(b) Procedures for inspecting consignments in packaging stations, storage places or
    production places in the country of origin:
   1- Inspection shall be carried out for the lots completed and ready for importation.
   2- The quarantine inspection of the samples taken by the Plant Quarantine Committee shall be
      carried out and the results recorded.
   3- The non-compliant lots shall be excluded and reported in the committee’s report as well as
      their quantities as rejected quantities.
   4- In the case of shipments requiring fumigation, the fumigation process shall be undertaken with
      the doses approved by Plant Quarantine. Such facts shall be stated in the committee's report.
   5- If any of the shipments have been rejected and the importer has carried out the treatment in
      the country of origin, such shipments may be inspected again so as to ensure that they
      comply with Egyptian Plant Quarantine’s legislation.
   6- In any case, a report is issued by the committee in the country of origin for the attention of the
      Plant Quarantine committee at the port of arrival. The report shall indicate the results of the
      consignments’ inspection together with the forms showing the inspection results in detail. The
      committee shall accept full responsibility for the shipment status, taking into account the
      shipping conditions.
   7- The Plant Quarantine committee of the port of arrival shall verify the identification of the
      consignment with the report of the committee and shall ensure the safety of the consignment
      so that it is not subject to any conditions that would require it to be re-inspected again as a
      new consignment.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     55/81
                                               Annex 14
                           Regarding Article 23 – Importation and Treatment
                               Regulations for importing potato tubers

First: Rules and conditions governing the import of potato tubers for the purpose of
cultivation:
1- The potato seeds shall be imported with an import permit issued by the Agricultural Crops
   Committee based on a request submitted by the importing authority to the Agricultural Crop Seeds
   Committee every year on the appropriate form and specifying the quantities, item, rank and origin.
2- Egyptian Plant Quarantine shall annually receive a list of agricultural land codes allocated for
   growing potato tubers for the purpose of exporting seeds and the plans at least one month prior to
   the importation, and in the event of any change in the above-mentioned codes or plans, the
   competent authority in the exporting country shall notify Egyptian Plant Quarantine of such change
   in due time.
3- The potato seeds shall be imported as per the quarantine requirements set forth herein and
   provided that they are accompanied by the phytosanitary certificate certified by the concerned
   authority in the country of origin, certifying the validity of the potato seeds and in which there is an
   additional acknowledgement indicating the compliance with the quarantine requirements, as well
   as the additional requirements in paragraph 4 below.
4- The following requirements must be complied with for potatoes imported from abroad:
              1- Insects:
      • The imported potato seeds shall be completely free from the infestation of any of the
        following insects in any phase:
      •    Leptinotars decemlineata (Say)                       Colorado potato beetle
      •    Phthorimaea operculella (Zeller)                     Phthorimaea operculella
      •    Euzophera osseatella (Treitscke)                     Eggplant Fruit and Shoot borer
      •    Premnotrypes spp.                                    Andean susses
      •    Epitrix cucumeris (Harris)                           Cabbage Llea Beetle
      •    Epitrix subcrinita (Le conte)                        Western potato flea beetle
      •    Limonius canus                                       Wired Worms Group
      •    Limonius californicus
      •    Ctenicera pruinina
      •    Epicauta spp.                                        Bitter beetle
      •    Phyllophaga spp.                                     Cyclocephala
      •    Hydraecia micacea (Esp)                              Potato leg digger
    2- Diseases
          First: The imported potatoes should be free from, and produced in, places free from the
          following diseases and their causes. Such places shall be established in accordance with the
          relevant international phytosanitary standards:
          1- Fungi

          Synchytium endobioticum
          2- Nematodes

          Globodera spp.

          Trichodorus spp. and Paratichodorus spp.
          3- Bacteria

          Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepdonicus

          Ralstonia solanacearum



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                        56/81
       Dickeya spp.

       Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum
       4- Virus and Phytoplasma

       Potato Yellow Dwarf Virus and Phytoplasma
       Second: The final importation of potato seeds is prohibited from any farm that has been
       infected with one of the diseases listed in item 1 during the year preceding the import season.
       Third: Potato seeds must be completely free from the following diseases:
       1- Nematodes

       Ditylenchus destructor

       Meloidogyne spp.
       2- Virus and Viroid

       Potato Spindle Tuber Viroid

       Tobacco Necrosis Virus (TNV)

       Tobacco ring spot nepo Virus (TRSV)
       3- Physiological diseases/Others:

       Frost injury
       Fourth: The following diseases if present should not exceed the percentage indicated in each
       of the samples taken from the lot:
       1- Bacteria
       Pectobacterium carotovorum

            Tubers infected with a rate of more than 0.2 % shall not be permitted to enter Egypt

       Pectobacterum atrosepticum

            Tubers infected with a rate of more than 0.2 % shall not be permitted to enter Egypt

       2- Fungi
       Phytoplithora erythoseptica

            Tubers infected with a rate of more than 0.1 % shall not be permitted to enter Egypt

       Phytophthera infestans

            Tubers infected with a rate of more than 0.1 % shall not be permitted to enter Egypt

       Colletorichum Coccodes -(Colletorichum atramentarium)

            Tubers infected with a rate of more than 20 % shall not be permitted to enter Egypt

       Alternaria Solani

            Tubers infected with a rate of more than 0.5 % shall not be permitted to enter Egypt

       Verticillium spp.

            Tubers infected with a rate of more than 0.5 % shall not be permitted to enter Egypt

       3- Viral viruses
       -   The Central Administration of Plant Quarantine (CAPQ) may mandate experts’
           committees of the Plant Quarantine in coordination with the Institute of Plant


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     57/81
           Pathology Research to examine signs of viral infection in the crops in the countries
           exporting potatoes and verify that the total percentage of all manifestations of viral
           infection in the fields does not exceed 4 %.
       -   It is prohibited to let enter into Egypt tubers infected with the following percentages
           of viruses respectively:
           Corky Ring sport (Tobacco Ratte Virus) (0.1 %)

           Mop Top Virus (MTV) (0.1 %)

           Potato Leaf Roll Virus (0.1 %)

           Alfa Alfa Mosaic Virus (0.4 %)

           PVY (0.4 %)

           PVX (0.4 %)

           PVA (0.4 %)

     The total percentage of infection from such viruses should not exceed 0.8 %
       Fifth: The following diseases should not exceed the percentage specified for each one
       respectively and provided the total percentage shall not be more than 5%:
       1- Fungi
       Fusarium spp. (0.1 %)

       Phoma Spp. (0.5 %)

       Watery wound rot caused by Pythium spp (0.5 %)

       2- Others /Physiological diseases:
       Internal Brown spot and Browning or Black sport & Vascular Discoloration (0.5 %)

       Hollow heart (0.5 %)

       Black heart (0.5 %)

       Skin Necrosis (0.5 %)

       Mechanical Damage (3 %)

       Sixth: The infection in samples should not exceed the following percentages as indicated:

 1- Powdery scab caused by                                           Spongospora subterranea
    Seeds shall be banned from entry if more than 1 % is affected and the pustules cover more than 10 %
    of the surface area of the tuber.
 2- Common Scab caused by                                            Streptomyces scabies
    Potato seeds with common scab are allowed in accordance with Dutch Standard No 1.5
 3- Black crust and other pathological symptoms that cause the       Rhizoctonia solani
    fungus caused by
    Seeds shall be banned from entry if more thatn 5 % is affected and the infected area of the tuber
    surface exceeds 10 %
 4- Silver scurf caused by                                           Helminthosporium solani
    No more than 20 % of infected pests should enter and the patches should cover no more than 20 % of
    the surface area of the tuber




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                  58/81
       Explanatory note on the virus tolerances ofannex 14 of tlte
       pltvtosanitary requirements ofImportation of Seed Potatoes


- For the tolerances of viruses for TRY and MTV the tolerance of 0.1 %
  will be assessed visually at tuber inspection.

- For the rest of viruses the tolerances will be assessed by the NPPO the
  exporting country in accordance with "Union Grade E".

- additional declaration into the phytosanitary certificate will be needed

  "The consignment complies with Union Grade E certification
  scheme for virus tolerances",
            Second: Rules and Conditions for importing potato tubers for processing purposes:
The following requirements shall be applied when importing and inspecting imported potato tubers for
manufacturing purposes in the ports of arrival in Egypt:
1- The imported potato seeds should be completely free of infection from the following insects in any
   of their phases:

 Colorado beetle                                    Leptinotarsa decemlineata (Say)
 Potato Tuber Moth                                  Phthorimaea operculella (Zeller)
 Eggplant Shoot borer                               Euzophera osseatella (Treitscke)
 Andean mite                                        Premnotrypes spp
 Cabbage Llea Beetle                                Epitrix cucumeris (Harris)
 Western potato flea beetle                         Epitrix subcrinita (Le Conte)
 Wireworms                                          Limonius canus
                                                    Limonius californicus
                                                    Ctenicera pruinina
 Bitter beetle                                      Epicauta spp.
 scarab beetles                                     Phyllophaga spp.
 Potato leg digger                                  Hydraecia micacea (Esp)

2- Potato tubers shall be free from, and produced in countries or places of production free from, the
   following diseases and in accordance with the standards of the International Plant Protection
   Convention (IPPC - FAO).

 Brown rot caused by                                  Ralstonia Solanacearum
 Ring rot caused by                                   Clavibacter michiganensis sub sp.sepdonicus
 Black cancer (fecundity) caused by                   Synchytrium endobioticum
 golden nematode                                      Globodera spp.
 Root-knot nematodes                                  Trichodorus spp. and Paratichodorus spp.
 Potato Yellow Dwarf Virus And Phytoplasma            Potato yellow dwarf virus and Phytoplasma
 Blackleg caused by                                   Dickeya solani
 Black Dot caused by                                  Colletorichum coccodes
                                                      Colletorichum atramentarium
 Zebra Chip caused by                                 Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum
                                                      Tobacco Necrosis Virus (TNV)

3- Potato tubers shall be completely free of the following diseases:

 Nematodes Dry rot in potatoes                        Ditylenchus destructo

 Nematode Root Knot                                   Meloidogynespp

 Potato spindle tuber viroid                          Spindle tuber viroid
 Frost injury                                         Frost injury

4- In the samples representing the lot, infection by the following diseases should not exceed the
   percentage indicated below

 Dry rot 3 %                                           Fusarium oxysporum
 Early Blight 3 %                                      Alternaria solani


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                   59/81
 Late Blight 0.5 %                                      Phytophthora infestans
 Soft rot 1 %                                           Pectobacterium carotovorum
 Powdery Scab 3 %                                       Spongospora subterranea
 "Severe infection covers one third of the tuber
 surface"
 Common Scab                                            Streptomyces scabies
 "Dutch Standard No 1.5"
 Black scurf 10 %                                      Rhizotonia solani
 Mechanical Damage 5 %                                  Mechanical damage
 Phoma sp 1 %                                           Phoma sp.

5- The amount of natural soil attached to potato tubers in each sack shall not be more than 0.3 % of
   the total weight.
6- Provision is made for shipments in the country of origin to be treated with an anti-germination
   substance. It is recommended that the phytosanitary certificate shall be accompanied by a
   certificate confirming such treatment with its name, and the doses used. If treatment is not done
   abroad, it shall be completed in the stores of the owner and at the expense of the party concerned
   and under his responsibility.
7- A copy of a phytosanitary certificate shall be attached certifying the compliance of the
   consignment with the quarantine requirements listed in this Annex and stating that it has been
   treated with an anti-germination (name and doses used) and that it is not being imported for the
   purpose of cultivation.
8- Importation shall be within a limited period of time (August, September and October) so as not to
   interfere with the importing period of potato tubers for cultivation.
9- The import shall be in special packages with the mention on one of side in Arabic "Not for
   cultivation" and on the other side the importer's name, variety and the farm’s number or the field
   code, in addition to an identification card to be put inside the package bearing the words "Not for
   cultivation".
10- All necessary quarantine measures shall be taken such as examination and inspection of
    warehouses, transport, storage, manufacture and disposal of solid waste and treatment of liquid
    waste and others under the supervision of Plant Quarantine and under the responsibility and at
    the expense of the party concerned.
11- The party concerned shall undertake not to use or market the consignment as seeds for
    cultivation.
12- The necessary records for registration and documentation of all previous steps and procedures
    under the supervision of the Plant Quarantine shall be provided.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                    60/81
                                            Annex 15
                         Regarding Article 24 - Importation and Treatment
                             Controls for importing cotton products
First: Ginned cotton and its waste:
1. The consignment must be imported from areas registered as quarantine pest free, areas that have
   been pre-examined by specialised higher committees to confirm the fact.
2. A technical permission to import must be pre-obtained from Plant Quarantine before shipment of
   the consignment from its place of origin and must be approved by Egyptian Plant Quarantine as a
   source of import for cotton.
3. The importer shall apply to the competent Plant Quarantine office to determine the appropriate
   date for the arrival of the consignment to start fumigation treatment with the available fumigation
   stations so as to prevent the accumulation of packages.
4. A phytosanitary certificate from the Plant Quarantine of the country of origin shall accompany the
   consignment.
5. The consignment of cotton shall be accompanied by a fumigation certificate from the Plant
   Quarantine Authority of the country of origin taking the following into account:
       The fumigation certificate shall have a validity of no more than three months.
       If the consignment is received after the expiry period of the fumigation certificate, it shall only
        be accepted if proof is submitted that the shipment was undertaken during the validity period
        of the fumigation certificate.
       If the fumigation certificate has expired before the consignment is shipped from the country of
        origin, re-fumigation is required before shipment and an approved fumigation certificate issued
        with a new validity period shall be submitted.
       The period of validity of the fumigation certificate shall be added to the import permit, taking in
        account the importer’s acknowledgement of the required quarantine requirements.
6. If the fumigation process was completed in the country of origin in the absence of a committee
   from Egyptian Plant Quarantine, a phytosanitary certificate must be provided in the form of an
   additional declaration stating that the package was fumigated in accordance with the terms of the
   Egyptian Plant Quarantine and under the full supervision of the Plant Quarantine of the country of
   origin. Upon arrival of the consignment in Egypt, samples shall be taken for the necessary
   analysis to verify the completion of the fumigation process. If the fumigation process was made
   under normal atmospheric pressure in the country of origin and in the absence of a committee
   from Egyptian Plant Quarantine, a phytosanitary certificate must be provided in the form of an
   additional declaration stating that the consignment was fumigated under conditions of normal
   atmospheric pressure in accordance with the terms of the Egyptian Plant Quarantine and under
   the full supervision of the Plant Quarantine of the country of origin. Upon arrival of the parcel, a
   vacuum fumigation shall be completed at the nearest vacuum fumigation plant under the
   supervision of Egyptian Plant Quarantine before the consignment is released.
7. Upon arrival of the consignment to the port of arrival, the necessary quarantine inspection shall be
   carried out to ensure that:
       the consignment is free from the cotton seeds, whole, broken or peeled.
       the consignment is free from prohibited quarantine pests.
       the consignment has been thoroughly fumigated abroad with neccesary documentation and
        laboratory analysis if vacuum fumigation has been undertaken abroad in the absence of an
        Egyptian Plant Quarantine committee.
       Compliant consignments shall be released, and consignments not complying with the terms of
        the Egyptian Plant Quarantine shall be rejected and re-exported.
8. Transit consignments are treated the same way as incoming consignments regarding inspection
   and fumigation.
9. For imports in containers, the consignment is inspected in the container yards at the first port of
   arrival (after ensuring that the fumigation process has been carried out in the country of origin),


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                        61/81
        and may be re-sealed after the quarantine inspection and transferred for vacuum fumigation at the
        nearest fumigation plant. It is transported within Egypt by the safest routes and means under the
        supervision of Plant Quarantine.
    10. For importats in containers that have previously been inspected by an external inspection
        committee of engineers from Plant Quarantine and identified as such on arrival, they shall be
        fumigated at any available vacuum fumigation plant.
    11. For importats in the holds of a ship:
           The consignment shall be sent by sea to the nearest port with a vacuum fumigation plant.
           The consignment shall be inspected on board ship.
           Samples shall be taken for random laboratory analysis to ensure fumigation has been
            undertaken if vacuum fumigation abroad was carried out without a committee of Egyptian
            Plant Quarantine being present.
           The consignment shall be fumigated at the port of arrival at the time specified in advance or as
            approved by the Plant Quarantine Authority at the port of arrival.
    12. The consignment must be transported from the country of origin in a tightly locked means of
        transport and shall be opened only at the port of arrival in Egypt. The inspectors of Plant
        Quarantine shall confirm this point.
    13. Transportation, manufacturing and waste disposal are carried out under the supervision of the
        Plant Quarantine.
    14. Manufacturing priority shall be for imported cotton.
    15. The consignment shall be rejected should the importer have violated the Plant Quarantine
        instructions contained in the import permit.
    Second: Commercial Cotton Samples:
    1. The samples shall be well ginned and be completely free of cotton seeds and of remnants thereof.
    2. The weight of each sample shall not exceed three kilogrammes. In the event of higher weight,
       three kilograms shall be separated for delivery to the importer if he agrees to it and the rest shall
       be disposed of.
    3. The samples shall be well packed in a solid, unbreakable packing.
    4. The samples shall be labelled in the name of the consignee and the requested port of arrival.
    5. If the cotton in the sample is fragmented into several parts, each part shall be considered an
       independent sample.
    6. Samples shall be processed at the expense of the owner prior to final delivery and the samples
       that he does not claim shall be disposed of within seven days from the date of notification of the
       goods’ arrival.
    Third: Cotton seeds imported for the purpose of pressing:
Persons wishing to import cotton seeds for the purpose of pressing shall submit an application to Plant
   Quarantine within a period of not less than three weeks before importation after the approval of the
   relevant scientific institutes (Cotton, Plant Protection, Plant Diseases and Plant Quarantine Research
   Institutes) through the Plant Quarantine Committee and under the following conditions:
    1. The seeds must be imported through one of the country's maritime ports where a mill is available
       within the Customs Circuit from the port of arrival so that the pressing process can be undertaken.
       The seeds shall be heat treated at a temperature of not less than 80° C, laboratory tests ensuring
       that the seeds are not germinating. The consignment shall not be relocated outside the Customs
       Circuit before completion of the pressing process under any circumstances.
    2. Cotton seeds shall be free from insects and pathogenic pests, be non-bioengineered, non-
       irradiated, and not treated with chemicals and pesticides. This shall be confirmed by competent
       authorities through Plant Quarantine.
    3. Crushed or milled seeds imported for the purpose of pressing may not be transferred.



    Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
    Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      62/81
4. The owner of the seeds and the mill owner undertake to give priority to the process of pressing the
   imported seeds. If they violate this undertaking, they shall receive a warning, and if they reiterate
   the violation, the owner shall no longer be permitted to import cotton seeds for pressing, and the
   mill owner shall no longer be permitted to press cotton seeds.
5. The mills shall send within a maximum of one week a statement to Plant Quarantine in the port of
   the mill stating the quantities of imported seeds that have been pressed and the remaining
   quantities of seeds.
6. The disposal of the packages in which the seeds were placed shall be made inside the Customs
   Circuit where the mill is located and they shall not be transferred in any way to any other area
   outside the Customs Circuit.
7. In all cases, the transportation, pressing and burning of waste shall be carried out under the
   supervision of Plant Quarantine and according to a specific work programme of the mill, advance
   notification of this programme being given to the Plant Quarantine.
8. It is stressed that in the event of any violation resulting in the refusal of the consignment, the
   consignment shall be re-exported and shall not be processed on the territory of Egypt.
Fourth: Cotton seeds for scientific purposes:
1. The samples shall be imported only for the Cotton Research Institute and after ensuring that they
   conform to the quarantine requirements
2. They shall be fumigated with an approved fumigation product, under the supervision of Plant
   Quarantine.
3. They shall be planted in an isolated area so that they remain under the supervision of the Cotton,
   Plant Protection, Plant Diseases and Plant Quarantine Research Institutes until the end of the
   harvest to ensure safety.
Fifth: Cotton seed cakes:
Cotton seed cakes are imported by sending a joint committee comprising Plant Quarantine inspectors
and the Regional Center for Food and Feed for inspection in the country of origin.
When the package enters the territory of Egypt, the following measures shall be taken:
1. Fumigation with an approved fumigation product under the supervision of Plant Quarantine (e.g.,
   methyl bromide at a dose of 32 g / m3 / 24 hours).
2. For the packaging, hot water treatment at 100° C for half an hour or fumigation with methyl
   bromide at a dose of 32 g / m3 / 24 hours or any other treatment approved for this purpose.
3. Transportation and manufacturing at the expense and under the responsibility of the concerned
   party and under the supervision of Plant Quarantine.
Sixth: Conditions for importing cotton linters for military factories:
1. An import permit must first be obtained from Plant Quarantine.
2. The import shall only be from certified cotton points of origin in addition to points of origin in India
   and Pakistan.
3. The imported consignment must be accompanied by a certificate from the competent authority of
   the exporting country confirming that the linters have been extracted from cotton seeds that have
   been sterilised by exposure to a temperature of not less than 65 °C for a period of at least five
   minutes.
4. The linters shall be free of cotton seeds or parts of seeds and from harmful pests. They shall be
   packed in high-pressure, high-quality bales.
5. The linters shall be inspected to ensure that they meet the required conditions and then
   transferred immediately to the military factories by a safe means of transport which will be closed
   and sealed with lead by specialised staff from Plant Quarantine, and may not be opened upon
   arrival at the factory, unless a representative from Plant Quarantine is present.
6. The means of transport shall receive treatment after unloading in a manner approved by Plant
   Quarantine.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                          63/81
7. The parcels shall be stored immediately after unloading in a store inspected by Plant Quarantine
   inspectors who shall check that it meets required quarantine requirements.
8. The factory must complete the processing to stop the linters from being in their vegetative state
   (digestion) within a period of not more than seven days from the date of arrival at the factory, all
   the waste being burnt in the presence of the representative of Plant Quarantine. The Director
   General of Plant Quarantine may extend the previous deadline for another seven days.
Seventh: Medical cotton:
For the import of medical cotton, the cotton is required to be whitened lint cotton offering a resistance
to cutting, to have a thick cohesion during combing, to be free from defects and foreign substances
and to be absorbant to the point that if one gramme of cotton is put on the surface of water at a
temperature of 25 °C, it should be saturated with water after 10 to 15 seconds. A sample shall be sent
to the Cotton Research Institute to verify these properties.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      64/81
                                           Annex 16
                      Regarding Article 25 - Importation and Treatment
Ban on the introduction of plants and parts of some cultivars and agricultural materials shown
    below into Egypt, with the exception of some or part of them under certain conditions
First: plant products whose importation is prohibited:
1. Date palm fruit whether dry or processed, or any dry or processed vegetable parts from palm
   waste such as leaves, palm fronds, etc., as well as henna, Medicago sativa and ornamental
   palms, which are considered to be hosts to Fusarium oxysporum var. albedinus which causes the
   Bayoud disease, from countries where this disease is spread.
2. Natural soil suitable for agriculture as well as containing organic materials under any name.
3. Live plant pests in all their stages.
4. Culture media of bacteria and fungi harmful to plants.
5. Remnants of plants and agricultural products resulting from consumption on ships and aircrafts.
6. Non-agricultural materials if they are mixed with agricultural soil, plants, agricultural products or
   other prohibited materials, if they cannot be separated inside the Customs Circuit without any risk
   of them leaking out.
7. It is prohibited to import bee honey products except under the following conditions:
8. The product should come from areas that are free from bacterial infection caused by
   (Paenibacillus larvae = Bacillus larvae), and European Melanococcus disease (Melissococcus
   plutonius = Paenibacillus) and the product should be free of pathogens and pests for both
   diseases. An approved certificate from the country of origin shall accompany the consignment.
Second: plants and parts suitable for planting and whose importation is prohibited
1. Cotton plant (Gosspium. Spp) and parts thereof.
2. Date palm plants, sprouts, henna, Medicago sativa and ornamental palms, which are host to
   Fusarium oxysporum var. albedinus that causes the Bayoud disease, from the countries where
   this disease is spread.
3. Palm sprouts from origins where Palmasips phoenicis (Asterlecaniidae) is spread.
4. Packages received for agriculture if they are mixed with agricultural soil, plants, agricultural
   products or other prohibited materials.
•   The items recommended by the Plant Quarantine Committee to enter the country based on
    the PRA shall be excluded.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                        65/81
                                             Annex 17
                       Regarding Article 27 - Importation and Treatment
             Conditions for allowing the transit of plant and plant products in Egypt:
1. All plants and plant product packages passing through ports, airports and entry points in Egypt,
   which are to be stored in free zones or in refrigerators within the Customs circuit, or sent to
   another port, and which were opened or suspected of leaking any quarantine pests, shall be
   treated as imported, exempting them from the following:
       Import permit.
       Phytosanitary certificates.
        Excluded from this exemption are transit parcels to free zones for manufacturing
        purposes.
2. Transit packages in Egyptian ports that are transported in sealed containers with the customs seal
   of the country of origin and which are to be stored in the Egyptian transit areas within the Customs
   Circuit until they are re-shipped, and whose seals are not to be removed except in the final pors of
   arrival, may not be inspected unless they are unsealed in an Egyptian port, provided that the
   concerned party submits a statement from the Customs permitting to do so.
3. Plant packages which are refused entry into Egypt shall be re-exported within the period specified
   in Annex 19. The party concerned shall submit to the competent Plant Quarantine port a
   statement approved by the Customs on all the re-exported packages and remnants thereof.
4. The transfer of in-transit packages of foreign cotton and seeds from one ship to another in
   Egyptian ports is not authorized, unless the cotton is ginned and contained in intact bales and
   unless the cotton seeds are kept in new well-sealed double bags. An application for permit shall
   be submitted to the competent Plant Quarantine port for the transfer of foreign cotton and seeds,
   together with the number of cotton bales, their weight, the number of cotton seeds bags, their
   weight, the name of the ship and the expected date of arrival. The concerned party must inform
   Plant Quarantine immediately upon arrival of the ship and specify the date of transport so that the
   Plant Quarantine can supervise the transport.
5. It is prohibited to unload cotton and its seeds to the ground but it may be transfered from one ship
   to another either directly or by barges. In the latter case, it must be covered in full in a manner
   approved by the Plant Quarantine representative. The barges shall be cleaned and all the waste
   shall be burned under the supervision of Plant Quarantine after the transfer at the expense and
   under the responsibility of the party.
6. In-transit parcels of cotton and seeds may not be kept in the port for more than fifteen days;
   otherwise, they shall be disposed of at the expense and under the responsibility of the concerned
   party without any right to claim any compensation.
7. In-transit packages of cotton and seeds may not be transferred from one aircraft to another within
   the Egyptian airports unless the cotton or seed are packed in metal containers that are intact and
   welded on all sides. These parcels may not be kept at the airport for more than 15 days;
   otherwise, they shall be disposed of at the expense and under the responsibility of the concerned
   party without any right to claim for compensation.
8. The Customs Department shall notify Plant Quarantine of the date of arrival and unloading of the
   parcels from ships at the ports and from aircrafts, and indicate all their specifications as well as
   their date of re-exportation.
9. Tax on incoming plant parcels may not be transferred from in-transit tax to import tax unless they
   meet the conditions of imported plant packages, in particular regarding the import permit and the
   phytosanitary certificate required by the Egyptian state and the payment of the difference in
   expenses with the import tax according to the type of parcels. Otherwise the parcels shall be
   completely rejected.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     66/81
                                            Annex 18
                          Regarding Article 31 - Import and Treatment
                      Procedures for treating incoming plant consignments
1. The treatment of incoming plant consignments shall be as approved by the competent authority
   (Plant Quarantine) and at the expense and under the responsibility of the party concerned as per
   this document or any other approved methods in accordance with the following:
       Methods approved internationally: stipulated in ISPMs.
       Methods approved locally: Methods recommended by one of the national research
        institutions (specialised Research Institutes of the Agricultural Research Centre - Egyptian
        universities - the Academy of Scientific Research and other research bodies). The methods
        shall be adopted by the Scientific Research Academy or the Egyptian Organisation for
        Standardization and Quality. Plant Quarantine is responsible for the application, monitoring
        and supervision of the treatment after it has been approved by the Plant Quarantine Work
        Committee.
       All the requirements for the appropriate treatment must be observed in all previous
        methods.
2. All incoming consignments to be treated must be submitted to treatment during official working
   hours by the party concerned or its representative within 48 hours of the notification of their
   transfer for treatment.
3. The competent Plant Quarantine inspector may request that the consignments be submitted to
   treatment before the end of the agreed period, if failure to start treatment as early as possible
   would constitute a threat to the country's agricultural sector. If the party concerned or its
   representative fail to comply with this requirement, a violation shall be reported and submitted to
   the competent authority.
4. The competent quarantine inspector and his direct supervisor shall indicate the treatment’s
   completion in the specifically designated box on the original inspection form.
5. If the consignments are delivered to a customs port which does not have the appropriate
   treatment equipment, they shall be transferred to the nearest customs port where the necessary
   equipment is available so as to complete the required treatments at the expense and under the
   responsibility of the party concerned or its representative, by sea or any other means approved by
   the competent authority and in accordance to the terms and procedures of that authority.
6. The treated consignmnets shall be received from the plant quarantine stations and delivered
   within 29 hours of completion of the treatment. The transfer of the consignments in whole or in
   parts shall not be permitted except after payment of the required ground fees according to the
   provisions of the attached expenditure annex.
7. The treatment procedures may be completed outside the customs port if the treatment cannot be
   completed within the designated premises and if it is undertaken under the supervision and
   monitoring of Plant quarantine, at the request of the concerned party or its representative and in
   full respect of the treatment methods stipulated in the treatment schedule, and after the site and its
   equipment have received the necessary inspection to assess their validity and efficiency and in
   accordance with the conditions and preventive measures approved by Plant Quarantine for the
   transport of the consignments and at all stages of the treatment.
8. In cases of transfer of some incoming plant product consignments that are temporarily released
   under custody for the purpose of completing some of the quarantine operations outside the
   Customs circuit, the consignments or parts of it shall be transported using suitable means of
   transport to prevent pest leakage. The consignment shall also be sealed and its weight shall be
   determined accurately to ensure that the consignment is not contaminated from outside or does
   not cause contamination to the external environment.
9. Consignments that are placed under plant custody shall be re-examined visually only (without
   taking samples) to ensure that they are free from live insects 60 days after the decision of Plant
   Quarantine as regards to their treatment, in whole or in parts, and this procedure shall be repeated
   every 60 days for as long as the consignments remain in custody.
10. Waste from treatments shall be disposed of by one of the safe disposal methods to protect the
    country's agricultural sector.

Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     67/81
11. In all cases, the final release of the treated plant consignments shall not be allowed until due
    expenses have been paid and treatments and quarantine procedures have been completed for the
    whole consignment as covered by the customs certificate.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                68/81
                                          Annex 19
                        Regarding Article 32 - Import and Treatment
 Procedures to be applied to plant consignments that are refused entry or transit through the
                                      Egyptian territory
1. The consignments which are refused entry or transit through the Egyptian territory must be re-
   exported by the party concerned within three weeks of the date of notification of the rejection
   decision, provided that the party concerned has been notified within two days of the date of the
   notification of the rejection. If this period has elapsed without the consignments having been re-
   exported, they shall be disposed of by the Plant Quarantine specialists at the expense of and
   subject to the liability of the party concerned. The consignment’s disposal may be undertaken
   before the expiry of this period if there is any threat to plantations if the disposal is approved by
   the Plant Quarantine committee at the expense of and subject to the liability of the party
   concerned without any compensation. The Director of Plant Quarantine or his representative may
   extend the three week period by a period of no more than one week if this extension does not
   pose a threat to the country's crops.
2. If the party concerned fails to respond to the re-export or disposal order, or if notification proves
   impossible, Customs shall be notified using the specific form for all necessary steps against the
   rejected consignments. Dealings with the party concerned or its representative (the
   importing company) shall be suspended until the final action is taken on the irregular
   consignments.
3. The party concerned shall be forced to re-export the consignments within the legal deadline if the
   consignments are infected with live insects and if their existence in the port and their release for
   disposal in a sanitary landfill outside the Customs circuit constitutes a threat to plantations.
    In the event of the re-export of the consignments not being complied with, dealings with
    the concerned party or its representative (the importing company) shall be suspended until
    after the re-export of the non-compliant consignments.
4. The competent staff from Plant Quarantine shall take all precautions to prevent pests leaking from
   the rejected consignments at the expense of and subject to the liability of the party concerned.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                       69/81
Annex 20
Regarding Article 34 – Export
Procedures applied to exports of plant consignments
1. Persons wishing to export plants or plant products whose export is not prohibited must go to the
   nearest Plant Quarantine Office to submit an application on the relevant form indicating the variety
   to be exported, the export destination and all data requested on the form. A single application for a
   consignment containing more than one variety of plants may be submitted if all varieties are
   exported to a single importer at a single destination. Costs due shall be estimated and recorded in
   the relevant register and the information provided on the application form shall be identical to the
   consignment to be exported.
2. The application form mentioned above shall be submitted by the exporter or its representative
   together with the following required documents:
       Copy of proof of ID of the party concerned or its representative under a power of attorney or
        bank authorization.
       Copy of the exporter's record of the exporting company.
       Proof of payment of the expenses imposed by Plant Quarantine on the consignment.
       Any other documents that need to be present prior to the inspection according to each article
        subject to quarantine regulations.
3. The consignments must be fully prepared for export upon submission for inspection.
   Consignments shall be opened under the responsibility of the exporter and at his expense. The
   exporter may not open the consignments authorized to be exported or make any change to them
   or to their distinctive marks except with the permission of and under supervision of Plant
   Quarantine. Preparation of the mentioned consignments shall not include the use of any plant
   products not approved by Plant Quarantine.
4. After the completion of all documents (and payment of required expenses), a committee of
   quarantine inspectors shall be assigned to the inspection of the consignments. The consignments
   prepared for export shall be examined in accordance with the requirements of the importing
   country if they are known in advance or if an import permit from the importing country specifies the
   import requirements to be applied, otherwise the party concerned shall take responsibility for the
   export of the consignments. The inspection shall take place either in the production area or in the
   packaging and preparation station or, where absolutely necessary and subject to the issue of an
   official document by the head of Egyptian Plant Quarantine, in the airport.
5. Treatments are carried out on the exported consignments according to the requirements of the
   importing countries.
6. The assigned Plant Quarantine Committee shall complete the inspection and record its results.
       If the consignments are compliant with Plant Quarantine requirements and not subject to any
        type of laboratory analysis, the export shall be authorized.
       If the consignments are compliant with Plant Quarantine requirements and subject to any sort
        of laboratory analysis, samples shall be taken in accordance with the relevant ministerial
        Decrees, the requirements of the importing countries and the protocols signed between Egypt
        and the country requiring the analyses. The export shall not be permitted until after the results
        of the tests are known and they are compliant with the requirements of the importing country.
       If the consignments are compliant but the results of the laboratory tests do not conform to the
        requirements of the importing country, the consignments shall be rejected and the export shall
        not be permitted.
       If the consignments are not compliant with the requirements of the importing country, the
        consignments shall be rejected and the export shall not be permitted.
7. The consignments compliant with the requirements of the importing country shall be exported
   within seven days from the day following the date of inspection. If not, all measures taken in this
   regard shall be deemed not to have taken place. This applies to plants and fresh fruit
   consignments. For other types of consignments, the Director General may extend the deadline by
   one further period of up to seven days. Some varieties and plant products for which joint
   ministerial Decrees have been issued shall be excluded from the extension.

Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      70/81
8. If the exporter wishes to change the destination of the consignments, he shall notify the concerned
   quarantine office well in time before shipping so that the requirements of the importing country can
   be met. If the consignments meet the export requirements of the new destination, there shall be
   no objection to changing it.
9. If all of the aforementioned export conditions are met as regards documents, expenses, inspection
   and sampling results (where applicable), the phytosanitary certificate shall be issued for the
   consignments authorised for export.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                   71/81
                                             Annex 21
                                   Regarding Article 35 – Export
                               Phytosanitary Certification Regulations
Egyptian Plant Quarantine (National Plant Protection Agency - NPPO) is the sole authority competent
to issue, develop and amend phytosanitary certificates and their annexes or issue an alternative or a
copy thereof. The competent authority shall not issue the phytosanitary certificate for consignments
that do not meet the necessary quarantine requirements.
First: Phytosanitary certificates:
Phytosanitary certificates are considered a documentary guarantee and acknowledgement of the
compliance of the exported plant consignments with the requirements of the importing country.
Second: Exporter's obligations when issuing phytosanitary certificates:
1. Issuance of a copy of the bill of lading or a carbon copy of the original bill certified and stamped by
   a power of attorney (with a valid stamp) or issuance of a carbon copy by a Compass Custom
   certified and stamped by the Customs with a valid stamp of the Egyptian seal.
2. The concerned party or its representative must submit an official power of attorney from the Real
   Estate Publicity Department or a valid bank authorization to complete the phytosanitary
   certification procedures proving that the concerned party does not bear any legal or criminal
   liability resulting from fraud.
3. The exporter shall submit an official statement from the importing country should he request a
   phytosanitary certificate for products for which Plant Quarantine does not issue phytosanitary
   certificates.
Third: Conditions for amendment, change or replacement of phytosanitary certificates:
An alternative phytosanitary certificate may be issued for any consignment for which a phytosanitary
certificate has already been issued in the event of damage, change of address, destination country,
entry point, change of importer's name, lack of information or error, after submission of the original
certificate to be cancelled and its approved copies to the Plant Quarantine inspector. The cancelled
certificate and copies shall be stamped with a stamp “cancelled” or have the word “cancelled” written
in bold on them across the certificate. They shall be kept in the relevant section in the file of cancelled
certificates with the registration thereof in the records prepared for that purpose.
An alternative phytosanitary certificate is issued when the following conditions are met:
A. After submission of an official statement to correct erroneous data.
B. The party concerned submits a request and the reasons for an alternative certificate to the Plant
   Quarantine office responsible for issuing the certificate to be replaced.
C. The requested modification does not concern the characteristics of the exported consignment in
   terms of its dimensions, size, type and number of packages, contents and any other change in the
   nature of the consignments.
D. The party concerned shall submit the original phytosanitary certificate to be replaced by Plant
   Quarantine free of any alterations to particulars such as amendments, modifications, wear and
   tear, additions or such like, and provided that it bears the stamp of Plant Quarantine and other
   plant information.
E. The certificate shall not have been marked by the importing country with a seal indicating a refusal
   of entry, a rejection or an interception or any other measures that could have been taken
   regarding the consignments.
       If an application is submitted to replace the phytosanitary certificate, it is necessary to refer to
        the replacement of the first certificate in the second certificate.
       If the concerned party fails to return the original phytosanitary certificate because it has been
        lost or it is in another country, the case shall be referred to the competent authority to take the
        necessary action.
       A record of cancelled certificates listing their numbers, alternate certificate numbers and
        respective data shall be opened.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                         72/81
Fourth: Issuing copies of the original phytosanitary certificate:
An original copy is a copy of the original phytosanitary certificate endorsed and stamped by the
competent authority. It may be issued at the request of the concerned party. It shall not replace the
original certificate.
Fifth: All controls set out in ISPMs 7 and 12 shall be complied with. The competent authority shall
issue instructions as regards these controls.
Sixth: Phytosanitary certificate for the re-export of incoming or in-transit consignments from
abroad.
Phytosanitary certificates may be issued for the purpose of re-exporting incoming or in-transit plant
consignments, which are to be re-exported to another party and if they are in their original form or
have undergone some manufacturing operations that do not cause them to deviate from their plant
form, provided that the original certificate number supplied by the country of origin for the consignment
is mentioned and that a copy of the original certificate is attached, and provided that the certificate has
been issued by the Plant Quarantine office from where the consignment was exported.
Seventh: In all cases, upon arrival of a previously exported returned consignment to an
Egyptian port and when a new phytosanitary certificate is requested for re-export, the following
shall be complied with:
1. Determining what actions should be taken after it has been treated as an incoming consignment.
2. Treating it as a new exported consignment to be subjected to all quarantine procedures applicable
   to exported consignments.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                       73/81
                                           Annex 22
                                 Regarding Article 36 – Export
     Conditions for approving the inspection and registration of sites subject to quarantine
                                     procedures for export
                                           Products to which the requirements of this Annex apply:
1. Stations for the sorting, preparation and packaging of potatoes, citrus, peanuts and any other
   varieties or stations found in accordance with any other resolutions.
2. The requirements contained in any relevant ministerial Decrees, whether in connection with or
   related to quarantine works, shall be applied.
3. Items that are not subject to the two previous clauses and whose inspection requires approved
   export facilities, provided that the parties concerned are given a deadline for meeting the
   conditions which shall be determined by the competent authority, to comply with the specifications
   required for places of inspection and preparation of plant products for export.
First: Required Documents:
1. Copy of the permit for building the facility or approval from the Land Protection Authority or from
   the Municipality.
2. Copy of the Commercial Registration or copy of the Tax registration.
3. Copy of the ID of the owner of the facility (National ID card - Passport).
After review of the original copies and proof of validity of these documents, any other document may
be requested that is required for approval after the competent authority has given instructions thereon,
provided that such approval is not deemed proof of the ownership of the site approved for such facility.
Any changes to the facility shall be notified to Plant Quarantine.
Second: General specifications of export facilities for crops that require inspection in approved
stations:
1. Paved roads to facilitate transport and transfer shall be available for the purpose of preserving
   export products.
2. It shall be surrounded by a solid wall that isolates the facility from external contaminants and a
   gate for raw products to enter and a gate for exported products to exit.
3. The site shall have sufficient permanent shaded areas with solid, well ventilated floors with
   adequate lighting and a clean water source, and auxiliary production tools such as scales, hoists,
   printing equipment, inspection tables and others shall be made available.
4. Appropriate means of communication shall be present.
Third: Specifications of export facilities for potato crops from the areas (PFA): Without prejudice
to any joint ministerial Decrees, the following technical requirements are required:
1. The station shall be licensed by the appropriate authorities and shall not be contrary to the law of
   land protection.
2. The total area shall not be less than eight thousand square meters. It shall be paved or tiled and
   surrounded by a wall on all four sides with a secure entrance for raw products and another for the
   exit of exported products, both under surveillance.
3. The station shall have a source of pure water and appropriate drainage facilities. Regardless of
   whether the source of water in the station is from the municipal water supply or from wells, an up-
   to-date document certifying that the water is free from chemicals and biological contaminants must
   be provided from one of the laboratories approved by the Ministry of Agriculture and Land
   Reclamation.
4. The station shall have areas to store raw potatoes and shall meet the following requirements:
       Have adequate storage capacity.
       The floor shall be tiled or paved, made of concrete or asphalt, with umbrellas that meet the
        technical conditions required for storage.
       Be separate from other storage areas.


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     74/81
5. Storage areas of operating supplies must be separate from the outgoing and raw products
   warehouses.
6. The preparation areas of peatmoss shall have a smooth (non-earth) floor tiled or paved,
   impermeable, easy to clean and disinfect, compatible with the production capacity of the station
   and have a source of pure water.
7. The station shall have the necessary electrical power for operation and adequate lighting for
   sorting, and packaging operations.
8. The sorting and grading areas should allow for a sufficient number of workers for the sorting
   works.
9. The areas for outgoing items must be well ventilated or cooled and the floor should be tiled or
   asphalted.
10. The inspection facilities shall be commensurate with this aim and equipped with sufficient lighting
    and fixtures to allow inspection with all necessary equipment and tools.
11. The station shall keep the following records:
       Books for recording incoming raw products.
       Books for recording outgoing products.
       Books for recording samples sent to analysis bodies.
    with respect to the models prepared for this purpose.
12. The station shall be headed by a manager qualified for the job and the staff shall be trained to sort
    and pack potatoes.
13. A suitable rest area and a well-equipped office shall be available for the inspection committees
    inside the station.
14. The station shall be equipped with an approved weighbridge.
15. The station shall have appropriate means of communication.
16. A refrigerator with a suitable storage capacity shall be provided when required.
17. The station shall be isolated from sources of pollution.
18. The station shall have toilets, changing rooms and a staff canteen large enough to accommodate
    the number of workers in the station.
Fourth: Specifications of export facility for citrus:
Without prejudice to any joint ministerial Decrees, the following technical specifications are required:
1. Perimeter of the station:
       A fence on all four sides shall surround the station with a gate to the outside of station.
       The station shall be isolated from any source of pollution.
       Drainage network outside the station shall be provided.
       The ground shall be asphalted or be a smooth soil.
       There shall be an integrated pest and rodent control system to prevent any animals or pests
        entering the station.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                        75/81
2. Inside the perimeter of the station:
       The floor of the station shall be made of concrete, asphalt or of tile slabs to support the
        required machines, and the floor shall be free of any cracks.
       The inside surfaces of the walls shall be smooth without cracks and they shall be washable.
       A drainage network must be available within the station.
       The station shall have two gates, one for the entry of inbound products and the second for the
        exit of outgoing products, allowing for the effective partition of incoming and outgoing
        products.
       The station shall be safely closed. There shall be no opening in roof supports, doors or
        windows.
       The windows shall be covered by wire netting.
       Curtains shall be available to prevent the entry of insects.
       There shall be adequate lighting.
       There shall be adequate ventilation.
       Electric insect killer or electrocutor trap must be available in the work room to stop flying
        insects as well as a net to control pests and rodents.
       A first aid kit with equipment shall be available.
       Well lit and suitable workbenches for inspecting raw and outgoing materials shall be available.
       There shall be waste bins within the station.
       A slot for evacuating the results of the operation.
       There shall be firefighting equipment.
3. Operating Equipment to be made available:
       Operation line for the process of sorting, washing, waxing, grading and packing of fruits
        efficiently.
       Refrigerators to store the finished product.
       Standby generator.
       Approved weighbridge.
4. Available facilities and Services:
       Disinfectant storage area with asphalted floor, drainage and ventilation source.
       Carton storage area meeting the requirements of industrial security.
       Basin with water sprayers to wash the boxes.
       Export equipment warehouse with concrete floor, well ventilated, equipped with fire
        extinguishers and anti-rodent control.
       Toilets and hand wash basins commensurate with the number of employees in the station.
       Changing rooms with lockers or coat hangers.
       Canteen area.
       A rest area and well-equipped offices for Plant Quarantine committees located at the station.
       Appropriate means of communication.
Fifth: Specifications for export facilities of soybeans crop:
Without prejudice to any joint ministerial Decrees and in addition to general requirements, the
following technical specifications are required:
1. The warehouses used shall be properly ventilated with tiled floors and remain at a temperature
   ranging from 10 to 15o C.


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                          76/81
2. The storage areas shall be subject to periodic inspection by the competent authority.
Sixth: Specifications for export facilities for other crops:
1. For exporting dry plant products which do not require special treatments, preparation, processing,
   packaging and storage, it is sufficient to meet the general requirements of export facilities.
2. For fresh and fragile export plant products such as grapes, strawberries, guava and the like, the
   facility shall have the same specifications as for citrus crops but taking into account the
   appropriate operating line for those specific crops.
In all cases, the following shall be observed:
1. A copy of the export facility's inspection record shall be attached to its approved operating records,
   and should there be any discrepancy in the facility’s specifications when in operation as shown by
   the details of the inspection record, then this should be reported to the competent authority.
2. In addition to the inspection necessary for the station's approval by the Joint Committee, Plant
   Quarantine shall carry out periodic inspections whenever necessary.
3. Plant Quarantine shall have the right to add any other specifications and issue appropriate
   instructions if required by some specific export product.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     77/81
                                             Annex 23
                                    Regarding Article 38 – Export
         Conditions and procedures for the export of crop seeds and plants for growing
The following products shall not be exported except after the exporter has submitted a prior
import permit from the importing country indicating the necessary quarantine conditions for
the products should these conditions not be in place within Plant Quarantine.
First: Crop Seeds
1. To initiate an export procedure, the exporter shall submit the following documents to Plant
   Quarantine:
       Valid approval from the Agricultural Crops Committee.
       Certificate of examination and approval of seeds from the Seed Inspection and Certification
        Committee from the Central Administration for the Examination and Certification of Seeds.
    Each certificate shall be completed with the following data:
    Name of exporter - Product - Number - Weight - Seed Committee's approval number - Lot number
    - Inspection results - Approval Seal of the Seed Department.
    All varieties of seeds must be inspected and have approval certificates of seeds for export with the
    exception of the 25 crop varieties shown in the table below, which are excluded from the need of
    obtaining an approval from the Agricultural Crops Committee,.

             Crop seeds not submitted to approval of the Agricultural Crops Committee
                 Castor                          Mulukhiyah                          Anise
                 Melon                             Lettuce                           Fennel
                 Chard                            Spinach                             Tyle
                Cabbage                          Dandelion                           Cumin
               Cauliflower                        Chicory                          Coriander
                  Kale                            Purslane                            Leek
                 Rocca                            Hibiscus                          Parsley
                 Radish                             Okra                             Celery
                    Dill

2. If the exporter wishes to change the destination or period mentioned in the approval issued by the
   Agricultural Crops Committee, fresh approval shall be obtained from the Agricultural Crops
   Committee to change the destination or period required for submission to the Plant Quarantine; no
   other item can be changed from the original approval.
3. In the case of exporting seeds for manufacturing purposes, the consignment shall be exempted
   from the approval of the Agricultural Crops Committee and from inspection and approval
   certificates. In this case, the concerned party shall submit a prior import permit from the importing
   country with all necessary requirements.
4. The crops seeds intended for export abroad must meet the following conditions:
       They must carry an inspection certificate issued by the Central Department of Seeds.
       Each homogeneous consignment shall contain seeds of the same type and variety.
       Seed consignments must be packed in new, sealed packages. The following data should be
        written on the packages:
        Type and variety followed by the word “seed” - gross and net weight - the number of
        consignments (the lot) - production entity (Arab Republic of Egypt) - the name of the exporter -
        the trademark of the exporter (if any).




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                     78/81
Second: Fruit seedlings and horticultural crops:
1. To start the export procedure, the exporter shall submit the following documents to Plant
   Quarantine:
    •   Valid approval from the Agricultural Crops Committee.
    •   The record of the inspection and examination of the seedlings by the General Department of
        Horticulture, stating the approval’s number from the Seeds Committee and the number of
        seedlings - their variety - the exporting company - the state of the seedlings - the seal mark for
        the seedlings. The record shall be signed and stamped with the seal of the General
        Department of Horticulture.
2. Consignments intended for cultivation or planting, or consignments not prepared for cultivation or
   planting may not be exported if they contain natural soil suitable for agriculture.
Third: Seedlings with a part of the growing soil (natural soil suitable for agriculture)
To start the exporting procedure, the exporter shall submit the following documents to Plant
Quarantine:
    1. Valid approval from the Agricultural Crops Committee.
    2. The record of the inspection and examination of the seedlings by the General Department of
       Horticulture, stating the approval’s number from the Seeds Committee and the number of
       seedlings - their variety - the exporting company - the state of the seedlings - the seal stamp
       for the seedlings. The record shall be signed and stamped with the seal of the General
       Department of Horticulture.
Fourth: Non-productive Palm Sprouts:
To start the export procedure, the exporter shall submit the following documents to Plant Quarantine:
    1. Valid approval from the Agricultural Crops Committee.
    2. Pre - and post - harvest inspection record of the sprouts by a joint committee from the
       Horticulture Research Institute – the General Directorate of Palm Care and Development – the
       Central Palm Laboratory – the Plant Protection Research Institute.
The inspection record shall include the name of the exporter, the destination, the production sites
(basin, area, municipality and governorate), the seal mark, the variety and number of palms sprouts,
the findings and duration of the inspection and confirmation that the sprouts are valid for export. The
record shall be stamped with the stamp of the General Directorate for Palm Care and Development.
The length of sprouts’ stem shall not exceed 3 m.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      79/81
                                         Annex 24
                                Regarding Article 40 – Export
 Plant products and articles whose export is completely prohibited or prohibited except under
                                     certain conditions

  S. No.           Item         Export Conditions
     1      Non-ginned cotton   Can only be authorized by a Decree of the President of the
            and cotton seed     Republic
            whether prepared
            for seeds or not
     2      White Palm fronds   Total prohibition
            near the core of
            the palm
     3      Green fronds cut    After approval to export from the governmental officials, the
            from non-           following procedures shall be followed:
            productive palms    1. Plant Quarantine shall be notified of the numbers and location
                                    of the non-productive palms (Heesh) in each governorate,
                                    specifying the number of authorized palm leaves to be
                                    exported from them.
                                2. Plant Quarantine shall be notified of the numbers and names
                                    of exporters in these governorates and their exporting shares.
                                3. Palm fronds shall be cut under the supervision of the General
                                    Directorate of Palm Care and Development - General
                                    Department of Horticulture and the directorates of agriculture
                                    in respect of the applicable conditions to be used when
                                    cutting, assembling, processing, inspecting, preparing and
                                    shipping these items:
                                     Cutting 1 or 2 green fronds from each of the non-
                                         productive palms (free from disease symptoms or insects)
                                         leaving a base of not less than 20 cm intact.
                                     Cutting shall be carried out with sharp pruning shears or a
                                         pruning saw cleaned with fungal and bacterial
                                         disinfectants as work progresses from one tree to the
                                         next (chloroox disinfectant).
                                     Spraying or covering the cut on the tree with one of the
                                         recommended pesticides against red palm weevil to clean
                                         the chopped palm base.
                                     Male palms shall not be cut.
                                     Avoid cutting the white frond, which is the frond next to
                                         the core of the palm before the bifurcation between the
                                         weaving palm leaf, with a length of less than 80 cm and of
                                         a white or yellowish white color.
                                     The exporter wishing to cut green palm fronds for export
                                         shall apply in sufficient time to the competent authority
                                         before exporting, specifying the quantity of palm fronds to
                                         be cut, the destination, the date of the cutting, and the
                                         names of the owners of the palm trees to be cut.
                                     The cut quantity shall be collected in the place specified
                                         for collection. A joint committee report shall be prepared
                                         from the following authorities (Agriculture Directorate,
                                         Central Department of Horticulture, and Central
                                         Laboratory for Palm Development Research), to check
                                         the quantities ready for export and make sure that they
                                         meet the above conditions. The closure of the packages
                                         shall be done by the Central Department of Horticulture
                                         with a lead seal whose number shall be be recorded in
                                         the report of the joint committee.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                 80/81
                                          The report from the Joint Committee shall be submitted to
                                           the Plant Quarantine Office of the export port for the
                                           quarantine and consignment inspection with the letter of
                                           the Joint Committee and the completion of the rest of the
                                           export procedures.
     4      Export of              After authorization (from the concerned authorities) from the
            productive date        Ministry of Agriculture, the export shall be permitted with the
            palm sprouts of        following conditions:
            Egyptian varieties     1. The export destination shall be scientific and research entities
                                       for a limited number of ten sprouts per variety per entity, once
                                       every three years.
                                   2. The length of the sprout wood to be exported shall not exceed
                                       one meter.
     5      Arable soil               The exporter shall submit a proof of approval from the Plant
            containing organic         Quarantine authority in the importing country, to import soil or
            matter, as well as         any plants whether prepared or not for cultivation or planting if
            consignments               they are mixed with agricultural soil.
            intended for
            cultivation or
            planting or other
            consignments not
            intended for
            cultivation or
            planting if they are
            mixed with
            agricultural soil
     6      Baby Small Potato      They shall be produced from fields originally intended for the
                                   production of potatoes of this size and at this condition.
     7      Palm pollen            1. There shall be a proof from the Central Laboratory for Palm
            (Pollen)                  Research that there are surplus quantities for export.
                                   2. There shall be accurate statistics on date palms in Egypt, on
                                      the productive capacity of Egypt, on Egypt's need for palm
                                      pollen and on surplus which can be exported with the
                                      knowledge of the Central Laboratory for Palm Research.
                                   3. The Central Laboratory for Palm Research shall specify the
                                      regulations for the export of palm trees.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Ägypten, Pflanzenquarantäneverordnung 2019/562                                                      81/81
