GUERNSEY

Preserved Plant Health Regulations based on the GB Plant Health Regulations and the retained
Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament of the Council of 26 October 2016 on
protective measures against pests of plants

Quelle: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ , https://www.legislation.gov.uk, https://www.gov.gg/

(Redaktionelle Bearbeitung und Konsolidierung, Julius Kühn-Institut, Bundesforschungsinstitut für
Kulturpflanzen, Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit,
10.01.2024)

Die Wiedergabe erfolgt ohne Gewähr.

Inoffiziell konsolidierte Fassung. Geändert durch:
►M9      The Plant Health (Preserved EU law) (Amendment) (Guernsey) Regulations, 2023, S.I.
         2023/41
►M8      The Animals and Animal Health, Feed and Food, Plantsand Plant Health (Amendment)
         Regulations 2022, S.I. 2022 No. 1315
►M7      The Plant Health (Brexit) (Amendment) (Guernsey) Regulations, 2022, S.I. 2022 No. 5
►M6      The Plant Health (Brexit) (Amendment) (Guernsey) Regulations, 2021, S.I. 2021 No. 53
►M5      The Official Controls, Plant Health, Seeds andSeed Potatoes (Amendment etc.) Regulations
         2021, SI 2021 No. 426
►M4      The Plant Health (Amendment) (EU Exit) Regulations 2021, SI 2021 No. 79
►M3      The Official Controls (Animals, Feed and Food, Plant Healthetc.) (Amendment) (EU Exit)
         (No. 2) Regulations 2020, SI 2020 No. 1631
►M2      The Plant Health (Brexit) (Amendment) (Guernsey) Regulations, 2020, S.I. 2020 No. 130
►M1      The Plant Health (Amendment etc.) (EU Exit) Regulations 2020, SI 2020 No. 1482


Preserved Plant Health Regulations based on the GB Plant Health Regulations and the
 retained Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament of the Council of 26
            October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants

                                            CHAPTER I
                                Subject matter, scope and definitions

                                              Article 1
                                      Subject matter and scope

1. This Regulation establishes rules to determine the phytosanitary risks posed by any species, strain
or biotype of pathogenic agents, animals or parasitic plants injurious to plants or plant products
(‘pests’) and measures to reduce those risks to an acceptable level.

2. Where there is evidence that non-parasitic plants, other than those regulated under Article 4(1) of
Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014, pose phytosanitary risks which would have a severe economic, social
and environmental impact on ►M2 Guernsey ◄, those non-parasitic plants may be considered as
pests for the purposes of this Regulation.

3. ►M1 ----- ◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  1/95
                                                  Article 2
                                                 Definitions

For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply:

(1)   ‘plants’ means living plants and the following living parts of plants:

      (a)    seeds, in the botanical sense, other than those not intended for planting;

      (b)    fruits, in the botanical sense;

      (c)    vegetables;

      (d)    tubers, corms, bulbs, rhizomes, roots, rootstocks, stolons;

      (e)    shoots, stems, runners;

      (f)    cut flowers;

      (g)    branches with or without foliage;

      (h)    cut trees retaining foliage;

      (i)    leaves, foliage;

      (j)    plant tissue cultures, including cell cultures, germplasm, meristems, chimaeric clones,
             micro-propagated material;

      (k)    live pollen and spores;

      (l)    buds, budwood, cuttings, scions, grafts;

(2)   ‘plant products’ means unmanufactured material of plant origin and those manufactured
      products that, by their nature or that of their processing, may create a risk of the spread of
      quarantine pests.

      Except where otherwise provided in the ►M1 Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, other◄
      ►M2 preserved EU law within the meaning of section 3(1) of the European Union (Brexit)
      (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law, 2018 or any enactment implementing the same ◄, wood shall only
      be considered as a plant product if it fulfils one or more of the following criteria:

      (a)    it retains all or part of its natural round surface, with or without bark;

      (b)    it has not retained its natural round surface due to sawing, cutting or cleaving;

      (c)    it is in the form of chips, particles, sawdust, wood waste, shavings or scrap, and has not
             undergone processing involving the use of glue, heat or pressure or a combination
             thereof to produce pellet, briquettes, plywood or particle board;

      (d)    it is, or is intended to be, used as packaging material, whether or not it is actually in use
             for transport of goods;

      (3)    ‘planting’ means any operation for the placing of plants in a growing medium, or by
             grafting or similar operations, to ensure their subsequent growth, reproduction or
             propagation;

      (4)    ‘plants for planting’ means plants intended to remain planted, to be planted or to be
             replanted;




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    2/95
     (5)    ‘other object’ means any material or object, other than plants or plant products, capable
            of harbouring or spreading pests, including soil or growing medium;

     (6)    ‘competent authority’ means ►M2 the Committee for the Environment & Infrastructure
            and any reference to "a competent authority", "competent authorities", "each competent
            authority" or "any of the competent authorities" is to be construed, unless the context
            requires otherwise, as a reference to that Committee; ◄

     (7)    ‘lot’ means a number of units of a single commodity, identifiable by its homogeneity of
            composition, origin and other relevant elements, forming part of a consignment;

     (8)    ‘trade unit’ means the smallest commercial or other useable unit applicable to the
            marketing stage concerned, which may be the subset or the whole of a lot;

     (9)    ‘professional operator’ means any person, governed by public or private law, involved
            professionally in, and legally responsible for, one or more of the following activities
            concerning plants, plant products and other objects:

            (a)   planting;

            (b)   breeding;

            (c)   production, including growing, multiplying and maintaining;

            (d)   introduction into, and movement within and out of, ►M2 Guernsey ◄;

            (e)   making available on the market;

            (f)   storage, collection, dispatching and processing;

     (10)   ‘registered operator’ means a professional operator registered in accordance with
            Article 65;

     (11)   ‘authorised operator’ means a registered operator authorised by the competent authority
            to issue ►M4 UK ◄ plant passports in accordance with Article 89, to apply a mark in
            accordance with Article 98, or to issue attestations in accordance with Article 99;

     (12)   ‘final user’ means any person acting for purposes which are outside that person's trade,
            business or profession who acquires plants or plant products for personal use;

     (13)   ‘test’ means an official examination, other than visual, to determine if pests are present or
            to identify pests;

     (14)   ‘treatment’ means a procedure, whether official or non-official, for the killing, inactivation
            or removal of pests, or for rendering those pests infertile, or for the devitalisation of plants
            or plant products;

     (15)   ‘incidence’ means the proportion or number of units in which a pest is present in a
            sample, consignment, field or other defined population;

     (16)   ‘establishment’ means the perpetuation, for the foreseeable future, of a pest within an
            area after entry;

     (17)   ‘eradication’ means the application of phytosanitary measures to eliminate a pest from an
            area;




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    3/95
     (18)   ‘containment’ means the application of phytosanitary measures in and around an infested
            area to prevent the spread of a pest;

     (19)   ‘quarantine station’ means any official station for holding pests, plants, plant products or
            other objects in quarantine;

     (20)   ‘confinement facility’ means any facility, other than quarantine stations, where pests,
            plants, plant products or other objects are kept under confinement conditions;

     (21)   ‘traceability code’ means a letter, numerical or alphanumerical code that identifies a
            consignment, lot or trade unit, used for traceability purposes, including codes referring to
            a lot, batch, series, date of production or professional operator documents;

     (22)   ‘phytosanitary measure’ means any official measure having the purpose to prevent the
            introduction or spread of quarantine pests or to limit the economic impact of regulated
            non-quarantine pests.

     (23)   Regulation (EU) 2017/625’ means Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of the European
            Parliament and of the Council on official controls and other official activities performed to
            ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant
            health and plant protection products(13);

     (24)   ‘appropriate authority’ has the meaning given in Article 2a;

     (25)   ►M2 ----- ◄

     (26)   ►M2 'Relevant British Island authority' in relation to a country or territory forming part of a
            Relevant British Island, means the authority that is officially responsible in that country or
            territory for the implementation of rules in relation to protective measures against pests of
            plants; ◄

     (27)   ►M2 'Relevant British Island pest-free area' means an area forming the whole or part of
            a Relevant British Island which has been established as a pest-free area in accordance
            with ISPM4 in respect of a Relevant British Island quarantine pest◄;

     (28)   ►M2 'Relevant British Island quarantine pest' means a pest which:

            (a)   is present in Guernsey, but not in an area forming the whole or part of a Relevant
                  British Island which is recognised as free from that pest in accordance with ISPM
                  4; and

            (b)   may not, under the relevant legislation applying in the area in question of the
                  Relevant British Island, be introduced into that area◄;

     (29)   ►M2 'Relevant British Island' means a country or territory within the British Islands
            except for Guernsey and Northern Ireland; ◄

     (30)   ‘Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1702’ means Commission Delegated
            Regulation (EU) 2019/1702 establishing a list of priority pests(14);

     (31)   ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area' ◄ means ►M2 an area forming the whole or part of
            Guernsey ◄ which has been established as a pest-free area in accordance with ISPM4
            in respect of a PFA quarantine pest;

     (32)   ‘►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄’ has the meaning given in Article 4;



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    4/95
      (33)   ‘►M2 Guernsey regulated non-quarantine pest ◄’ has the meaning given in Article 36;

      (34)   ‘IPPC’ means the International Plant Protection Convention 1951(15);

      (35)   ‘ISPM4’ means International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures No. 4 of November
             1995 on the requirements for the establishment of pest free areas, prepared by the
             Secretariat of the IPPC established by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the
             United Nations(16);

      (36)   ‘ISPM15’ means International Standard for Phytosanitary Measures No. 15 of March
             2002 on guidelines for regulating wood packaging material in international trade,
             prepared by the Secretariat of the IPPC established by the Food and Agriculture
             Organisation of the United Nations(17);

      (37)   ‘PFA quarantine pest’ has the meaning given in Article 32(1);

      (38)   ‘the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation” means Commission Implementing Regulation
             (EU) 2019/2072 establishing uniform conditions for the implementation of Regulation
             (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and the Council, as regards protective
             measures against pests of plants(18);

      (39)   ‘priority pest’ has the meaning given in Article 6(1);

      (40)   ‘provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄’ has the meaning given in Article 30(A1);

      (41)   ►M2 'relevant British Islands legislation', in relation to a country or territory in a relevant
             British Island, means legislation on protective measures against pests of plants that is in
             force in that country or territory ◄;

      (42)   ►M2 ----- ◄

                                            ►M1 Article 2a
                                   Meaning of appropriate authority◄

►M2 In this Regulation, "the appropriate authority" means the Committee for the Environment &
Infrastructure.◄

                                             ►M1 Article 2b
                            Meaning of third country and related expressions

1.    In this Regulation:

      ‘third country’ means any country or territory outside the British Islands; ‘EU Member State’
      means a member State.

2.   For the purposes of this Regulation, any reference to the territory of an EU Member State or the
European Union is not to be treated as including the Canary Islands, Ceuta, Melilla or the French
Overseas Departments. ◄

►M4 3.Any reference in this Regulation (however expressed) to plants, plant products orother objects
originating in or from a third country, or dispatched from a third country, doesnot include:

a)    any plants, plant products or other objects in so far as they are part of a relevantNI trade unit; or

b)    any wood packaging material in use in the transport of a relevant NI trade unit.◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                      5/95
                                           ►M4 Article 2c
      Meaning of qualifying Northern Ireland goods and other expressions relating to qualifying
                                      Northern Ireland goods◄

►M4 In this Regulation:

(a)      ‘EU Plant Health Regulation’ means Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament
         and of the Council on protective measures against pests of plants, as it applies in Northern
         Ireland by virtue of the Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland in the EU withdrawal agreement(2);

(b)      ‘other permitted plant passport’ means a plant passport which has been issued in respect of a
         relevant NI trade unit before its introduction into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ and by which, pursuant to
         paragraph 2 of Article 95a, that trade unit is permitted to be accompanied if moved within ►M2
         Guernsey ◄;

(c)      ‘qualifying Northern Ireland goods’ has the meaning given in the Definition of Qualifying
         Northern Ireland Goods (EU Exit) Regulations 2020(3);

(d)      ‘relevant NI trade unit’ means a trade unit of plants, plant products or other objects listed in
         Annex 13 or 14 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation which consists entirely of qualifying
         Northern Ireland goods, other than any such trade unit in respect of which a UK plant passport
         has been issued in accordance with Articles 83 to 86, 87, 89 and 90.◄

                                                 CHAPTER II
                                               Quarantine pests

                                                  Section 1
                                               Quarantine pests

                                                   Article 3
                                        Definition of quarantine pests

A pest is a ‘quarantine pest’, with respect to a defined territory, if it fulfils all of the following conditions:

(a)      its identity is established, within the meaning of point (1) of Section 1 of Annex I;

(b)      it is not present in the territory, within the meaning of point (2)(a) of Section 1 of Annex I, or, if
         present, is not widely distributed within that territory, within the meaning of points (2)(b) and (c)
         of Section 1 of Annex I;

(c)      it is capable of entering into, becoming established in and spreading within the territory, or, if
         present in the territory, but not widely distributed, is capable of entering into, becoming
         established in and spreading within those parts of that territory where it is absent, within the
         meaning of point (3) of Section 1 of Annex I;

(d)      its entry, establishment and spread would, within the meaning of point (4) of Section 1 of Annex
         I, have an unacceptable economic, environmental or social impact on that territory, or, if present
         but not widely distributed, for those parts of the territory where it is absent; and

(e)      feasible and effective measures are available to prevent the entry into, establishment in or
         spread of that pest within, that territory and to mitigate the risks and impact thereof.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                          6/95
                                              Section 2
                                    ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests

                                               Article 4
                            Definition of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests

A quarantine pest is a ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest’ if the defined territory referred to in the
introductory part of Article 3 is ►M2 Guernsey ◄ and if it is included in the list ►M1 in Annex 2 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation◄.

                                           Article 5
 Prohibition of introduction, movement, holding, multiplication or release of ►M2 Guernsey ◄
                                      quarantine pests

1. A ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest shall not be introduced into, moved within, or held, multiplied
or released in, the ►M2 Guernsey ◄ .

2. ►M1 -----

3. ►M1 The appropriate authority ►M2 may by regulations amend or modify ◄ the list of ►M2
Guernsey quarantine pests◄ in Annex 2 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation where the results
of an assessment show, in respect of ►M2 Guernsey ◄, that a pest which is not included in that list
fulfils the conditions listed in Article 3, or that a pest which is included in that list no longer fulfils one or
more of those conditions.◄

4. ►M1 ----◄

                                                    Article 6
                                                 Priority pests

1. ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests are ‘priority pests’ if they fulfil all of the following conditions:

(a)    they fulfil, as regards ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , one or more of the conditions set out in point (2) of
       Section 1 of Annex I;

(b)    their potential economic, environmental or social impact is the most severe in respect of the
       ►M2 Guernsey ◄ as set out in Section 2 of Annex I;

(c)    they are ►M1 included in the list in the Annex to Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
       2019/1702◄.

2. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend the list of priority pests in the Annex to
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/1702 where the results of an assessment show that a
►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ which is not included in that list fulfils the conditions referred to in
points (a) and (b) of paragraph 1, or that a pest which is included in that list no longer fulfils either of
those conditions.◄

                                              Article 7
                                   Amendment of Section 1 of Annex I

The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations amend ◄ Section 1 of Annex I in order to adapt it
to the development of scientific and technical knowledge and of relevant international standards.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                          7/95
                                         Article 8
      ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests used for official testing, scientific or educational
                     purposes, trials, varietal selections or breeding

1. By way of derogation from Article 5(1), ►M1 a competent authority ◄ may, on application,
temporarily authorise the introduction into, the movement within, and the holding and multiplication in,
►M1 in the relevant territory of ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ or provisional ►M2 Guernsey
quarantine pests◄ for official testing, scientific or educational purposes, trials, varietal selections, or
breeding.

An authorisation shall be granted for the activity concerned only if adequate restrictions are imposed
to ensure that the introduction, movement, holding, multiplication or use of the pest concerned does
not result in its establishment or spread within the ►M1 relevant ◄ territory, taking into account the
identity, biology and means of dispersal of the pest, the activity envisaged, the interaction with the
environment and other relevant factors relating to the risk posed by that pest.

2. Authorisations granted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall include all of the following conditions:

(a)   the pest is to be kept in a location and under conditions which:

      (i)    the competent ►M1 authority considers◄ to be appropriate; and

      (ii)   are referred to in the authorisation;

(b)   the activity involving the pest is to be carried out in a quarantine station or a confinement facility
      designated by the competent authority in accordance with Article 60 and referred to in the
      authorisation;

(c)   the activity involving the pest is to be carried out by personnel:

      (i)    whose scientific and technical competence is considered to be appropriate by the
             competent authority; and

      (ii)   who are referred to in the authorisation;

(d)   the pest is to be accompanied by the authorisation when introduced into, moved within, or held
      or multiplied in, the ►M1 relevant ◄ territory.

3. ►M1 An authorisation◄ granted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be limited as to the quantity of the
pest that can be introduced, moved, held, multiplied or used and the length of time that ►M1 is◄
adequate for the activity concerned. ►M1 The authorisation◄ shall not exceed the capacity of the
designated quarantine station or confinement facility.

►M1 An authorisation◄ shall include the restrictions necessary to adequately eliminate the risk of
establishment and spread of the ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ or provisional ►M2
Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ to which the authorisation relates ◄.

4. The competent authority shall monitor compliance with the conditions referred to in paragraph 2
and the limitation and the restrictions referred to in paragraph 3 and take the necessary action in the
event of non-compliance. Where appropriate, that action shall be the revocation of the authorisation
referred to in paragraph 1.

5. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations lay ◄ down detailed rules concerning:

(a)   ►M1 -----◄;



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                     8/95
(b)     the procedure and conditions for granting the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1; and

(c)     the monitoring of compliance and the actions to be taken in the event of non-compliance, as
        referred to in paragraph 4.

                                                Article 9
                                  Notification of an imminent danger

1. ►M1 ----- ◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 Where a professional operator has any evidence concerning an imminent danger of the entry
of a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ or a provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ into
►M2 Guernsey ◄, or into a part of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ where it is not yet present, the professional
operator must immediately notify the competent authority.◄

                                              Article 10
      Official confirmation by the competent authorities of the presence of a ►M2 Guernsey ◄
                                          quarantine pest

Where a competent authority suspects or has received evidence concerning the presence of a ►M1
►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ or a provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ in a part of its
territory ◄ where that pest was previously not known to be present, or in a consignment of plants,
plant products or other objects introduced into, intended to be introduced into, or moved within, the
►M2 Guernsey ◄ , it shall immediately take any measures necessary to confirm on the basis of a
diagnosis of an official laboratory as referred to in Article 37 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625 (‘to officially
confirm’), whether that pest is present or not.

Pending the official confirmation of the presence of the pest, the ►M1 competent authority ◄ shall,
where appropriate, take phytosanitary measures to eliminate the risk of spread of the pest.

The suspicion or evidence referred to in the first paragraph of this Article may be based on any
information received pursuant to Articles 14 and 15, or any other source.

                                              ►M2 Article 11
                                                 ----- ◄

                                      Article 12
Information on ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests to be provided to professional operators by
                               the competent authorities

1. Where one of the situations referred to in ►M2 paragraph 2◄ is officially confirmed, the
competent authority shall ensure that professional operators whose plants, plant products or other
objects may be affected are informed of the presence of the ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest ►M9
or provisional Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ without delay.

2. ►M2 The situations are:

(a)     the presence in Guernsey of a Guernsey quarantine pest not known to be present there;

(b)     the presence of a Guernsey quarantine pest in a part of Guernsey where it was previously not
        present;

(c)     the presence of a Guernsey quarantine pest in a consignment of plant, plant products or other
        objects introduced into, intended to be introduced into, or moved within, Guernsey. ◄


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                     9/95
                                             Article 13
      Information on priority pests to be provided to the public by the competent authorities

Where one of the situations referred to in points (a) and (b) of ►M1 ----- ◄ ►M2 Article 12(2) ◄ is
officially confirmed as regards a priority pest, the competent authority shall inform the public about the
measures it has taken or intends to take and about any measures to be taken by relevant categories
of professional operators or other persons.

                                           Article 14
                   Measures to be taken immediately by professional operators

1. Where a professional operator suspects or becomes aware that a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest
◄ ►M1 or a provisional◄ ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ is present in plants, plant products or
other objects which are under that operator's control, it shall immediately notify the competent
authority thereof, in order for that competent authority to take actions in accordance with Article 10.
Where appropriate, the professional operator shall also immediately take precautionary measures to
prevent the establishment and spread of that pest.

2. The competent authority may decide that the notification referred to in paragraph 1 is not required
where a specific pest is known to occur in an area. ►M1 The competent authority must promptly
publish any decision made under this paragraph in such manner as the competent authority considers
is appropriate to bring it to the attention of the professional operators who may be affected by the
decision.◄

3. Where a professional operator receives an official confirmation concerning the presence of a ►M2
Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest ►M9 or provisional Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ in plants, plant
products or other objects which are under that operator's control, it shall consult the competent
authority regarding the action to be taken and shall proceed, as applicable, with the actions referred to
in paragraphs 4 to 7.

4. The professional operator shall immediately take the necessary measures to prevent the spread of
that pest. Where the competent authority has provided instructions concerning those measures, the
professional operator shall act in accordance with those instructions.

5. Where so instructed by the competent authority, the professional operator shall take the necessary
measures to eliminate the pest from the plants, plant products or other objects concerned and from
that operator's premises, land, soil, water or other infested elements which are under its control.

6. Unless otherwise instructed by the competent authority, the professional operator shall, without
delay, withdraw from the market the plants, plant products and other objects which are under that
operator's control and in which the pest could be present.

Where those plants, plant products or other objects have left the control of the professional operator,
the professional operator shall, unless otherwise instructed by the competent authority, immediately:

(a)    inform the persons in the trade chain to whom those plants, plant products and other objects
       have been supplied of the presence of the pest;

(b)    provide those persons with guidelines on the necessary measures to be taken during shipment
       of the respective plants, plant products and other objects to reduce the risk of spread or escape
       of the pests concerned; and

(c)    recall those plants, plant products or other objects.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  10/95
7. Where paragraph 1, 3, 4, 5 or 6 of this Article applies, the professional operator shall, on request,
provide to the competent authority all information which is relevant for the members of the public.
Without prejudice to Article 13, if action is necessary with regard to the plants, plant products or other
objects in which the respective pest may be present, the competent authority shall inform the public as
soon as possible of that fact.

                                            Article 15
                Measures to be taken by persons other than professional operators

1. Where any person other than a professional operator becomes aware of the presence of a ►M2
Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest ►M9 or provisional Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ or has reason to
suspect such a presence, that person shall immediately notify the competent authority. Where that
notification is not made in writing, the competent authority shall officially record it. If so requested by
the competent authority, that person shall provide that authority with the information which is in its
possession concerning that presence.

2. The competent authority may decide that the notification referred to in paragraph 1 is not required
where a specific pest is known to be present in an area.

►M1 2A. The competent authority must promptly publish any decision made under paragraph 2 in
such manner as the competent authority considers is appropriate to bring the decision to the attention of
the public.◄

3. The person who made the notification referred to in paragraph 1 shall consult the competent
authority on the action to be taken and shall, in accordance with the instructions of the competent
authority, take the measures necessary to prevent the spread of that pest and to eliminate it from the
plants, plant products or other objects concerned and, where applicable, from that person's premises.

                                              Article 16
                                Derogations to notification obligations

The notification obligations referred to in Articles 14 and 15 shall not apply where:

(a)   a ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest ►M9 or provisional Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ is found
      to be present in the infested zone of a demarcated area established for the containment of that
      pest, as referred to in Article 18(2);

(b)   a ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest ►M9 or provisional Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ is found
      to be present in the infested zone of a demarcated area and subject to eradication measures
      requiring eight years or more, during the period of those first eight years.

                                             Article 17
                          Eradication of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests

1. Where one of the situations referred to in points (a) and (b) of ►M1 ----- ◄ ►M2 Article 12(2) ◄ is
officially confirmed, the competent authority shall immediately take all necessary phytosanitary
measures to eradicate the relevant ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest from the area concerned.
Those measures shall be taken in accordance with Annex II.

That obligation to eradicate shall not apply where ►M2 preserved EU law within the meaning of
section 3(1) of the European Union (Brexit) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law, 2018◄ ►M1 relating to plant
health provides or regulations made under Article 28(1) provide ◄ otherwise.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    11/95
2. The competent authority shall without delay investigate the source of the presence of the ►M2
Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest concerned, in particular where that presence may be related to
movements of plants, plant products or other objects, and the possibility that the pest concerned has
been spread to further plants, plant products or other objects by those movements.

3. ►M1 ----- ◄

4. The measures referred to in paragraph 1 and the investigations referred to in paragraph 2 shall be
taken irrespective of whether the pest is present on public or private premises.

                                            Article 18
                                 Establishment of demarcated areas

1. Where one of the situations referred to in points (a) and (b) of ►M1 ----- ◄ ►M2 Article 12(2) ◄ is
officially confirmed, the competent authority shall immediately establish one or more areas where the
eradication measures referred to in Article 17(1) are to be taken (‘demarcated area’).

The demarcated area shall consist of an infested zone and a buffer zone.

2. The infested zone shall, as applicable, contain:

(a)   all plants known to be infested by the pest concerned;

(b)   all plants showing signs or symptoms indicating possible infestation by that pest;

(c)   all other plants liable to have been or become contaminated or infested by that pest, including
      plants liable to be infested due to their susceptibility to that pest and their close proximity to
      infested plants or common source of production, if known, with infested plants, or plants grown
      from them;

(d)   land, soil, water courses or other elements infested, or liable to be infested, by the pest
      concerned.

3. The buffer zone shall be adjacent to the infested zone and shall surround it.

Its extent shall be appropriate in view of the risk of the pest concerned spreading out of the infested
zone naturally or by human activities in the infested zone and its surroundings, and shall be decided in
accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II.

However, where any risk of the pest spreading out of the infested zone is eliminated or reduced to an
acceptable level through natural or artificial barriers, no buffer zone shall be required to be
established.

4. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, where upon initial examination the competent authority
concludes, in view of the nature of the pest, the plant, plant product or other object concerned and the
site where it was found, that the pest concerned can be eliminated immediately, the competent
authority may decide not to establish a demarcated area.

In that case, it shall carry out a survey to determine whether any further plants or plant products have
been infested. On the basis of that survey, the competent authority shall determine whether there is a
need to establish a demarcated area.

5. ►M1 ----- ◄

6. ►M1 ----- ◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 12/95
                                          Article 19
            Surveys and modifications of demarcated areas and lifting of restrictions

1. ►M1 The◄ competent authorities shall at least annually, at appropriate times, carry out a survey of
each demarcated area as regards the development of the presence of the pest concerned.

Those surveys shall be carried out in accordance with Article 22(2).

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 Where appropriate, the◄ competent authorities shall modify the boundaries of ►M1 the
infested zones, the buffer zones and the demarcated areas ◄, in view of the results of the surveys
referred to in paragraph 1.

4. ►M1 The◄ competent authorities may abolish a demarcated area and terminate the respective
eradication measures where the pest-free status of that area has been verified. This will be the case
where the following two conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   the survey referred to in paragraph 1 shows that the area has been found to be free from the
      pest concerned; and

(b)   the pest concerned has not been found to be present in that demarcated area for a sufficiently
      long period.

5. When deciding on the modifications referred to in paragraph 3 or the abolition of the demarcated
area referred to in paragraph 4, the competent authority concerned shall take into account at least the
following factors:

(a)   the biology of the pest and the vector concerned;

(b)   the presence of host plants;

(c)   the ecoclimatic conditions; and

(d)   the likelihood of the eradication measures having been successful.

6. By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article, annual surveys shall not be required to be
carried out in the infested zone of demarcated areas established for:

(a)   pests subject to eradication measures requiring eight years or more;

(b)   pests subject to the containment measures ►M1 where applicable◄.

7. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations supplement ◄ this Regulation by further
specifying the pests referred to in point (a) of paragraph 6 of this Article and in point (b) of Article 16
and conditions for the application of those derogations.

                                       ►M1 Article 20
             Reports on measures taken in accordance with Articles 17, 18 and 19◄
                                          Article 21
                                   Amendment of Annex II

►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend ◄ Annex II in order to adapt it to the
development of scientific and technical knowledge and of relevant international standards.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                     13/95
                                         Article 22
      Surveys on ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests and pests provisionally qualifying as ►M2
                                Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests

1. ►M1 The competent authorities ◄ shall carry out risk-based surveys ►M1 in the territories for
which they are responsible ◄, over specific periods of time, checking at least for:

(a)      the presence of any ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest; and

(b)      signs or symptoms of any ►M1 provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ or any pest
         which is subject to measures pursuant to Article 29(2A)◄.

Those surveys shall take place in all areas where the pest concerned was not known to be present.

►M1 ----- ◄

2. The design of the surveys referred to in paragraph 1 shall be based on the risk that the pest
occurs in the area covered by each survey. They shall consist, at least, of visual examinations by the
competent authority ►M1 carrying out the survey ◄ and, where appropriate, the collection of samples
and performance of tests. Those surveys shall be carried out in all appropriate locations and shall
include, where appropriate, premises, vehicles, machinery and packaging used by professional
operators and other persons. They shall be based on sound scientific and technical principles and
shall be carried out at appropriate times with regard to the possibility to detect the pest concerned.

Those surveys shall take account of scientific and technical evidence, and any other appropriate
information, concerning the presence of the pests concerned.

3. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                             Article 23
                    Multiannual survey programmes and collection of information

1. ►M1 The competent authorities◄ shall establish multiannual survey programmes setting out the
content of the surveys to be carried out pursuant to Article 22. Those programmes shall provide for the
collection and recording of the scientific and technical evidence and other information referred to in the
second subparagraph of Article 22(2).

The multiannual survey programmes shall include the following elements in conformity with Article
22(2):

(a)      the specific objective of each survey;

(b)      the scope of each survey as regards the area concerned and the time scale covered, as well as
         the pests, plants and commodities targeted;

(c)      the survey methodology and quality management including a description of the procedures for
         visual examination, sampling and testing and their technical justification;

(d)      the timing, frequency and numbers of scheduled visual examinations, samples and tests; and

(e)      the methods of recording and reporting the information collected.

The multiannual survey programmes shall be for a period of five to seven years.

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 ----- ◄



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 14/95
                                             Article 24
                                       Surveys of priority pests

1. For each priority pest, ►M1 the competent authorities◄ shall carry out a survey annually, as set
out in Article 22(1) and (2). Those surveys shall include a sufficiently high number of visual
examinations, sampling and testing, as appropriate for each priority pest, to ensure, as far as it is
possible given the respective biology of each priority pest and the ecoclimatic conditions, with a high
degree of confidence, the timely detection of those pests.

►M1 ----- ◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                            Article 25
                                Contingency plans for priority pests

1. Each ►M1 competent authority ◄ shall draw up and keep up to date for each priority pest which
is capable of entering into and becoming established in ◄►M2 Guernsey ◄, a separate plan
containing information concerning the decision-making processes, procedures and protocols to be
followed, and the minimum resources to be made available and the procedures to make available
further resources in the event of an officially confirmed or suspected presence of that pest (‘the
contingency plan’).

►M1 The competent authorities◄ shall, at an appropriate stage, consult all relevant stakeholders in
the process of drawing up and keeping up to date the contingency plans.

►M1 ----- ◄

2. Each contingency plan shall include the following:

(a)   the roles and responsibilities of the bodies involved in the execution of the plan in the event of
      an officially confirmed or suspected presence of the priority pest concerned, as well as the chain
      of command and procedures for the coordination of actions to be taken by ►M1 the competent
      authority◄, other public authorities, as referred to in Article 4(2) of Regulation (EU) 2017/625 ,
      delegated bodies or natural persons involved, as referred to in Article 28(1) of that Regulation,
      laboratories and professional operators►M1 ----- ◄;

(b)   access of ►M1 the competent authority◄to premises of professional operators, other relevant
      operators and natural persons;

(c)   access of ►M1 the competent authority◄, where necessary, to laboratories, equipment,
      personnel, external expertise and resources necessary for the rapid and effective eradication or,
      where appropriate, containment of the priority pest concerned;

(d)   measures to be taken concerning the provision of information to ►M1 ----- ◄ the professional
      operators concerned and the public as regards the presence of the priority pest concerned and
      the measures taken against it in the event that the presence of the pest concerned is officially
      confirmed or suspected;

(e)   arrangements for recording findings of the presence of the priority pest concerned;

(f)   the available assessments as set out in Article 6(2) ►M1 ----- ◄;

(g)   the risk management measures to be taken as regards the priority pest concerned, in
      accordance with Section 1 of Annex II, and the procedures to be followed;


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                15/95
(h)   principles for the geographical demarcation of demarcated areas;

(i)   protocols describing the methods of visual examinations, sampling and laboratory testing; and

(j)   principles concerning the training of personnel of ►M1 the competent authority◄ and, where
      appropriate, the bodies, public authorities, laboratories, professional operators and other
      persons referred to in point (a).

Where appropriate, the items referred to in points (d) to (j) of the first subparagraph shall take the form
of instruction manuals.

3. Contingency plans may be combined for multiple priority pests with similar biology and range of
host species. In those cases, the contingency plan shall consist of a general part common to all
priority pests covered by it and of specific parts for each priority pest concerned.

4. ►M1 The competent authorities must, before 1st January 2023, establish contingency plans for the
priority pests included in the list of priority pests in the Annex to Commission Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2019/1702, as it has effect on◄ ►M2 exit day within the meaning of section 12(1) of the
European Union (Brexit) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law, 2018.◄

►M1 4A. Paragraph 4 does not apply in relation to any priority pest that is removed from that list
before 1st January 2023.◄

►M1 4B. ◄ Within one year from the date of the inclusion of any further pest concerned in the list of
priority pests, ►M1 the competent authority◄ shall establish contingency ►M1 plans◄ for that
priority pest.

►M1 4C. ◄ ►M1 The competent authorities◄ shall regularly review and, where appropriate, update
their contingency plans.

5. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                              Article 26
                                Simulation exercises for priority pests

1. ►M1 The competent authorities◄ shall carry out simulation exercises ►M1 in the territories for
which they are responsible ◄ concerning the implementation of the contingency plans at intervals set
according to the biology of the priority pest or pests concerned and the risk posed by that pest or
those pests.

Those exercises shall take place with regard to all priority pests concerned within a reasonable period
of time and with the involvement of the relevant stakeholders.

Those exercises shall not be required where ►M1 ----- ◄ measures for the eradication of the pest or
pests concerned ►M1 have recently been taken ◄.

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                              Article 27
                                    Action plans for priority pests

1. Where the presence of a priority pest is officially confirmed in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ pursuant to
Article 10, the competent authority ►M2 -----◄ shall immediately adopt a plan (the ‘action plan’)




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  16/95
setting out the measures for the eradication of that pest ►M1 ----- ◄ or its containment, ►M1 ----- ◄
as well as a time schedule for the application of those measures.

The action plan shall include a description of the design and organisation of the surveys to be carried
out and set out the number of visual examinations, samples to be taken and laboratory tests to be
carried out, as well as the methodology to be applied for the examination, sampling and testing.

The action plan shall be based on the relevant contingency plan and shall be immediately
communicated by the competent authority to the professional operators concerned.

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                          Article 28
              ►M2 Guernsey◄ measures for specific ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests

1. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations set out measures against specific ►M2
Guernsey quarantine pests◄. The provision that may be made in those regulations may include, in
relation to a specific ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄, provision:◄

(a)   ►M1 ----- ◄ concerning ►M1 the ◄ measures to be taken in the event of suspicion and official
      confirmation by competent authorities of the presence of that ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine
      pest;

(b)   ►M1 ----- ◄ concerning ►M1 the ◄ measures to be taken immediately by professional
      operators;

(c)   ►M1 ----- ◄ concerning ►M1 the ◄ measures to be taken by persons other than professional
      operators;

(d)   ►M1 concerning the eradication of that◄ ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄;

►M1 (da)       concerning the containment of that ◄►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄;

(e)   ►M1 ----- ◄ concerning ►M1 the ◄ establishment of demarcated areas;

(f)   ►M1 ----- ◄ concerning surveys and modifications of demarcated areas and lifting of
      restrictions;

(g)   ►M1 concerning surveys of that ◄►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄;

►M1 (ga) concerning prevention measures in areas outside demarcated areas where necessary to
     prevent the establishment of that ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ in those areas;◄

(h)   ►M1 in the case of a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ which is a priority pest:

      (i)      concerning surveys for that priority pest, as regards the number of visual examinations,
               samples and tests for the priority pest;

      (ii)     concerning contingency plans for that priority pest;

      (iii)    concerning simulation exercises for that priority pest;

      (iv)     concerning action plans for that priority pest.◄;

►M1 ----- ◄

2. ►M1 Regulations under paragraph 1 may only make provision under point (da) of that paragraph if
the appropriate authority has concluded, on the basis of surveys or other evidence, that the
eradication of the ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ in a demarcated area is not possible.◄


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 17/95
3. ►M1 ----- ◄

4. ►M1 Regulations made under paragraph 1 may include any of the measures specified in Annex 2,
taking into account the specific risks of the ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ to which the regulations
relate and any specific eco-climatic conditions and risks as regards any part of ►M2 Guernsey ◄.◄.

5. ►M1 ----- ◄.

6. ►M1 ----- ◄

7. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                      Article 29
 Measures by ►M1 competent authorities◄ concerning pests not listed as ►M2 Guernsey ◄
                                   quarantine pests

1. ►M1 Where the presence of a pest that is not included in Annex 2 or 2A to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation is officially confirmed to be present in a part of ►M2 Guernsey ◄, and the
competent authority considers that the pest may fulfil the conditions for inclusion in Annex 2 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, the competent authority must immediately assess whether the
pest fulfils the criteria set out in Subsection 1 of Section 3 of Annex 1 and notify the other competent
authorities of its conclusion.◄ . If it concludes that those criteria are fulfilled, it shall immediately take
eradication measures in accordance with Annex II. Articles 17 to ►M1 19 ◄ shall apply.

Where it is concluded, on the basis of the surveys referred to in Article 19 or other evidence, that the
eradication of a pest in a demarcated area is not possible, Article 28(2) shall apply mutatis mutandis.

Where the presence of a pest fulfilling the criteria referred to in the first subparagraph is officially
confirmed in a consignment of plants, plant products or other objects introduced into, or moved within,
►M1 ►M2 Guernsey ◄, the competent authority◄ shall take the necessary measures to prevent the
entry of that pest into, and its establishment and spread in, the ►M1 the territory for which it is
responsible ◄.

Where a Member State suspects the presence in its territory of a pest fulfilling the criteria referred to in
the first subparagraph, Article 10 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

Pending the official confirmation of the presence of that pest, the Member State shall, where
appropriate, take phytosanitary measures to mitigate the risk of it spreading.

2. ►M1 The competent authority ►M2 ----- ◄ must promptly assess whether the pest concerned
fulfils the criteria for quarantine pests set out in Section 1 of Annex 1.◄

►M1 2A. Each competent authority must ensure that interim measures are taken in relation to the
pest where it is present in its territory or in a consignment of plants, plant products or other objects
introduced into, or moved within, its territory until:

(a)    a risk assessment has been carried out which shows that the pest does not fulfil the criteria set
       out in Subsection 1 of Section 3 of Annex 1; or

(b)    regulations in relation to the pest have been made under Article 30(1). ◄

►M1 2B. In paragraph 2A, ‘interim measures’, in relation to a pest which has been provisionally
assessed, in accordance with paragraph 2, as fulfilling the criteria set out in Subsection 1 of Section 3
of Annex 1, means any of the following measures insofar as they are relevant:

(a)    official confirmation of the presence of the pest where its presence is suspected;


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                       18/95
(b)   pending official confirmation of the presence of the pest, phytosanitary measures to mitigate the
      risk of the pest spreading;

(c)   where the pest is officially confirmed to be present, eradication measures equivalent to the
      measures specified in Articles 17 to 19 in relation to ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ or, if it
      is concluded, on the basis of the surveys referred to in Article 19 or other evidence, that the
      eradication of the pest in a demarcated area is not possible, containment measures; and

(d)   any other measures which are necessary or appropriate to prevent the entry of that pest into
      ►M2 Guernsey ◄, or its establishment or spread within ►M2 Guernsey ◄, including risk-
      based surveys to check for signs and symptoms of that pest.◄

3. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                       Article 30
          ►M1 Measures concerning provisional◄ ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄

►M1 A1. In this Article, ‘provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄’ means a pest which is not
included in the list of ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ in Annex 2 to the Phytosanitary Conditions
Regulation, but which, according to an appropriate assessment, meets the criteria set out in Subsection 2
of Section 3 of Annex 1 and is listed in Annex 2A to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation.◄

►M1 A2. A provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ may not be introduced into, moved within,
or held, multiplied or released in, ►M2 Guernsey ◄.◄

1. ►M11. The appropriate authority may by regulations:

(a)   ►M2 amend or ◄ modify Annex 2A to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation where the
      results of an assessment show, in respect of ►M2 Guernsey ◄, that a pest which is not
      included in that Annex fulfils the criteria set out Subsection 2 of Section 3 of Annex 1, or that a
      pest which is included in that Annex no longer fulfils those criteria or fulfils the criteria in Article
      3;

(b)   make temporary provision for the purposes of preventing the introduction of a provisional ►M2
      Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ into ►M2 Guernsey ◄, or the spread of a provisional ►M2
      Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ within ►M2 Guernsey ◄.◄

►M1 1A. Regulations under paragraph 1 may include, in relation to a pest which is listed, or is to be
listed, in Annex 2A, provision concerning:

(a)   measures to be taken in the event of suspicion and official confirmation by competent
      authorities of the presence of that pest;

(b)   measures to be taken immediately by professional operators;

(c)   measures to be taken by persons other than professional operators;

(d)   the eradication of that pest;

(e)   the containment of that pest;

(f)   the establishment of demarcated areas;

(g)   surveys and modifications of demarcated areas and lifting of restrictions;

(h)   surveys of that pest;



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                      19/95
(i)   prevention measures in areas outside demarcated areas where necessary to protect the
      establishment of that pest in those areas.◄

. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 Regulations under paragraph 1 may only make provision under point (e) of paragraph 1A if
the appropriate authority has concluded, on the basis of the surveys or other evidence, that the
eradication of the pest in a demarcated area is not possible.◄

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

5. ►M1 Regulations under paragraph 1 may include any of the measures specified in Annex 2, taking
into account the specific risks of the pest.◄

6. ►M1 ----- ◄

7. ►M1 ----- ◄

8. ►M1 .----- ◄

                                              Article 31
                              More stringent requirements ►M1 ----- ◄

1. ►M1 The competent authorities may apply within their respective territories more stringent
measures than those specified in regulations made under Article 28(1) or 30(1)◄, if justified by the
objective of phytosanitary protection and in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of
Annex II.

Those more stringent measures shall not impose, or result in, any prohibitions or restrictions on the
introduction into, or movement within and through, the ►M2 Guernsey ◄ of plants, plant products and
other objects, other than those imposed by ►M1 , or under ◄ Articles 40 to 58 and 71 to ►M1 101◄.

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                              Section 3
                                   Protected zone quarantine pests

                                           Article 32
                          Recognition of ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄

1. ►M1 ‘A PFA quarantine pest’ is a pest which:

(a)   is present in ►M2

      (i)    a Relevant British Island but is not present in Guernsey and the whole island is
             recognised as free of that pest in accordance with ISPM 4; or

      (ii)   Guernsey but not present in a part of it and that part is recognised as free of that pest in
             accordance with ISPM 4; and ◄

(b)   is listed in column (1) of the table in Annex 3 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation.◄

2. ►M1 A PFA quarantine pest may not be introduced into, moved within, or held, multiplied or
released in, any ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ established in respect of that PFA quarantine pest,
and described in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the table in Annex 3 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation.◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  20/95
Article 8 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the introduction into, movement within, and holding and
multiplication in, ►M1 a ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ of the PFA quarantine pest in respect of
which the area was established ◄.

3. ►M1 ----- ◄

►M1 The appropriate authority ►M2 may by regulations amend or modify ◄ Annex 3 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation where:

(a)   a pest is no longer recognised as a PFA quarantine pest;

(b)   any additional ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ is recognised in relation to a PFA quarantine
      pest;

(c)   the extent of an existing ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ has been altered; or

(d)   an existing ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ is no longer recognised as free from the PFA
      quarantine pest in respect of which the area was established.◄

►M1 ----- ◄

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

5. ►M1 ----- ◄

6. ►M1 ----- ◄

7. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                            Article 33
                 General obligations concerning ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄

1. With regard to a ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄, the obligations set out in Articles 9 to 19 shall
apply mutatis mutandis to the ►M1 relevant PFA◄ quarantine pest.

2. ►M1 Where a PFA quarantine pest is found to be present in a ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄
established in respect of that PFA quarantine pest and the competent authority has established a
demarcated area in response to its presence, any plant, plant product or other object originating in the
demarcated area may only be moved from that demarcated area into the remaining part of that ►M2
Guernsey pest-free area ◄ or into any other ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ established in respect
of that PFA quarantine pest if its movement has been authorised by, or on behalf of, the competent
authority by notice.◄

►M1 2A. By way of derogation from paragraph 2, a plant, plant product or other object may be
moved out of that demarcated area and through and out of the ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄
concerned if it is packed and moved in such a way that there is no risk of spreading the relevant PFA
quarantine pest within the ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄.◄

3. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                          Article 34
                             Surveys on ►M1 PFA◄ quarantine pests

1. ►M1 The competent authorities must carry out annual surveys of each ►M2 Guernsey pest-free
area ◄ within their respective territories as regards the presence of the PFA quarantine pests in
respect of which those areas have been established.◄



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                               21/95
►M1 1A. The appropriate authority may by regulations supplement this Regulation by laying down
detailed rules for the preparation and the content of the surveys referred to in paragraph 1.◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                       ►M1 Article 35
            Amendment of extent and revocation of recognition of protected zones◄

                                        CHAPTER III
                         ►M2 Guernsey ◄ regulated non-quarantine pests

                                           Article 36
                  Definition of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ regulated non-quarantine pests

A pest is a ►M2 Guernsey ◄ regulated non-quarantine pest’ if it fulfils all of the following conditions
and it is included in ►M1 column (1) of the tables in Annex 4 to the Phytosanitary Conditions
Regulation ◄:

(a)   its identity is established in accordance with point (1) of Section 4 of Annex I;

(b)   it is present in the ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ;

(c)   it is not a ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest or a ►M1 provisional ◄►M2 Guernsey
      quarantine pest ◄;

(d)   it is transmitted mainly through specific plants for planting, in accordance with point (2) of
      Section 4 of Annex I;

(e)   its presence on those plants for planting has an unacceptable economic impact, as regards the
      intended use of those plants for planting, in accordance with point (3) of Section 4 of Annex I;

(f)   feasible and effective measures are available to prevent its presence on the plants for planting
      concerned.

                                           Article 37
 Prohibition of the introduction and movement of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ regulated non-quarantine
                                  pests on plants for planting

1. ►M1 A professional operator may not introduce a ►M2 Guernsey regulated non-quarantine pest
◄ into ►M2 Guernsey ◄, or move a ►M2 Guernsey regulated non-quarantine pest ◄ within ►M2
Guernsey ◄, on the plants for planting through which it is transmitted, as specified in the entries in
respect of that pest in column (2) of the tables in Annex 4 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation,
if the presence of that pest on those plants for planting exceeds the thresholds specified in those tables
in respect of that pest and those plants for planting.◄.

The prohibition laid down in the first subparagraph shall not apply in the following cases:

(a)   movement of plants for planting within, or between, the premises of the professional operator
      concerned;

(b)   movement of plants for planting necessary for their disinfection.

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 ---- ◄

4. ►M1 ----- ◄


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    22/95
5. ►M1 The appropriate authority ►M2 may by regulations amend or modify ◄ Annex 4 or 5 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation where the results of an assessment show that:

(a)   a pest not listed in column (1) of the tables in Annex 4 to the Phytosanitary Conditions
      Regulation fulfils the conditions referred to in Article 36;

(b)   a pest listed in column (1) of the tables in Annex 4 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation
      no longer fulfils one or more of the conditions referred to in Article 36; or

(c)   amendments to Annex 4 or 5 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation are necessary as
      regards the categories referred to in paragraph 7 of this Article or the thresholds referred to in
      paragraph 8 of this Article. ◄

►M1 5A. The appropriate authority ►M2 may by regulations amend or modify ◄ Annex 5 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation to make provision as to the measures to be taken to prevent the
presence of a ►M2 Guernsey regulated non-quarantine pest ◄ on the plants for planting concerned.
◄

►M1 5B. Regulations under paragraph 5A may specify whether the measures are to apply to the
introduction of the plants for planting into ►M2 Guernsey ◄, the movement of those plants for
planting within ►M2 Guernsey ◄, or both. ◄

►M1 5C. Any measures specified in regulations under paragraph 5A must be consistent with the
principles set out in Section 2 of Annex 2 to this Regulation ◄►M2 ----- ◄.

6. ►M1 ----- ◄

7. Where point (e) of Article 36 is only fulfilled for one or more of the ►M1 categories of ◄ pre-basic,
basic, or certified material, seed or seed potatoes, or standard or CAC material or seed, as referred to
in ►M2 Directives 66/401/EEC, 66/402/EEC, 68/193/EEC, 2002/54/EC, 2002/55/EC, 2002/56/EC,
2002/57/EC, 2008/72/EC and 2008/90/EC, ◄ ►M1 the tables in Annex 4 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation must include ◄ those categories ►M1 ----- ◄.

8. Where point (e) of Article 36 is only fulfilled if the pest concerned is present at an incidence above
a certain threshold higher than zero, ►M1 the tables in Annex 4 to the Phytosanitary Conditions
Regulation must include that threshold ◄.

Such a threshold shall only be ►M1 included ◄ if both of the following points are fulfilled:

(a)   it is possible for professional operators to ensure that the incidence of that ►M2 Guernsey ◄
      regulated non-quarantine pest on those plants for planting does not exceed that threshold;

(b)   it is possible to verify whether that threshold is not exceeded in lots of those plants for planting.

The principles for the management of the risk of pests set out in Section 2 of Annex II shall apply.

9. Article 31 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the measures to be taken by the ►M1 competent
authorities◄ concerning ►M1 GB◄regulated non-quarantine pests and the respective plants for
planting.

                                           Article 38
                                 Amendment of Section 4 of Annex I

The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations amend ◄Section 4 of Annex I in order to adapt it
to the development of scientific and technical knowledge and of relevant international standards.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   23/95
                                          Article 39
 ►M2 Guernsey ◄ regulated non-quarantine pests used for scientific or educational purposes,
                    trials, varietal selection, breeding or exhibitions

The prohibition provided for in Article 37 shall not apply to ►M2 Guernsey ◄ regulated non-
quarantine pests which are present on plants for planting used for scientific or educational purposes,
trials, varietal selection, breeding or exhibitions.

                                         CHAPTER IV
                  Measures concerning plants, plant products and other objects

                                              Section 1
                          Measures relating to the entire ►M2 Guernsey ◄

                                            Article 40
Prohibition of the introduction of plants, plant products and other objects into ►M2 Guernsey
                                                ◄

1. ►M1 1. Plants, plant products or other objects of a description specified in any entry in column (1)
of the tables in Parts A and C of Annex 6 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation may not be
introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ if they originate from any third country listed in the corresponding
entry in column (2) of those tables.◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 3. The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Parts A and C of Annex 6 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation where the amendment is appropriate in the light of a risk
assessment in relation to a plant, plant product or other object originating in or dispatched from a third
country.◄

►M1 3A. For the purposes of paragraph 3, an amendment is appropriate if, on the basis of the risk
assessment, it is concluded:

(a)   in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which is not included in Part A or C of Annex
      6 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant, plant product or other object poses
      a pest risk of an unacceptable level which cannot be reduced to an acceptable level by applying
      one or more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2; or

(b)   in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which is included in Part A or C of Annex 6
      to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant, plant product or other object no
      longer poses a pest risk of an unacceptable level, or that it continues to pose a pest risk of an
      unacceptable level, but that the risk can be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or
      more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2. ◄

►M1 3B. A plant, plant product or other object may only be regarded as posing a pest risk of an
unacceptable level for the purposes of paragraph 3A if the risk assessment shows that the plant, plant
product or other object may host a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ and, in determining the
acceptability of the level of pest risk, the risk assessment was carried out in accordance with the
principles set out in Section 2 of Annex 2, where appropriate with regard to one or more specific third
countries. ◄

►M1 ----- ◄



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   24/95
                                             Article 41
      Plants, plant products and other objects subject to special and equivalent requirements

1. ►M1 1. Plants, plant products or other objects of a description specified in any entry in column (1)
of the tables in Parts A and B of Annex 7 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, and which
originate in a third country listed in the corresponding entry in column (2) of those tables may only be
introduced into, or moved within, ►M2 Guernsey ◄ if the special requirements specified in the
corresponding entry in column (3) of those tables are fulfilled.◄

►M1 1A. Plants, plant products or other objects of a description specified in any entry in column (1) of
the tables in Parts A and B of Annex 8 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, and which originate
in a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄, may only be introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ if the special
requirements specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of those tables are fulfilled. ◄

►M1 1B. Plants, plant products or other objects of a description specified in any entry in column (1) of
the tables in Parts A and B of Annex 8 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, and which originate
in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄, may only be moved within ►M2 Guernsey
◄ if the special requirements specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of those tables are
fulfilled.◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Annex 7 or 8 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation where the amendment is appropriate in the light of a risk assessment in relation
to a plant, plant product or other object. ◄

►M1 3A. For the purposes of paragraph 3, an amendment is appropriate if, on the basis of the risk
assessment, it is concluded:

(a)     in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which originates in a third country and is not
        included in Part A or B of Annex 7 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant,
        plant product or other object poses a pest risk of an unacceptable level which can be reduced to
        an acceptable level by applying one or more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of
        Section 1 of Annex 2;

(b)     in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which originates in a third country and is
        included in Part A or B of Annex 7 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant,
        plant product or other object poses a pest risk of an unacceptable level which can no longer be
        reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or more of the measures set out in points (2)
        and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2, or that the pest risk can continue to be reduced to an
        acceptable level by applying alternative measures to those specified in relation to the plant,
        plant product or other object in Annex 7 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation;

►M4 (ba) in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which originates in a third country and
     is included in Part B of Annex 7 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant, plant
     product or other object continues to pose a pest risk which can be reduced to an acceptable
     level by applying one or more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of
     Annex 2, and the plant, plant product or other object and those measures can be included in
     Part A, instead of in Part B, of Annex 7 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation;◄

(c)     in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which originates in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or a
        ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ and is not included in Annex 8 to the Phytosanitary Conditions


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   25/95
       Regulation, that the plant, plant product or other object poses a pest risk of an unacceptable
       level which can be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or more of the measures set
       out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2; or

(d)    in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which originates in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or a
       ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ and is included in Annex 8 to the Phytosanitary Conditions
       Regulation ►M4 ----- ◄, that the plant, plant product or other object poses a pest risk of an
       unacceptable level which can no longer be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or
       more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2, or that the pest risk
       can continue to be reduced to an acceptable level by applying alternative measures to those
       specified in relation to the plant, plant product or other object in ►M4 Annex 8 to the
       Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation;◄

►M4 (e)     in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which originates in ►M2 Guernsey ◄
     or a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ and is included in Part B of Annex 8 to the Phytosanitary
     Conditions Regulation, that the plant, plant product or other object continues to pose a pest risk
     which can be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or more of the measures set out in
     points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2, and the plant, plant product or other object and those
     measures can be included in Part A, instead of in Part B, of Annex 8 to the Phytosanitary
     Conditions Regulation.◄

►M1 3B. A plant, plant product or other object may only be regarded as posing a pest risk of an
unacceptable level for the purposes of paragraph 3A if the risk assessment shows that the plant, plant
product or other object may host a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ and, in determining the
acceptability of the level of pest risk and the measures to reduce that risk to an acceptable level, the
risk assessment was carried out in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex 2,
where appropriate with regard to one or more specific third countries or parts of specific third
countries.◄

4. In the event that plants, plant products or other objects have been introduced into, or moved
within, the ►M2 Guernsey ◄ in violation of paragraph 1, ►M1 the competent authority◄ shall adopt
the necessary measures, as referred to in Article 66(3) of Regulation (EU) 2017/625 ►M1 ----- ◄.

►M1 ----- ◄

                                           Article 42
Restrictions on the basis of a preliminary assessment for the introduction into ►M2 Guernsey
                    ◄ of high-risk plants, plant products and other objects

1. A plant, plant product or other object originating in a third country ►M1 ----- ◄ and which, on the
basis of a preliminary assessment, presents a pest risk of an unacceptable level for ►M2 Guernsey ◄
is a ‘high-risk plant’, ‘high-risk plant product’ or ‘high-risk other object’ (‘high-risk plants, plant products
or other objects’).

That preliminary assessment shall take into account, as appropriate for the plant, plant product or
other object concerned ►M1 any existing prohibitions or requirements that apply to that plant, plant
product or object by virtue of Article 40, or 41 or any measures in regulations made under Article 49(1),
and ◄, the criteria set out in Annex III.

2. ►M1 High-risk plants, plant products or other objects listed in Part B of Annex 6 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation may not be introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from the third



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                      26/95
countries, groups of third countries or specific areas of third countries of origin specified in respect of
those plants, plant products or other objects in that list.◄

3. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Part B of Annex 6 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation to include at the appropriate taxonomic level, pending the risk assessment
referred to in paragraph 4, additional high-risk plants, plant products or other objects and, where
appropriate, the third countries, groups of third countries or specific areas of third countries of origin in
respect of those plants, plant products or other objects.◄

►M1 ----- ◄

►M1 ----- ◄

4. ►M1 Where a risk assessment in relation to a high-risk plant, plant product or other object
originating in any third country has been completed, the appropriate authority must by regulations
amend the list of high-risk plants, plant products or other objects in Part B of Annex 6 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation to remove the third country from the entry in that list relating to
the plant, plant product or other object.◄

►M1 4A. Regulations under paragraph 4 may amend Part A or C of Annex 6, or Part A or B of Annex
7, to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, where appropriate, in the light of the risk assessment.◄

5. Provided that demand for import of plants, plant products or other objects listed in ►M1 Part B of
Annex 6 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation ◄ is identified, the risk assessment referred to in
paragraph 4 shall be carried out within an appropriate and reasonable period of time.

Where appropriate, that assessment may be limited to plants, plant products or other objects of a
particular third country of origin or dispatch, or a group of third countries of origin or dispatch.

6. The ►M1 the appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ lay down specific rules concerning the
procedure to be followed in order to carry out the risk assessment referred to in paragraph 4.

7. ►M2 A risk assessment referred to in paragraph 4 is one which:

(a)     is carried out by the UK NPPO and conforms with the procedures for risk assessment laid down
        in Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2018 laying down specific rules concerning
        the procedure to be followed to carry out the risk assessment of high risk plants, plant products
        and other objects within the meaning of Article 42(1) of the PHR, as it has effect in Great Britain,
        or

(b)     is otherwise carried out in accordance with regulations made under paragraph 6.◄

                                               Article 43
      Specific import conditions for the introduction into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ of wood packaging
                                               material

1. Wood packaging material, whether or not actually in use in the transport of objects of all kinds,
shall only be introduced into ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from a third country ◄ if it fulfils all of the
following requirements:

(a)     it has been subject to one or more of the approved treatments and complies with the applicable
        requirements set out in Annex 1 to ►M1 ----- ◄ ISPM15;

(b)     it is marked with the mark referred to in Annex 2 of ISPM15 attesting that it has been subject to
        the treatments referred to in point (a).


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                      27/95
This paragraph shall not apply to wood packaging material which is subject to the exemptions
provided for in ISPM15.

2. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations:

(a)   amend the requirements set out in paragraph 1 of this Article to take into account the
      development of international standards, and in particular of ISPM15; or

(b)   specify derogations from paragraph 1 for the purpose of exempting other wood packaging
      material which is not subject to the exemptions provided for in ISPM15 from the requirements of
      paragraph 1 of this Article, or for the purpose of imposing less stringent requirements on wood
      packaging material which is subject to the exemptions provided for in ISPM15.◄

                                              Article 44
                               Setting out of equivalent requirements

1. ►M11. The appropriate authority may by regulations make provision for the purpose of giving
effect to a relevant decision. ◄

►M1 1A. Regulations under paragraph 1 may in particular:

(a)   amend any of the special requirements in column (3) of the table in Part A or B of Annex 7 to
      the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation to set out the equivalent requirements that apply to the
      plant, plant product or other object in question; or

(b)   specify the conditions under which the decision of the UK NPPO applies. ◄

►M1 1B. In paragraph 1, ‘relevant decision’ means a decision of the UK NPPO confirming that
specific measures which are applied in the third country in relation to a particular plant, plant product
or other object from that third country provide a level of phytosanitary protection which is equivalent to
the measures included in the special requirements in relation to that plant, plant product or other
object in Annex 7 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation.◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                            Article 45
              Information to be provided to travellers and clients of postal services

1. ►M1 The competent authorities and seaport, airport and international transport operators must
make information available to passengers concerning the prohibitions referred to in Article 40(1) and
42(2), the requirements referred to in Article 41(1) and any exemption which applies by virtue of Article
75(1) as regards the introduction of plants, plant products and other objects into ►M2 Guernsey ◄
from a third country.◄

They shall provide that information in the form of posters or brochures and, where applicable, on their
internet sites ►M1, in the standardised format published by the appropriate authority (if any)◄.

Postal services and professional operators involved in sales through distance contracts shall also
make available to their clients that information concerning plants, plant products and other objects
referred to in the first subparagraph at least through the internet.

►M1 The appropriate authority may publish, in such manner as the appropriate authority considers
appropriate, a standardised format for any poster or brochure which must be used for the purposes of
the first subparagraph of this paragraph.◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  28/95
                                           ►M1 Article 46
                  Exception from prohibitions and requirements for frontier zones ◄

                                              Article 47
                                 Requirements for phytosanitary transit

1. By way of derogation from Article 40(1), Article 41(1), Article 42(2), Article 72(1) and Article 73,
plants, plant products and other objects may be introduced into, and be passed through, ►M2
Guernsey ◄ to a third country, either in the form of transit or transhipment (‘phytosanitary transit’), if
they fulfil both of the following conditions:

(a)      they are accompanied by a signed declaration of the professional operator in control of those
         plants, plant products and other objects stating that those plants, plant products or other objects
         are in phytosanitary transit;

(b)      they are packed and moved in such a way that there is no risk of spreading of ►M2 Guernsey
         ◄ quarantine pests during their introduction into, and passing through, ►M2 Guernsey ◄ .

2. ►M1 The competent authority◄ shall prohibit phytosanitary transit if the plants, plant products or
other objects concerned do not comply, or there is reasonable evidence that they will not comply, with
paragraph 1.

                                               Article 48
      Plants, plant products and other objects used for official testing, scientific or educational
                            purposes, trials, varietal selection or breeding

1. By way of derogation from Article 40(1), Article 41(1) and Article 42(2), ►M1 a competent
authority◄ may, on application, authorise temporarily the introduction into, and the movement within,
►M1 the territory for which it is responsible ◄ of plants, plant products and other objects used for
official testing, scientific or educational purposes, trials, varietal selection or breeding.

That authorisation shall be granted for the activity concerned only if adequate restrictions are imposed
to ensure that the presence of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned does not cause an
unacceptable risk of the spread of a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄►M1 or provisional◄ ►M2
Guernsey quarantine pest ◄, taking into account the identity, biology and means of dispersal of the
pests concerned, the activity envisaged, the interaction with the environment and other relevant
factors relating to the pest risk posed by those plants, plant products or other objects.

2. Where an authorisation is granted in accordance with paragraph 1, it shall include all of the
following conditions:

(a)     the plants, plant products or other objects concerned are to be kept in a location and under
        conditions found to be appropriate by the competent ►M1 authority ◄ and referred to in the
        authorisation;

(b)     the activity involving those plants, plant products or other objects is to be carried out in a
        quarantine station or a confinement facility designated in accordance with Article 60 by the
        competent authority and referred to in the authorisation;

(c)     the activity involving those plants, plant products or other objects is to be carried out by
        personnel whose scientific and technical competence is found to be appropriate by the
        competent authority and referred to in the authorisation;




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                      29/95
(d)   those plants, plant products or other objects are to be accompanied by the authorisation when
      introduced into, or moved within, the ►M1 territory in question ◄.

3. The authorisation referred to in paragraph 1shall be limited to the amount and duration that is
adequate for the activity concerned and shall not exceed the capacity of the designated quarantine
station or confinement facility.

It shall include the restrictions necessary to adequately eliminate the risk of the spread of the relevant
►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ ►M1 or provisional ◄►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄.

4. The competent authority shall monitor compliance with the conditions referred to in paragraph 2
and the limitation and the restrictions referred to in paragraph 3 and take the necessary action in case
those conditions, that limitation or those restrictions are not complied with.

Where appropriate, that action shall be the revocation of the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1.

5. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations supplement ◄ this Regulation by laying down
detailed rules concerning:

(a)   ►M1 ----- ◄;

(b)   the procedures and conditions for granting the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1 of this
      Article; and

(c)   the requirements for the monitoring of compliance and the actions to be taken in the event of
      non-compliance, as referred to in paragraph 4 of this Article.

                                          Article 49
Temporary measures concerning plants, plant products and other objects likely to pose newly
               identified pest risks or other suspected phytosanitary risks

1. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations impose ◄ temporary measures as regards the
introduction into, and movement within, ►M2 Guernsey ◄ of plants, plant products and other objects
from third countries where the following conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   the plants, plant products or other objects are likely to pose newly identified pest risks which are
      not sufficiently covered by any ►M1 existing measures and are not linked, or cannot yet be
      linked to, ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ or provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄
      ◄;

(b)   there is insufficient phytosanitary experience, such as in relation to new plant species or
      pathways, as regards trade in the plants, plant products and other objects concerned originating
      in or dispatched from the third countries concerned;

(c)   no assessment has been carried out as regards the newly identified pest risks for ►M2
      Guernsey ◄ in respect of those plants, plant products or other objects from the third countries
      concerned.

►M1 ----- ◄

2. The temporary measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall be adopted taking into account Section 2
of Annex II and Annex IV.

They shall provide for one or more of the following, as necessary in the case concerned:




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  30/95
(a)      systematic and intensive inspections and sampling, at the point of introduction, of each lot of
         plants, plant products or other objects introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ and the testing of
         samples;

(b)      a quarantine period, within a quarantine station or a confinement facility as referred to in Article
         60, to verify the absence of the newly identified pest risk concerned in those plants, plant
         products or other objects;

(c)      a prohibition of the introduction of those plants, plant products or other objects into ►M2
         Guernsey ◄ .

In the cases referred to in points (a) and (b) of the second subparagraph, ►M1 regulations made
under ◄ in paragraph 1 may also set out specific measures to be taken before the introduction into
►M2 Guernsey ◄ of those plants, plant products or other objects.

3. The temporary measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall apply for an appropriate and reasonable
period of time, pending the characterisation of pests likely to be associated with those plants, plant
products or other objects from those third countries and the full assessment of the risks posed by
those pests in accordance with Section 1 of Annex I.

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

5. By way of derogation from the measures adopted pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article, Article 48
shall apply to the introduction into, and the movement within, ►M2 Guernsey ◄ of plants, plant
products or other objects used for official testing, scientific or educational purposes, trials, varietal
selection or breeding.

6. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                     ►M1 Article 50
  Report from the Commission on the enforcement and effectiveness of measures relating to
                              imports into union territory ◄

                                              Article 51
                                     Amendment of Annexes III and IV

The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations amend ◄ Annexes III and IV in order to adapt
them to the development of scientific and technical knowledge and of relevant international standards.

                                       ►M1 Article 52
               Temporary measures by Member States concerning imminent danger ◄

                                               Section 2
                         Measures relating to ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄

                                                Article 53
      Prohibition of introduction of plants, plant products and other objects into ►M2 Guernsey
                                            pest-free areas◄

1. ►M1 Any plants, plant products or other objects of a description specified in any entry in column (1)
of the table in Annex 9 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, whether originating in a third country,
►M2 Guernsey ◄ or a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄, may not be introduced into, or moved within, a
►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ listed in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the table.◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                     31/95
2. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Annex 9 to the Phytosanitary Conditions
Regulation where the amendment is appropriate in the light of a risk assessment in relation to a plant,
plant product or other object.◄

3. ►M1 For the purposes of paragraph 2, an amendment is appropriate if, on the basis of the risk
assessment, it is concluded:

(a)    in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which is not included in Annex 9 to the
      Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant, plant product or other object poses a pest
      risk of an unacceptable level which cannot be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or
      more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2; or

(b)   in the case of any plant, plant product or other object which is included in Annex 9 to the
      Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant, plant product or other object no longer
      poses a pest risk of an unacceptable level, or that it continues to pose a pest risk of an
      unacceptable level, but that the risk can be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or
      more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2.◄

►M1 3A. A plant, plant product or other object may only be regarded as posing a pest risk of an
unacceptable level for the purposes of paragraph 3 if the risk assessment shows that the plant, plant
product or other object may host a PFA quarantine pest and, in determining the acceptability of the
level of pest risk to the ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ which relates to the PFA quarantine pest, the
risk assessment was carried out in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex 2.◄

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                           Article 54
  Plants, plant products and other objects subject to special requirements for ►M2 Guernsey
                                       pest-free areas◄

1. ►M1 Plants, plant products or other objects of a description specified in any entry in column (1) of
the table in Annex 10 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, whether originating in a third
country, ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄, may only be introduced into, or
moved within, a ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ listed in the corresponding entry in column (3) of the
table if the special requirements specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the table are
fulfilled.◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Annex 10 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation where the amendment is appropriate in the light of a risk assessment in relation
to a plant, plant product or other object.◄

►M1 3A. For the purposes of paragraph 3, an amendment is appropriate if, on the basis of the risk
assessment, it is concluded:

(a)    in the case of a plant, plant product or other object which is not included in Annex 10 to the
      Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant, plant product or other object poses a pest
      risk of an unacceptable level which can be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or
      more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2; or◄

(b)   the case of a plant, plant product or other object which is included in Annex 10 to the
      Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that the plant, plant product or other object poses a pest risk



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 32/95
      of an unacceptable level which can no longer be reduced to an acceptable level by applying one or
      more of the measures set out in points (2) and (3) of Section 1 of Annex 2, or that the pest risk can
      continue to be reduced to an acceptable level by applying alternative measures to those specified
      in Annex 10 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation.

►M1 3B. A plant, plant product or other object may only be regarded as posing a pest risk of an
unacceptable level for the purposes of paragraph 3A if the risk assessment shows that the plant, plant
product or other object may host a PFA quarantine pest and, in determining the acceptability of the level
of pest risk to the ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ which relates to the PFA quarantine pest and the
measures to reduce that risk to an acceptable level, the risk assessment was carried out in accordance
with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex 2.◄

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                            Article 55
     Information to be provided to travellers and clients of postal services as regards ►M2
                                  Guernsey pest-free areas◄

Article 45 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the introduction into, or the movement within, ►M2
Guernsey pest-free areas◄ of plants, plant products and other objects.

                                       ►M1 Article 56
Exception from prohibitions and requirements for frontier zones as regards protected zones ◄

                                          Article 57
      Requirements for phytosanitary transit as regards ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄

Article 47 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the phytosanitary transit of the plants, plant products and
other objects ►M1 of a description specified in any entry in column (1) of the tables in Annex 9 and 10
to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation through the ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄ related to
those plants, plant products or other objects.◄.

                                             Article 58
   Plants, plant products and other objects used for official testing, scientific or educational
  purposes, trials, varietal selection or breeding as regards ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄

By way of derogation from ►M1 ----- ◄ Article 53(1) and Article 54(1), Article 48 shall apply mutatis
mutandis to the introduction into, and the movement within, ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ of
plants, plant products and other objects of a description specified in any entry in column (1) of the
tables in Annex 9 and 10 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation which relate to that ►M2
Guernsey pest-free area ◄ and (3) and used for official testing, scientific or educational purposes,
trials, varietal selection or breeding.

                                         Section 3
              Other measures concerning plants, plant products and other objects

                                           Article 59
              General requirements for vehicles, machinery and packaging material

1. ►M1 Vehicles, machinery and packaging material used for plants, plant products or other objects
of a description specified in any entry in Annex 6, 7 or 8 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, or
in any regulations made under Article 28(1), 30(1) or 49(1), and moving into or within ►M2 Guernsey




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  33/95
◄, or through ►M2 Guernsey ◄ pursuant to Article 47, must be free from ►M2 Guernsey quarantine
pests◄ and ►M2 provisional Guernsey quarantine pests.◄

2. Paragraph 1 shall apply to ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄ also as regards ►M1 a PFA
quarantine pest relating to that ◄►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄.

                                            Article 60
                   Designation of quarantine stations and confinement facilities

1. For the purposes referred to in Articles 8, 48, 49 and 58, ►M1 the competent authorities◄ shall
take one or more of the following actions, taking into account the relevant pest risk:

(a)   designate in ►M1 the territories for which they are responsible ◄ quarantine stations or
      confinement facilities;

(b)   ►M1 ----- ◄

(c)   designate temporarily the premises of professional operators or other persons ►M1 in the
      territories for which they are responsible ◄ as confinement facilities for the pests, plants, plant
      products or other objects and their relevant uses as set out in Articles 8, 48 and 49.

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                           Article 61
                 Requirements for quarantine stations and confinement facilities

1. Quarantine stations and confinement facilities referred to in Article 60 shall meet the following
requirements to prevent the spread of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests:

(a)   they provide physical isolation of the pests, plants, plant products and other objects to be kept in
      quarantine or confinement and ensure they cannot be accessed or removed from those stations
      or facilities without consent of the competent authority;

(b)   they have systems, or access to systems, for sterilisation, decontamination or destruction of
      infested plants, plant products and other objects, waste and equipment before removal from the
      stations or facilities;

(c)   they have an identification and description of the tasks of those stations and facilities, the
      persons responsible for carrying out those tasks and the conditions under which they shall carry
      out those tasks;

(d)   they have a sufficient number of suitably qualified, trained and experienced personnel; and

(e)   they have a contingency plan for the purpose of effectively eliminating any unintended presence
      of ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ and provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄
      ◄ and preventing their spread.

2. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ lay down specific rules in order to provide
uniform conditions of application for the requirements set out in paragraph 1 in relation to the type of
plants, plant products and other objects and the actual or potential risk, including specific requirements
for official testing, scientific or educational purposes, trials, varietal selection or breeding.

►M1 ----- ◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  34/95
                                            Article 62
                    Operation of quarantine stations and confinement facilities

1. The person responsible for the quarantine station or confinement facility shall monitor that station
or facility and its immediate vicinity for the unintended presence of ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine
pests◄ and provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ ◄.

2. Where an unintended presence of a pest referred to in paragraph 1 is found or suspected, the
person responsible for the quarantine station or confinement facility concerned shall take the
appropriate action, based on the contingency plan referred to in point (e) of Article 61(1). The
obligations set out for professional operators in Article 14 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the person
responsible for the quarantine station or confinement facility.

3. The person responsible for the quarantine station or confinement facility shall keep records on the
following:

(a)   the personnel employed;

(b)   the visitors accessing the station or facility;

(c)   the pests, plants, plant products and other objects entering and leaving the station or facility;

(d)   the place of origin of such plants, plant products and other objects; and

(e)   observations concerning the presence of pests on such plants, plant products and other objects
      inside the quarantine station or confinement facility and in its immediate vicinity.

Those records shall be kept for three years.

                                          Article 63
  Supervision of quarantine stations and confinement facilities and revocation of designation

1. The competent ►M1 authorities◄ shall regularly inspect the quarantine stations and confinement
facilities ►M1 which they have designated ◄ to verify whether they meet the requirements set out in
Article 61 and the operation conditions set out in Article 62.

►M1 They ◄ shall determine the frequency of those inspections according to the pest risk related to
the operation of the quarantine stations or confinement facilities.

2. ►M1 Where corrective actions to ensure compliance with Articles 61 and 62 are considered by a
competent authority to be necessary ◄, the competent authority may require the person responsible
for the quarantine station or confinement facility to implement ►M1 those ◄ corrective actions ►M1 --
--- ◄, either immediately or within a specified period of time.

Where the competent authority concludes that the quarantine station or confinement facility ►M1 does
not comply with Articles 61 and 62 ◄ or the person responsible for it ►M1 has failed ◄ to comply with
Articles 61 and 62, that authority shall without delay take the measures necessary to ensure that non-
compliance with those provisions does not continue. Those measures may include the revocation or
suspension of the designation referred to in Article 60(1).

3. Where the competent authority has taken measures in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article
other than the revocation of the designation referred to in Article 60(1), and non-compliance with
Articles 61 and 62 continues, that authority shall without delay revoke that designation.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  35/95
                                          Article 64
Release of plants, plant products and other objects from quarantine stations and confinement
                                          facilities

1. Plants, plant products and other objects shall only leave ►M1 a quarantine station or a
confinement facility ◄, upon authorisation by the competent ►M1 authority ◄, if it is confirmed that
they are free from ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ and provisional ►M2 Guernsey
quarantine pests◄ , or, where applicable, PFA ◄ quarantine pests.

2. The competent authority may authorise the movement of plants, plant products or other objects
infested by a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄►M1 or provisional ◄►M2 Guernsey quarantine
pest ◄ from a quarantine station or a confinement facility to another quarantine station or confinement
facility if that movement is justified by official testing or scientific reasons and takes place under the
conditions set by the competent authority.

3. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ lay down specific rules concerning the
release of plants, plant products and other objects from quarantine stations and confinement facilities,
and, where appropriate, labelling requirements related to that release or to the movement referred to
in paragraph 2.

►M1 ----- ◄

                                           CHAPTER V
                      Registration of professional operators and traceability

                                                Article 65
                              Official register of professional operators

1. The competent ►M1 authorities◄ shall keep and update a register containing the following
professional operators who operate in the ►M2 Guernsey ◄ :

(a)   professional operators introducing into, or moving within, the ►M2 Guernsey ◄ plants, plant
      products and other objects for which a phytosanitary certificate or a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport
      is required ►M1 ----- ◄ pursuant to Article 72(1), Article 73, Article 74(1), Article 79(1) and
      Article 80(1);

(b)   professional operators authorised to issue ►M4 UK ◄ plant passports in accordance with
      Article 89;

(c)   professional operators who request the competent authority to issue the certificates referred to
      in Articles 100 ►M1 and 101 ◄;

(d)   professional operators authorised to apply the marks referred to in Article 98, authorised to
      issue the attestations referred to in Article 99, providing information in accordance with Articles
      45 or 55, ►M1 ----- ◄ or carrying out activities concerning the relevant plants in demarcated
      areas, unless those operators are listed in another official register which is accessible to the
      competent authorities; and

(e)   professional operators other than the ones referred to in points (a) to (d) of this subparagraph, if
      so required by an ►M1 the special requirements in Annex 7, 8 or 10 or by regulations made
      under Article 28(1), 30(1) or 49(1)◄.

3. ►M1 ----- ◄



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 36/95
2. ►M1 The competent authorities must ensure that a professional operator is registered only once.
◄

3. Paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to a professional operator who fulfils one or more of the
following criteria:

(a)   ►M2 it supplies exclusively and directly to final users small quantities of plants, plant products
      and other objects by means other than sales through distance contracts; ◄

(b)   it supplies exclusively and directly to final users small quantities of seeds, other than the seeds
      subject to Article 72;

(c)   its professional activity concerning plants, plant products and other objects is limited to
      transporting them for another professional operator;

(d)   its professional activity exclusively concerns the transport of objects of all kinds using wood
      packaging material.

►M2 The competent authority may decide not to apply the exemption referred to in point (a) of the
first subparagraph to all or certain growers or other professional operators if so justified by the pest
risk presented by the plants that they grow or if it is concerned by any other of their activities.◄

4. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations ◄:

(a)   ►M1 amend◄ this Regulation by adding further categories of professional operators to be
      exempted from the application of paragraph 1 of this Article, where registration would constitute
      an administrative burden for them disproportionate to the low pest risk related to their
      professional activities;

(b)   ►M1 supplement◄ this Regulation by setting out particular requirements for the registration of
      certain categories of professional operators, taking into account the nature of the activity or of
      the plant, plant product or other object concerned;

(c)   ►M2 supplement this Regulation by setting out the maximum figures for small quantities of
      particular plants, plant products or other objects as referred to in point (a) of the first
      subparagraph of paragraph 3. The figures shall be established as appropriate for the plants,
      plant products and other objects concerned and the respective pest risks. ◄

                                              Article 66
                                       Procedure of registration

1. Professional operators falling within the scope of Article 65(1) shall submit to the competent
authorities an application for registration.

2. The application for registration shall include the following elements:

(a)   name, address in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ and contact details of the professional operator;

(b)   a statement concerning the intention of the professional operator to exercise one or more of the
      activities referred to in Article 65(1) concerning plants, plant products and other objects;

(c)   a statement concerning the intention of the professional operator to carry out, as applicable, one
      or more of the following activities:

      (i)    issuing of ►M4 UK ◄plant passports for plants, plant products and other objects
             pursuant to Article 84(1);



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   37/95
      (ii)    placing of the mark on wood packaging material referred to in Article 96(1);

      (iii)   issuing of any other attestation referred to in Article 99(1);

(d)   address of the premises and, where applicable, the location of land plots used by the
      professional operator ►M1 ----- ◄ to carry out the activities referred to in Article 65(1) for the
      purpose of the registration; and

(e)   the commodity types, families, genera or species of the plants and plant products and, where
      appropriate, the nature of other objects concerned by the activities of the professional operator,
      as referred to in Article 65(1).

3. The competent authorities shall register a professional operator without delay where the
application for registration contains the elements set out in paragraph 2.

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

5. Registered operators shall, where relevant, submit annually an update concerning any changes in
the data referred to in points (d) and (e) of paragraph 2 and the statements referred to in points (b)
and (c) of paragraph 2. That submission shall take place by 30 April of each year with regard to the
updating of the data of the preceding year.

An application for updating the data referred to in point (a) of paragraph 2 shall be submitted no later
than 30 days after the change in those data.

6. Where the competent authority becomes aware that ►M1 a ◄registered operator no longer
carries out the activities referred to in Article 65(1), or that the elements included in the application
submitted by the registered operator in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article are no longer
correct, it shall request that operator to correct those elements immediately or within a specified period
of time.

Where the registered operator does not correct those elements within the period of time set by the
competent authority, the competent authority shall, as appropriate, amend or revoke the registration of
that operator.

                                               Article 67
                                          Content of the register

The register shall contain the elements set out in points (a), (b), (d) and (e) of Article 66(2) and the
following elements:

(a)   the official registration number, ►M1 for the professional operator ◄;

(b)   where applicable, an indication for which of the activities referred to in point (c) of Article 66(2)
      the professional operator is authorised, and, where applicable, the specific plants, plant
      products or other objects concerned.

                                                 Article 68
                             Availability of information of official registers

1. ►M1 ----- ◄

2. The ►M1 competent authority ◄ shall make available, on justified request, the information
referred to in points (a) and (b) of Article 66(2) and point (b) of Article 67 concerning a particular
registered operator to any professional operator established in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , for its own use.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    38/95
3. This Article shall apply without prejudice to ►M1 ----- ◄ rules on confidentiality, access to
information and private data protection.

                                                 Article 69
                                                Traceability

1. ►M4 A professional operator to whom a regulated trade unit is supplied must keep a record
allowing that operator to identify the professional operator who supplied it. ◄

2. ►M4 A professional operator supplying a regulated trade unit must keep a record allowing that
operator to identity the professional operator to whom it was supplied. ◄

3. Where an authorised operator issues a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport pursuant to Article 84(1), and
where the competent authority issues a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport pursuant to Article 84(2) for a
registered operator, that operator shall ensure, for the purpose of ensuring traceability pursuant to
paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, that it records the following information as regards that ►M1 UK ◄
plant passport:

(a)   where applicable, the professional operator who supplied the trade unit concerned;

(b)   the professional operator to whom the trade unit concerned was supplied; and

(c)   relevant information relating to the plant passport.

4. Professional operators shall keep the records referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 for at least three
years after the date on which the plant, plant product or other object concerned was supplied to or by
them.

5. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ set out the following elements:

(a)   a shorter or longer minimum period than the one referred to in paragraph 4 with regards to
      specific plants, where so justified by the length of the cultivation period of those plants; and

(b)   requirements as to the accessibility of the records to be kept by the professional operators
      referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.

►M1 ----- ◄

6. On request, the professional operators referred to in paragraph 4 shall communicate the
information in the records referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 to the competent authority.

7. This Article shall not apply to the professional operators referred to in points (c) and (d) of the first
subparagraph of Article 65(3).

►M4 8. In this Article ‘regulated trade unit’ means a trade unit of plants, plant products or other
objects that are subject to requirements or conditions pursuant to Article 28(1), 30(1), 37(1), 41, 47(1),
48(1), 49(1), 54(1), 57, 58 or 79(1) or a relevant NI trade unit.◄

                                         Article 70
Movements of plants, plant products and other objects within and between the premises of the
                                   professional operator

1. The professional operators who are supplied with, or supply, the plants, plant products or other
objects ►M4 in the trade units◄ referred to in Article 69(1) and (2) shall have in place traceability
systems or procedures to allow identification of the movements of those plants, plant products and
other objects within and between their own premises.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    39/95
The first subparagraph shall not apply to the professional operators referred to in points (c) and (d) of
the first subparagraph of Article 65(3).

2. The information identified by the systems or procedures referred to in paragraph 1 on the
movement of the plants, plant products and other objects within and between the premises of the
professional operators referred to in that paragraph shall be made available to the competent authority
on request.

                                               CHAPTER VI
                        Certification of plants, plant products and other objects

                                                Section 1
      Phytosanitary certificates required for the introduction of plants, plant products and other
                                    objects into ►M2 Guernsey ◄

                                               Article 71
                   Phytosanitary certificate for introduction into ►M2 Guernsey ◄

1. A phytosanitary certificate for introduction of plants, plant products and other objects into ►M2
Guernsey ◄ shall be a document, issued by a ►M4 relevant authority ◄, which fulfils the conditions
of Article 76, has the contents set out in Part A of Annex V, or, where applicable, Part B of Annex V,
and certifies that the plant, plant product or other object concerned complies with all of the following
requirements:

(a)      it is free from ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ and provisional ►M2 Guernsey
         quarantine pests◄ ◄;

(b)      it complies with the provisions of Article 37(1) concerning the presence of ►M2 Guernsey ◄
         regulated non-quarantine pests on plants for planting;

(c)      it complies with the requirements referred to in Article 41►M1 (1)◄ or, where applicable, Article
         54►M1(1)◄;

(d)      where applicable, it complies with ►M1 any requirements specified in regulations made under
         Article 28(1) or 30(1)◄.

2. ►M1 Where one or more options are specified for the purposes of meeting any such requirements,
the ◄ phytosanitary certificate shall specify under the heading ‘Additional Declaration’ which specific
requirement is fulfilled►M1 ----- ◄. That specification shall include the full wording of the relevant
requirement.

3. Where ►M1 required by regulations made under Article 44(1)◄, the phytosanitary certificate shall
state that the plants, plant products or other objects concerned comply with phytosanitary measures
recognised ►M1 for the purposes of those regulations ◄ as equivalent ►M1 ----- ◄.

4. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations amend ◄ Parts A and B of Annex V to adapt
them to the development of the relevant international standards.

►M4 5. In paragraph 1, ‘relevant authority’ means:

(a)      in the case of plants, plant products and other objects which are introduced into ►M2 Guernsey
         ◄ from a third country, the national plant protection organisation of that third country;




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 40/95
(b)     in the case of plants, plant products and other objects which are introduced into ►M2 Guernsey
        ◄ from Northern Ireland and are not part of a relevant NI trade unit, the Department of
        Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs.◄

                                              Article 72
      Plants, plant products and other objects for which phytosanitary certificates are required

1. ►M1 Plants, plant products and other objects of a description specified in any entry in columns (1)
and (2) of the table in Part A of Annex 11 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation which originate in
any third country listed in the corresponding entry in column (3) of that table may not be introduced
into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ unless they are accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate.◄

►M1 ----- ◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Part A of Annex 11 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation ◄, in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex II, where
there is a risk that a plant, plant product or other object not listed in ►M1 that Part hosts a ►M2
Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ or provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ ◄, or where, for a
plant, plant product or other object listed in that ►M1 Part◄, that risk no longer exists.

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

5. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1►M1 ----- ◄ and 3, no phytosanitary certificate shall be
required for the plants, plant products or other objects which are subject to ►M1 Articles 47, 48 and
75(1)◄.

                                             Article 73
                    Other plants for which phytosanitary certificates are required

►M1 1. Plants of a description specified in columns (1) and (2) of Part B of Annex 11 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation may not be introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from third
countries unless they are accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate.◄

►M1 2.◄ ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Part C of Annex 11 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation ◄ where an assessment, based on evidence about pest risks
and experience with trade, demonstrates that such a certificate is not necessary. That assessment
shall take into account the criteria set out in Annex VI. Where appropriate, that assessment may only
concern plants of a particular third country of origin or dispatch, or a group of third countries of origin
or dispatch.

►M1 ----- ◄

                                           Article 74
 Plants, plant products and other objects for which phytosanitary certificates are required for
                     introduction into a ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄

1. ►M1 Any plants, plant products and other objects of a description specified in an entry (if any) in
columns (1) and (2) of the table in Annex 12 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, which
originate in a third country specified in the corresponding entry in column (3) of the table and are
destined for a ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ established in respect of those plants, plant products
or other objects, may not be introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ unless they are accompanied by a
phytosanitary certificate.◄


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    41/95
2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Annex 12 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex 2, where there is
a risk that a plant, plant product or other object not listed in Annex 11 or in Annex 12 to the
Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation hosts a PFA quarantine pest, or where, for a plant, plant product
or other object listed in Annex 11 or 12 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, that risk no longer
exists,◄

►M1 3A. Regulations under paragraph 3 may apply in relation to a plant, plant product or other object
originating in, or dispatched from, all third countries or particular third countries or regions.◄

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

5. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1►M1 ----- ◄ and 3, no phytosanitary certificate shall be
required for the plants, plant products or other objects which are subject to ►M1 Article 57, 58 or
75(1)◄.

                                         ►M1 Article 74a
                                     Commodity classification ◄

►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Annex 11 to the Phytosanitary Conditions
Regulation to:

(a)   remove the references to any CN codes used in that Annex to identify the plants plant products
      and other objects listed; or

(b)    identify the plants, plant products and other objects listed in that Annex by any alternative
      commodity code classification system that the appropriate authority considers appropriate. ◄

                                             Article 75
                                  Exceptions for travellers' luggage

1. Small quantities of particular plants, other than plants for planting, and of plant products and other
objects from a third country may be exempted from the requirement for a phytosanitary certificate set
out in ►M1 ----- ◄ Article 72(1), Article 73 or Article 74(1), if they comply with all of the following
conditions:

(a)   they are introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ as part of travellers' personal luggage;

(b)   they are not to be used for professional or commercial purposes;

(c)   they are listed in an ►M1 regulations made under ◄ paragraph 2 of this Article.

2. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ list the plants, plant products and other
objects referred to in paragraph 1 and the third countries concerned, and set out the maximum
quantity, as appropriate, of the plants, plant products and other objects concerned that are to be
subject to the exemption of that paragraph and, where appropriate, one or more of the risk
management measures set out in Section 1 of Annex II.

That listing and the setting out of the maximum quantity concerned and, where appropriate, the risk
management measures shall be decided on the basis of the pest risk posed by small quantities of
those plants, plant products and other objects, in accordance with the criteria set out in Section 2 of
Annex II.

►M1 ----- ◄


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 42/95
                                               Article 76
                       Conditions to be fulfilled by a phytosanitary certificate

1. Without prejudice to obligations under the ►M1 ----- ◄ IPPC and taking into account relevant
international standards, the competent authority shall only accept a phytosanitary certificate
accompanying plants, plant products or other objects to be introduced from a third country, if the
content of that certificate complies with Part A of Annex V. Where the plants, plant products or other
objects are to be introduced from a third country from which they do not originate, the competent
authority shall only accept a phytosanitary certificate complying either with Part A or Part B of Annex
V.

It shall not accept that phytosanitary certificate where the additional declaration referred to in Article
71(2), where applicable, is not present or not correct, and where the statement referred to in Article
71(3), where applicable, is not present.

It shall not accept a phytosanitary certificate for re-export if that phytosanitary certificate is not
accompanied by the original phytosanitary certificate for export, or a certified copy of the original
phytosanitary certificate for export.

2. The competent authority shall only accept a phytosanitary certificate if it fulfils the following
requirements:

(a)   it is issued in ►M1 English ◄;

(b)   it is addressed to the national plant protection organisation of ►M1 the United Kingdom ◄; and

(c)   it has been issued no more than 14 days before the date on which the plants, plant products or
      other objects covered by it have left the third country in which it was issued.

3. In the case of a third country which is a contracting party to the IPPC, the competent authority
shall only accept the phytosanitary certificates issued by the official national plant protection
organisation of that third country or, under its responsibility, by a public officer who is technically
qualified and duly authorised by that official national plant protection organisation.

4. In the case of a third country which is not a contracting party to the IPPC, the competent authority
shall only accept the phytosanitary certificates issued by the authorities which are competent in
accordance with the national rules of that third country and notified to the ►M1 UK NPPO ◄. ►M1 ---
-- ◄

The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ supplementing the conditions for acceptance
referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph to ensure the reliability of those certificates.

5. Electronic phytosanitary certificates shall only be accepted when provided ►M2 in a form and
manner approved by the competent authority in writing ◄ for official controls at Union level.

Electronic phytosanitary certificates shall only be accepted when provided through, or in electronic
exchange with, the ►M1 appropriate computerised information management system ◄.

                                                Article 77
                                Invalidation of phytosanitary certificate

1. Where a phytosanitary certificate has been issued in accordance with Article 71(1), (2) and (3),
and the competent authority concerned concludes that the conditions referred to in Article 76 are not
fulfilled, it shall invalidate that phytosanitary certificate and ensure that it no longer accompanies those



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                      43/95
plants, plant products or other objects concerned. In that case, and in respect of the plants, plant
products or other objects concerned, the competent authority shall take one of the measures set out in
Article 66(3) of Regulation (EU) 2017/625.

Upon invalidation, the certificate concerned shall bear on its face and in a prominent position a
triangular stamp in red, marked ►M1 CERTIFICATE CANCELLED ◄ from the ►M1 ----- ◄
competent authority, together with its denomination and the date of invalidation. It shall be in capital
letters, and in at least one of the official languages of the Union.

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ set out technical arrangements concerning
the invalidation of the electronic phytosanitary certificates, as referred to in Article 76(5). ►M1 ----- ◄

                                            Section 2
      ►M1 UK ◄ Plant passports required for the movement of plants, plant products and other
                        objects within ►M1 or into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ◄

                                              Article 78
                                       ►M1 UK ◄ Plant passports

►M1 1. A UK plant passport shall be an official label to be used for:

(a)       the movement of plants, plant products and other objects described in Articles 79 and 80
         (including the introduction of plants, plant products and other objects into ►M2 Guernsey ◄
         from a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄); and

(b)      the movement of plants, plant products and other objects from ►M2 Guernsey ◄ to a ►M2
         Relevant British Island ◄. ◄

►M1 2. Articles 83 to 92 and 93 to 95 apply in relation to any UK plant passport issued in ►M2
Guernsey ◄. ◄

►M1 3. Article 92a applies to any UK plant passport issued in a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ that
accompanies plants, plant products or other objects that are introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from
that ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ and are subsequently moved within ►M2 Guernsey ◄.◄

                                           Article 79
 Plants, plant products and other objects for which a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport is required for
                              movement within ►M2 Guernsey ◄

1. ► Plants, plant products and other objects listed in Annex 13 to the Phytosanitary Conditions
Regulation may not be moved within ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from a
►M2 Relevant British Island ◄, unless they are accompanied by a UK plant passport. ◄

►M1 1A. Paragraph 1 is subject to Articles 81 and 82◄►M4 and, in relation to qualifying Northern
Ireland goods, to Article 95a(2)◄.

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Annex 13 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex 2:

(a)      to include a plant, plant product or other object that is not included in Annex 13 to the
         Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, where there is a risk that the plant, plant product or other



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   44/95
      object hosts a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ or a provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine
      pest ◄;

(b)    to remove a plant, plant product or other object listed in that Annex, where the risk that it hosts
      a ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ or a provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pest ◄ no
      longer exists◄

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

5. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1►M1 ----- ◄ and 3, no ►M4 UK ◄ plant passport shall
be required for the plants, plant products or other objects which are subject to ►M1 Article 47, 48 or
75(1)◄.

6. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                           Article 80
 Plants, plant products and other objects for which a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport is required for
            introduction into, and movement within, ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄

1. ► Any plants, plant products and other objects described in any entry in column (1) of the table in
Annex 14 to Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation may not be introduced into, or moved within, a ►M2
Guernsey pest-free area ◄ specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the table unless they
are accompanied by a UK plant passport.◄

►M1 1A. Paragraph 1 is subject to Articles 81 and 82.◄

2. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. ►M1 The appropriate authority may by regulations amend Annex 14 to the Phytosanitary
Conditions Regulation in accordance with the principles set out in Section 2 of Annex 2:

(a)   to include a plant, plant product or other object which is not listed in Annex 14 to the
      Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, where there is a risk that the plant, plant product or other
      object hosts a PFA quarantine pest; or

(b)   to remove a plant, plant product or other object from the list in Annex 14 to the Phytosanitary
      Conditions Regulation where the risk that it hosts a PFA quarantine pest no longer exists.◄

4. ►M1 ----- ◄

5. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1►M1 ----- ◄ and 3, no plant passport shall be required for
the plants, plant products or other objects which are subject to ►M1 Article 57 or 58◄.

                                              Article 81
                              Exception for direct supply to final users

►M1 A1. This Article applies to the movement of plants, plant products or other objects in ►M2
Guernsey ◄ and the introduction of plants, plant products or other objects ►M1 which are ◄ into ►M2
Guernsey ◄ from a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄.◄

1. No ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M4 or other permitted plant passport◄ shall be required for the
movement of plants, plant products or other objects supplied directly to a final user, including home
gardeners.

►M1 1A. ◄ That exception shall not apply to:




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  45/95
(a)   final users receiving those plants, plant products or other objects by means of sales through
      distance contracts; or

(b)   final users of plants, plant products or other objects ►M1described in an entry (if any) in column
      (1) of the table in Annex 14 to Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation, who are situated in a ►M2
      Guernsey pest-free area ◄ specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the table◄.

►M1 1B. ◄ The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, specify that the requirements of
point (b) of the second subparagraph shall only apply for particular protected zone pests, plants, plant
products or other objects. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the
examination procedure referred to in Article 107(2).

2. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations supplement ◄ this Regulation by setting out
the cases where, for particular plants, plant products or other objects, the exception of paragraph 1 of
this Article shall only apply to small quantities. Those ►M1 regulations must ◄ define those quantities
per period of time as appropriate to the plant, plant product or other object concerned and the
respective pest risks.

                                         Article 82
      Exceptions for movements within and between the premises of a registered operator

No ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M4 or other permitted plant passport◄ shall be required for the
movements of plants, plant products and other objects within and between the premises of the same
registered operator which are in close proximity to each other.

►M1 ----- ◄

                                           Article 83
                       Content and format of the ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport

1. ►M1 A UK ◄ plant passport shall take the form of a distinct label, made on any substrate suitable
for printing the elements ►M1 set out in Part A, B, C or D of Annex 7◄, provided that the ►M1 UK ◄
plant passport is clearly distinguishable from any other information or label which may also be
indicated on that substrate.

The ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport shall be easily visible and clearly legible, and the information on it
shall be unchangeable and durable.

2. ►M1 A UK ◄ plant passport ►M1 ----- ◄ shall contain the elements set out in Part A of Annex VII
►M1 , except where paragraph 4 or 5 applies ◄.

By way of derogation from point 1(e) of Part A of Annex VII, the traceability code shall not be required
►M1 on a UK plant passport for the movement of plants for planting in ►M2 Guernsey ◄, or the
introduction of plants for planting into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄,◄
where ►M1 the◄ plants for planting fulfil all of the following conditions:

(a)   they are prepared in such a way that they are ready for the sale to final users without any
      further preparation and no risk exists concerning the spread of ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine
      pests◄ or provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ ◄;

(b)   they do not belong to types or species ►M1 specified in regulations made under ◄ in
      paragraph 3 of this Article.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                46/95
3. The ►M1 the appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ identify types and species of plants for
planting for which the exemption referred to in paragraph 2 shall not apply. ►M1 ----- ◄

4. ►M1 A UK ◄ plant passport for introduction into, and movement within, a ►M2 Guernsey pest-
free area ◄ or ►M2 Relevant British Island pest-free area ◄ shall contain the elements set out in
Part B of Annex VII.

5. In the case of plants for planting produced, or made available on the market, as pre-basic, basic or
certified material or pre-basic, basic or certified seed or seed potatoes, as respectively referred to in
►M2 Directives 66/401/EEC, 66/402/EEC, 68/193/EEC, 2002/54/EC, 2002/55/EC, 2002/56/EC,
2002/57/EC and 2008/90/EC, ◄ ►M1 a UK plant passport ◄ shall be included, in a distinct form, in
the official label ►M2 which must be produced in accordance with the respective provisions of those
Directives◄.

►M1 Where this paragraph applies, a UK plant passport must contain:

(a)    the elements set out in Part C of Annex 7; or

(b)   in the case of plants, plant products or objects which are to be introduced into a ►M2
      Guernsey pest-free area ◄ or ►M2 Relevant British Island pest-free area ◄, the elements set
      out in Part D of Annex 7.◄

►M4 5A. Where a replacement UK plant passport is issued in relation to plants, plant products or
other objects in a relevant NI trade unit pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 93, the UK plant
passport must contain the element set out in point (1)(g) of Part A of Annex 7 or point (1)(h) of Part B
of Annex 7 (as the case may be).◄

6. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations amend ◄ Parts A, B, C and D of Annex VII in
order to adapt the elements set out therein, where applicable, to the development of scientific and
technical knowledge.

7. ►M1 A UK plant passport must comply with the requirements set out in Commission Implementing
Regulation (EU) 2017/2313 setting out the format specifications of the plant passport for movement
within the Union territory and the plant passport for introduction into, and movement within, a protected
zone(29).◄

►M1 7A. The appropriate authority may by regulations make provision relating to the format or size of
UK plant passports.◄

8. A ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport may also be issued in an electronic form (‘electronic ►M4 UK ◄
plant passport’), provided that it contains all the elements ►M1 set out in Part A, B, C or D of Annex 7
(as the case may be)◄, and that the technical arrangements have been set out ►M1 in regulations
made under paragraph 9◄.

►M1 9. The appropriate authority may by regulations set out technical arrangements for the issuance
of electronic UK plant passports to ensure an appropriate credible and effective mode for their
issuance.◄

                                        Article 84
 Issuance of ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports by authorised professional operators and competent
                                       authorities

1. ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports shall be issued by authorised operators, under the supervision of the
competent authorities.


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 47/95
Authorised operators shall issue ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports only for the plants, plant products or
other objects for which they are responsible.

2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, competent authorities may also issue ►M1 UK ◄ plant
passports.

3. Authorised operators shall only issue ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports in the premises, collective
warehouses and dispatching centres which are under their responsibility and declared by them
pursuant to point (d) of Article 66(2) or, where Article 94(1) applies, in another location if so authorised
by the competent authority.

                                           Article 85
              Substantive requirements for a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M1 ----- ◄

A ►M1 UK plant passport may only be issued for the movement of ◄ a plant, plant product or other
object ►M1 within ►M2 Guernsey ◄ if the plant, plant product or other object ◄ fulfils the following
requirements:

(a)   it is free from ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ and provisional ►M2 Guernsey
      quarantine pests◄ ◄;

(b)   it complies with the provisions of Article 37(1) concerning the presence of ►M2 Guernsey ◄
      regulated non-quarantine pests on plants for planting and the provisions of Article 37 ►M1 (4A)
      ◄ concerning the measures to be taken;

(c)   it complies with the requirements ►M1 ----- ◄ referred to in Article 41►M1 (1)◄;

(d)   where applicable, it complies with ►M1 any requirements specified in regulations made under
      Article 28(1) or 30(1)◄; and

(e)   where applicable, it complies with ►M1 any◄ measures adopted by the competent ►M1
      authority◄ for the eradication of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests pursuant to Article 17(1)
      or ►M1 the eradication of provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ pursuant to
      regulations made under Article 30(1)◄.

                                       Article 86
Substantive requirements for a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport for movement into and within a ►M2
                                Guernsey pest-free area ◄

►M1 A1. This Article applies to any plant, plant product or other object of a description specified in
any entry in column (1) of the table in Annex 14 to the Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation which is to
be introduced into, or moved within, a ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ specified in the corresponding
entry in column (2) of the table.◄

1. A ►M1 UK plant passport may only be issued for the introduction into, or movement within, a
►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ of a plant, plant product or other object if it ◄ fulfils all of the
requirements of Article 85, and in addition the following requirements:

(a)   it is free from the ►M1 PFA quarantine pest which relates to that ◄►M2 Guernsey pest-free
      area ◄; and

(b)   it complies with the requirements referred to in Article 54►M1 (1) ◄.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   48/95
2. ►M1 But where Article 33(2) applies, a UK plant passport may ◄ not be issued for plants, plant
products or other objects originating in the demarcated area concerned and which may host the ►M1
PFA quarantine ◄ pest concerned.

                                        ►M1 Article 86a
  UK plant passports for the introduction of plants, plant products and other objects into ►M2
                      Relevant British Islands ◄ from ►M2 Guernsey ◄

►M1 1. This Article applies to any plant, plant product or other object which is to be introduced into a
►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ from ►M2 Guernsey ◄ and is required by the ►M2 relevant British
Islands legislation ◄ to be accompanied by a UK plant passport on its introduction into that territory.
◄

►M1 2. A UK plant passport may only be issued for the introduction of a plant, plant product or other
object into a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ if the plant, plant product or other object:

(a)    fulfils all of the requirements of Articles 85 and 86, where applicable; and

(b)    fulfils any additional requirements that apply under the ►M2 relevant British Islands legislation
◄ to the introduction of that plant, plant product or other object into the ►M2 Relevant British Island
◄. ◄

                                             Article 87
                            Examinations for ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports

1. A ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport may only be issued for plants, plant products and other objects for
which a meticulous examination in accordance with paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 has shown that they fulfil
the requirements of Article 85, and, where applicable, Article 86 ►M1 and 86a◄.

Plants, plant products and other objects may either be examined individually or by representative
samples. The examination shall also cover the packaging material of the plants, plant products or
other objects concerned.

2. The examination shall be carried out by the authorised operator. However, in the following cases,
the examination shall be carried out by the competent authority:

(a)   where point (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 3 of this Article applies concerning
      inspections, sampling and testing;

(b)   where Article 84(2) applies; or

(c)   where an examination is carried out in the immediate vicinity as referred to in point (b) of the
      first subparagraph of paragraph 3 of this Article and the authorised operator does not have
      access to that immediate vicinity.

3. The examination shall fulfil all of the following conditions:

(a)   it shall be carried out at appropriate times and taking into account the risks involved;

(b)   it shall be carried out at the premises referred to in point (d) of Article 66(2). Where so required
      ►M1 by or under regulations made under Article 28(1) or 30(1) or pursuant to Article 37(4A),
      41(1B) or 54(1)◄, an examination shall also be carried out in the immediate vicinity of the place
      of production of the plants, plant products or other object concerned;

(c)   it shall be made at least by visual examination, complemented by:



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 49/95
      (i)    inspections, sampling and testing by the competent authority in the event of suspicion of
             the presence of a ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest or ►M1 provisional ►M2 Guernsey
             quarantine pest ◄ ◄, or in the event of the suspicion of the presence of a ►M1 PFA
             quarantine pest in the relevant◄ ►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄; or

      (ii)   sampling and testing in the event of suspicion of the presence of a ►M2 Guernsey ◄
             regulated non-quarantine pest, where applicable above the respective thresholds;

(d)   its results shall be recorded and stored for at least three years.

That examination shall take place without prejudice to any specific examination requirements or
measures ►M1applicable by virtue of regulations made under Article 28(1) or 30(1), or requirements
or measures under Article 37(4A), 41(1B) or 54(1), and in the case of plants, plant products and other
objects that are to be introduced into a ◄►M2 Relevant British Island ◄, under the ►M2 relevant
British Islands legislation ◄. Where those examination requirements or measures require the
examination to be carried out by the competent authority, that examination shall not be carried out by
the authorised operator referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article.

4. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations supplement ◄ this Regulation by setting out
detailed measures concerning visual examination, sampling and testing, and the frequency and timing
of the examinations, referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Article, with regard to specific plants,
plant products and other objects, on the basis of the particular pest risks they may present. Those
examinations shall, where appropriate, concern certain plants for planting belonging to pre-basic,
basic, or certified material, seed or seed potatoes, or standard or CAC material or seed, ►M2 as
respectively referred to in Directives 66/401/EEC, 66/402/EEC, 68/193/EEC, 2002/54/EC,
2002/55/EC, 2002/56/EC, 2002/57/EC, 2008/72/EC and 2008/90/EC◄.

►M1 5. Where regulations made under paragraph 4 make provision in relation to specific plants for
planting, and those plants for planting are subject to certification schemes under ►M2 Directives
66/401/EEC, 66/402/EEC, 68/193/EEC, 2002/54/EC, 2002/55/EC, 2002/56/EC, 2002/57/EC and
2008/90/EC ◄, the regulations must set out the requirements as regards the examinations for the
presence of ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ , provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ and
►M2 Guernsey regulated non-quarantine pests◄ , and other characteristics of the plants for planting
under the relevant legislation, in a single certification scheme.◄

►M1 6. Regulations made under paragraph 4 must take account of developments in scientific and
technical knowledge and international standards.◄

                                             Article 88
                            Attaching of the ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports

►M1 UK ◄ plant passports ►M1 issued in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ◄ shall be attached by the
professional operators concerned to the trade unit of the plants, plant products and other objects
concerned before they are moved within ►M2 Guernsey ◄ pursuant to Article 79 or into or within a
►M2 Guernsey pest-free area ◄ pursuant to Article 80. Where such plants, plant products or other
objects are moved in a package, bundle or container, the ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport shall be attached
to that package, bundle or container ►M1 , or before they are introduced into a ◄►M2 Relevant
British Island ◄.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 50/95
                                           Article 89
          Authorisation of professional operators to issue ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports

1. The competent authority shall grant an authorisation to a professional operator to issue ►M1 UK
◄ plant passports (‘the authorisation to issue ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports’) for particular families,
genera or species, and commodity types of plants, plant products and other objects where that
professional operator complies with both of the following conditions:

(a)   it possesses the necessary knowledge to carry out the examinations referred to in Article 87
      concerning the ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ , provisional ►M2 Guernsey
      quarantine pests◄ , PFA quarantine pests, ►M2 Relevant British Island quarantine pests◄
      and Guernsey◄ regulated non-quarantine pests that could affect the plants, plant products and
      other objects concerned, and concerning the signs of the presence of those pests, the
      symptoms caused by them, and the means to prevent the presence and spread of those pests;

(b)   it has in place systems and procedures enabling it to fulfil its obligations concerning traceability
      pursuant to Articles 69 and 70.

2. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations supplement ◄ this Regulation by setting out
criteria to be fulfilled by the professional operators in order for them to comply with the conditions set
out in point (a) of paragraph 1 of this Article and procedures to ensure that those criteria are met.

                                              Article 90
                                 Obligations of authorised operators

1. Where an authorised operator intends to issue a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport, it shall identify and
monitor the points of its production process, and the points concerning the movement of plants, plant
products and other objects, which are critical as regards compliance with ►M1 Articles 33(2), 37(4A),
41(1B), 54(1), 85, 86, 86a and 87 (as the case may be) and any requirements specified in regulations
made under Article 28(1) or 30(1)◄.

It shall keep for at least three years records concerning the identification and monitoring of those
points.

2. The authorised operator referred to in paragraph 1 shall ensure that appropriate training is
provided, when necessary, to its personnel involved in the examinations referred to in Article 87, in
order to ensure that that personnel possesses the necessary knowledge to carry out those
examinations.

                                                Article 91
                                      Pest risk management plans

1. Authorised operators may have in place pest risk management plans. The competent authority
shall approve those plans, if they fulfil all of the following conditions:

(a)   they set out measures which are appropriate for those operators to fulfil the obligations set out
      in Article 90(1);

(b)   they fulfil the requirements set out in paragraph 2 of this Article.

Authorised operators implementing an approved pest risk management plan may be subject to
inspections with a reduced frequency, as referred to in point (b) of Article 22(3) of Regulation (EU)
2017/625 .



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    51/95
2. The pest risk management plans shall cover, where appropriate in the form of standard operating
procedure manuals, at least the following:

(a)   the information required under Article 66(2) concerning the registration of the authorised
      operator;

(b)   the information required under Articles 69(4) and 70(1) concerning the traceability of plants,
      plant products and other objects;

(c)   a description of the production processes of the authorised operator and its activities as regards
      movement and sales of plants, plant products and other objects;

(d)   an analysis of the critical points referred to in Article 90(1) and the measures taken by the
      authorised operator to mitigate the pest risks associated with those critical points;

(e)   the procedures in place and actions foreseen where quarantine pests are suspected or found to
      be present, the recording of those suspicions or findings and the recording of the actions taken;

(f)   the roles and responsibilities of the personnel involved in the notifications referred to in Article
      14, the examinations referred to in Article 87(1), the issuance of ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports
      pursuant to Article 84(1), Article 93(1) and (2) and Article 94, and the attaching of ►M1 UK ◄
      plant passports pursuant to Article 88; and

(g)   the training provided to the personnel referred to in point (f) of this paragraph.

3. Where the competent authority becomes aware that the professional operator concerned does not
apply the measures referred to in point (a) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, or that a pest risk
management plan is no longer up to date with any of the requirements referred to in point (b) of the
first subparagraph of paragraph 1, that authority shall without delay take the measures necessary to
ensure that non-compliance with those conditions does not continue. Those measures may include
the withdrawal of the approval of that plan.

Where the competent authority has taken measures in accordance with the first subparagraph other
than the withdrawal of the approval of the plan, and the non-compliance continues, that authority shall
without delay withdraw that approval.

                                            Article 92
                            Inspections and withdrawal of authorisation

1. The competent authority shall carry out inspections at least once per year, and sampling and
testing if appropriate, to verify whether the authorised operators comply with ►M1, where
applicable,◄ Article 83(1), (2), (4) ►M1 and◄ (5), Article 87, Article 88, Article 89(1), Article 90 ►M1
and◄ Article 93(1), (2), (3) or (5) ►M4 and, in relation to qualifying Northern Ireland goods, Article
95a◄.

2. Where the competent authority becomes aware that an authorised operator does not comply with
the provisions referred to in paragraph 1 or that a plant, plant product or other object, for which that
professional operator has issued a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport, does not comply with ►M4 the
relevant requirements◄, that authority shall without delay take the measures necessary to ensure that
non-compliance with those provisions does not continue.

Those measures may include the withdrawal of the authorisation to issue plant passports for the
plants, plant products and other objects concerned.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   52/95
3. Where the competent authority has taken measures in accordance with paragraph 2 other than the
withdrawal of the authorisation to issue plant passports for the plants, plant products and other objects
concerned, and non-compliance with ►M4 the relevant requirements◄ continues, that authority shall
without delay withdraw that authorisation.

►M4 4. In this Article, ‘the relevant requirements’ means:

(a)   in the case of a relevant NI trade unit’, the requirements in Article 85 and, where applicable,
      Article 86 of the EU Plant Health Regulation;

(b)   in the case of any other trade unit, the requirements in Article 85 and, where applicable, Article
      86 or 86a of this Regulation.◄

▼M1

                                           Article 92a
                   UK plant passports issued in ►M2 Relevant British Islands ◄

1. A UK plant passport issued in a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ may only accompany plants, plant
products or other objects that are introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from that ►M2 Relevant British
Island ◄, and are subsequently moved within ►M2 Guernsey ◄, if the UK plant passport:

(a)    has been issued, in accordance with the relevant legislation in the ►M2 Relevant British Island
      ◄, by the ►M2 Relevant British Island authority ◄ for that ►M2 country or ◄ territory or by a
      professional operator under the supervision of the ►M2 Relevant British Island authority ◄;

(b)    is in the relevant form and has the relevant content specified in Article 83; and

(c)   is attached to the trade unit of the plants, plant products or other objects, or where the plants,
      plant products or other objects are moved in a package, bundle or container, to that package,
      bundle or container.

2. In paragraph 1, ‘relevant legislation’ means legislation containing provision which only permits UK
plant passports to be issued for plants, plant products or other objects that are to be introduced into
►M2 Guernsey ◄ if:

(a)    the plants, plant products or other objects:

      (i)     are free from ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ , provisional ►M2 Guernsey
              quarantine pests◄ , and where applicable, PFA quarantine pests;

      (ii)    comply with the provisions of Article 37(1) concerning the presence of ►M2 Guernsey
              regulated non-quarantine pests◄ on plants for planting and the provisions of Article
              37(4A) concerning the measures to be taken;

      (iii)   comply with the requirements concerning their introduction into, and movement within,
              ►M2 Guernsey ◄ referred to in Article 41(1A) and (1B) and, where applicable, the
              requirements referred to in Article 54(1);

      (iv)    comply with any requirements specified in regulations made under Article 28(1) or 30(1);
              and

      (v)     comply with any measures adopted by the competent authority for the eradication of
              ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ pursuant to Article 17(1) or the eradication of
              provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ pursuant to regulations made under
              Article 30(1); and


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 53/95
(b)   examinations have been carried out for the purpose of attesting that the plants, plant products
      or other objects fulfil those requirements in a manner equivalent to the examinations required
      under Article 87 in respect of UK plant passports issued for the movement of plants, plant
      products or other objects within ►M2 Guernsey ◄.

                                            Article 93
                               Replacing a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport

1. An authorised operator which has received a trade unit of plants, plant products or other objects
for which a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M4 or other permitted plant passport◄ has been issued, or
the competent authority acting on request of a professional operator, may issue a new ►M1 UK ◄
plant passport for that trade unit, replacing the ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport initially issued for that trade
unit, provided that the conditions of paragraph 3 are fulfilled.

2. Where a trade unit of plants, plant products or other objects for which a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport
►M4 or other permitted plant passport◄ has been issued is divided into two or more new trade units,
the authorised operator responsible for those new trade units, or the competent authority acting on
request of a professional operator, shall issue a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport for each new trade unit
resulting from the division, provided that the conditions set out in paragraph 3 are fulfilled. Those ►M1
UK ◄ plant passports shall replace the ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport issued for the initial trade unit.

3. A ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport, as provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2, may only be issued if the
following conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   the traceability requirements referred to in Article 69(3) concerning the plants, plant products or
      other objects concerned are fulfilled;

(b)   as applicable, the plants, plant products or other objects concerned continue to comply with the
      requirements referred to in Articles 85 and 86; and

(c)   the characteristics of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned have not changed.

4. Where a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport is issued pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2, the examination
referred to in Article 87(1) shall not be required.

5. Following the replacement of a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M4 or other permitted plant
passport◄ pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2, the authorised operator concerned shall retain the replaced
►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M4 or other permitted plant passport◄ or its content for at least three
years.

Where the replacement of a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 is carried out by
the competent authority, the professional operator on whose request it is issued shall retain the
replaced ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M4 or other permitted plant passport,◄ or its content for at
least three years.

That retainment may take the form of storage of the information contained in the ►M1 UK ◄ plant
passport ►M4 or other permitted plant passport◄ in a computerised database, provided that this
includes the information contained in any traceability barcode, hologram, chip or other data carrier
which may supplement the traceability code as referred to in Annex VII.

►M4 6. In paragraph 3(b), ‘the requirements referred to in Articles 85 and 86’ means:

(a)   in the case of a relevant NI trade unit, the requirements referred to in Articles 85 and 86 of the
      EU Plant Health Regulation;


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 54/95
(b)   in the case of any other trade unit, the requirements referred to in Articles 85 and 86 of this
      Regulation.◄

                                          Article 94
                  ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports replacing phytosanitary certificates

1. By way of derogation from Article 87 of this Regulation, where a plant, plant product or other
object, ►M1 is introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from a third country and a UK plant passport is
required for the movement of the plant, plant product or other object within ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ◄
pursuant to Article 79(1) and 80(1) of this Regulation, ►M1 a UK plant passport ◄ shall be issued if
the checks under Article 49(1) of Regulation (EU) 2017/625 concerning its introduction have been
completed satisfactorily and have led to the conclusion that the plant, plant product or other object
concerned fulfils the substantive requirements for issuance of a a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport in
accordance with to Article 85 of this Regulation and, where appropriate, Article 86 of this Regulation.

The replacement of a phytosanitary certificate by a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport may be carried out at
the place of destination of the plant, plant product or other object concerned, instead of the point of
entry, where checking at the place of destination is allowed ►M1 ----- ◄.

2. ►M1 By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, a UK plant passport need
not be issued for the movement of a plant, plant product or other object from its place of entry into
►M2 Guernsey ◄ to its initial destination in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ if the plant, plant product or other
object is accompanied by a copy, issued by the competent authority, of the original phytosanitary
certificate that accompanied it on its arrival in ►M2 Guernsey ◄.◄

3. The competent authority shall retain the phytosanitary certificate for at least three years. That
retainment may take the form of storage of the information contained in the phytosanitary certificate in
a computerised database.

Where point (a) of Article 101(2) applies, that phytosanitary certificate shall be replaced by a certified
copy thereof.

                                            Article 95
                      Invalidation and removal of ►M1 a UK ◄ plant passport

►M1 A1. This Article applies where a professional operator becomes aware that a trade unit of plants,
plant products or other objects, which is under the operator’s control does not comply with any of the
◄►M4 relevant requirements ◄.

1. ►M1 The professional operator must invalidate the UK plant passport ►M4 or other permitted
plant passport◄ and, where possible, remove it from that trade unit.◄

Without prejudice to the notification obligation referred to in Article 14, that professional operator shall
inform the competent authority under the competence of which it operates.

2. Where the professional operator fails to comply with paragraph 1, the competent authority shall
invalidate the ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M4 or other permitted plant passport◄ and, where
possible, remove it from the trade unit concerned.

3. Where paragraphs 1 and 2 apply, the professional operator concerned shall retain the invalidated
►M1 UK ◄ plant passport ►M4 or other permitted plant passport◄ or its content for at least three
years.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    55/95
That retention may take the form of storage of the information contained in the invalidated ►M1 UK ◄
plant passport in a computerised database, provided that this includes the information contained in
any traceability barcode, hologram, chip or other data carrier which may supplement the traceability
code as referred to in Annex VII, and a statement concerning that invalidation.

4. Where paragraphs 1 and 2 apply ►M4 in relation to a UK plant passport◄, the professional
operator concerned shall inform accordingly the authorised operator, or competent authority, who
issued the invalidated ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport.

5. ►M1 ----- ◄

►M4 6. In paragraph A1, ‘relevant requirements’ means:

(a)   in the case of a relevant NI trade unit, the requirements in Articles 83 to 87, 89, 90, 93 or 94 of
      the EU Plant Health Regulation;

(b)   in the case of any other trade unit, the requirements in Articles 83 to 86, 87, 89, 90, 92a, 93 or
      94 of this Regulation.◄

                                         ►M4 Article 95a
Introduction of qualifying Northern Ireland goods into ◄►M2 Guernsey ◄ and their movement
                                   within ►M2 Guernsey ◄

►M4 1. A relevant NI trade unit which is introduced directly into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from Northern
Ireland must be accompanied, on its introduction into ►M2 Guernsey ◄, by the plant passport which
was required for its movement within Northern Ireland in accordance with the EU Plant Health
Regulation. ◄

►M4 2. A relevant NI trade unit which has been introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from Northern
Ireland in accordance with paragraph 1 may be moved within ►M2 Guernsey ◄ if it is accompanied
by the plant passport referred to in paragraph 1.◄

                                               Section 3
                                           Other attestations

                                          Article 96
                   Marking of wood packaging material, wood, or other objects

1. The mark applied on wood packaging material, wood or other objects to attest that a treatment has
been applied in accordance with Annex 1 to ISPM15 shall comply with the requirements set out in
Annex 2 to ISPM15 in all of the following cases:

(a)   wood packaging material introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from a third country, as referred to
      in Article 43;

(b)   wood packaging material marked within ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , moving out of ►M2 Guernsey ◄
      ►M1 to a third country or Northern Ireland ◄;

(c)   wood packaging material, wood or other objects moving within ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , ►M1 or into
      ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄, if so required by regulations made
      under Article 28(1) or 30(1), or by Article 41 or 54(1), or in the case of wood packaging material
      moving from ►M2 Guernsey ◄ to a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄, if required by legislation in
      force in that ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄◄;

(d)   any other wood packaging material, wood or other object marked within ►M2 Guernsey ◄.


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  56/95
The mark shall only be applied where the wood packaging material, wood or other objects have been
subject to one or more of the approved treatments referred to in Annex 1 to ISPM15, without prejudice
to Regulations (EC) No 1005/2009 (28), (EC) No 1107/2009 (29) and (EU) No 528/2012 (30) of the
European Parliament and of the Council.

For wood packaging material, wood or other objects marked in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , the mark shall only
be applied by a registered operator authorised in accordance with Article 98.

Points (a) and (b) of the first subparagraph shall not apply to wood packaging material which is subject
to the exemptions provided for in ISPM15.

2. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations amend ◄ the requirements set out in
paragraph 1 of this Article in order to adapt them to the development of international standards and in
particular to ISPM15.

                                           Article 97
                    Repairing of wood packaging material in ►M2 Guernsey ◄

1. Wood packaging material that is marked with the mark referred to in Article 96 shall only be
repaired if all of the following conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   the person carrying out that repair is a registered operator authorised in accordance with Article
      98;

(b)   the material and treatment used are eligible for repair;

(c)   the mark is applied anew, as appropriate.

2. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations ◄ set out specific arrangements concerning
the material, treatment and marking referred to in paragraph 1 ►M1 , taking into account relevant
international standards and in particular ISPM15◄. ►M1 ----- ◄

3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply where a professional operator permanently obliterates by any
means all earlier applications of that mark from the wood packaging material.

                                          Article 98
 Authorisation and supervision of registered operators applying the mark of wood packaging
                               material in ►M2 Guernsey ◄

1. An authorisation to apply the mark referred to in Article 96 and to repair wood packaging material
in accordance with Article 97 shall be granted by the competent authority on application to a registered
operator provided that the registered operator fulfils both of the following conditions:

(a)   it possesses the necessary knowledge to carry out the treatment of the wood packaging
      material, wood and other objects required pursuant to ►M1 regulations ◄ referred to in Articles
      96 and 97;

(b)   it operates appropriate facilities and equipment to carry out that treatment (‘treatment facilities’);

The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations supplement ◄ this Regulation by specifying the
requirements for authorisation, where appropriate in view of the development of scientific and
technical knowledge and international standards.

2. An authorisation to apply the mark referred to in Article 96 and to repair wood packaging material
according to Article 97 shall be granted by the competent authority on application to a registered



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   57/95
operator using wood treated in a facility of another operator, provided that it fulfils all of the following
conditions in respect of wood packaging material marked with that mark:

(a)   it exclusively uses wood:

      (i)    which has been subject to one or more of the approved treatments referred to in Annex 1
             of ISPM15 and has been treated in facilities operated by a registered operator authorised
             pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article; or

      (ii)   which has been subject to one or more of the approved treatments referred to in Annex 1
             of ISPM15 in a treatment facility in a third country that has been approved by the national
             plant protection organisation of that third country;

(b)   it ensures that the wood used for that purpose can be traced back to ►M1 the treatment
      facilities referred to in point (a)(i) and (ii) of this paragraph ◄;

(c)   where applicable pursuant to ►M1 regulations made under Article 28(1) or 30(1), or pursuant to
      Article 41 or 54(1)◄, it exclusively uses wood referred to in point (a) of this subparagraph which
      is accompanied by a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport or any other document providing guarantees
      that the treatment requirements referred to in Annex 1 to ISPM15 are fulfilled.

3. The competent authority shall supervise at least once per year the registered operators ►M1 it
has◄ authorised pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 to verify and ensure that they treat and mark as
appropriate wood packaging material, wood and other objects in accordance with Article 96(1) and
Article 97 and fulfil the conditions set out respectively in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article.

4. Where ►M1 any of the competent authorities◄ becomes aware that a professional operator does
not comply with the requirements referred to in paragraphs 1 or 2, that authority shall without delay
take the measures necessary to ensure that the non-compliance with those provisions does not
continue.

Where the competent authority has taken those measures other than the withdrawal of the
authorisation referred to in paragraphs 1 or 2, and the non-compliance continues, that authority shall
without delay withdraw the authorisation referred to in paragraphs 1 or 2.

                                              Article 99
                    Attestations other than the mark of wood packaging material

1. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations supplement ◄ this Regulation by setting out
the elements to be contained in official attestations specific for plants, plant products or other objects,
other than wood packaging material, which are required by the applicable international standards as
form of proof of the implementation of measures ►M1 specified in regulations made under Article
28(1), 30(1) or 44(1), or the implementation of measures specified in the requirements to be fulfilled
under Article 41 or 54(1)◄.

2. ►M1 Those regulations ◄ may also set out requirements concerning one or more of the following:

(a)   the authorisation of professional operators as regards the issuance of the official attestations
      referred to in paragraph 1;

(b)   the supervision by the competent authority of the professional operators authorised pursuant to
      point (a) of this paragraph;

(c)   the withdrawal of that authorisation referred to in point (a) of this paragraph.



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                     58/95
3. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations make provision about ◄ the format
specifications of the attestations referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. ►M1 ----- ◄

                                             Section 4
            Export of plants, plant products and other objects from ►M2 Guernsey ◄

                                            ►M1 Article 99a
                                            Interpretation◄

►M1 In Articles 100 and 101, “relevant phytosanitary import requirements” means:

(a)   in relation to the export of plants, plant products or other objects to a third country other than an
      EU Member State, the phytosanitary import requirements of that third country;

(b)   in relation to the export of plants, plant products or other objects to an EU Member State, the
      phytosanitary import requirements of the European Union;

(c)    in relation to the movement of plants, plant products or other objects to Northern Ireland, the
      phytosanitary import requirements of the European Union that apply by virtue of the Protocol on
      Ireland/Northern Ireland to the withdrawal agreement. ◄

                                             Article 100
                    Phytosanitary certificate for export from ►M2 Guernsey ◄

1. Where, for the export of a plant, plant product or other object from ►M2 Guernsey ◄ to a third
country ►M1 or Northern Ireland ◄, a phytosanitary certificate is required by the ►M1 relevant
phytosanitary import requirements ◄ (‘phytosanitary certificate for export’), that certificate shall be
issued by the competent authority, at the request of the professional operator, when all of the following
conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   the professional operator is registered by that competent authority in accordance with Article 65;

(b)   the professional operator has under its control the plant, plant product or other object to be
      exported;

(c)   it is ensured that that plant, plant product or other object complies with the ►M1 relevant
      phytosanitary import requirements ◄.

The competent authority shall also issue a phytosanitary certificate for export at the request of persons
other than professional operators, provided that the conditions set out in points (b) and (c) of the first
subparagraph are fulfilled.

For the purpose of this paragraph, the competent authority shall not delegate the issuance of the
phytosanitary certificate for export to any other person.

2. Without prejudice to obligations under the IPPC, and taking into account the relevant international
standards, the phytosanitary certificate for export shall be issued where the information available
allows the competent authority to certify compliance of the plant, plant product or other object
concerned with the ►M1 relevant phytosanitary import requirements ◄. That information may
originate from one or more of the following elements, as applicable:

(a)   inspections, sampling and testing of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned, or
      their place of production and its vicinities;

(b)   official information on the pest status in the production site, place of production, area or country
      of origin of the plants, plant products or other objects concerned;


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    59/95
(c)   a ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport, as referred to in Article 78, accompanying the plants, plant
      products or other objects concerned, where that ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport attests the results
      of inspections by ►M1 a ◄ competent authority;

(d)   the mark of wood packaging material as referred to in Article 96(1), or the attestations referred
      to in Article 99(1);

(e)   ►M1 ----- ◄

(f)   official information included in the phytosanitary certificate as referred to in Article 71, where the
      plants, plant products or other objects concerned have been introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄
      from a third country.

3. ►M2 ----- ◄

4. The ►M1 appropriate authority may by regulations amend ◄ the elements referred to in
paragraph 2 of this Article ►M1 ----- ◄ to adapt them to the development of the relevant international
standards.

5. Electronic phytosanitary certificates for export shall be provided ►M2 in a form and manner
approved by the competent authority in writing ◄, where the use of electronic phytosanitary
certificates is permitted by the competent authority ◄.

                                            Article 101
                  Phytosanitary certificate for re-export from ►M2 Guernsey ◄

1. For the re-export of a plant, plant product or other object which originates in a third country and
has been introduced into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ from that, or another, third country, a phytosanitary
certificate for re-export from ►M2 Guernsey ◄ (‘the phytosanitary certificate for re-export’) shall,
where possible, be issued instead of the phytosanitary certificate for export.

The phytosanitary certificate for re-export shall be issued by the competent authority at the request of
the professional operator when all of the following conditions are fulfilled:

(a)   that professional operator is registered by that competent authority in accordance with Article
      65;

(b)   the professional operator has under its control the plant, plant product or other object to be re-
      exported;

(c)   it is ensured that that plant, plant product or other object complies with the phytosanitary import
      requirements of the third country concerned.

The competent authority shall also issue a phytosanitary certificate for re-export at the request of
persons other than professional operators, provided that the conditions set out in points (b) and (c) of
the second subparagraph are fulfilled.

For the purpose of this paragraph, the competent authority shall not delegate the issuance of the
phytosanitary certificate for re-export to any other person.

2. Without prejudice to obligations under the IPPC, and taking into account the relevant international
standards, the phytosanitary certificate for re-export shall be issued where the information available
allows certifying of compliance with the ►M1 relevant phytosanitary import requirements ◄ and that
all of the following conditions are complied with:




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   60/95
(a)     the original phytosanitary certificate accompanying the plant, plant product or other object
        concerned from the third country of origin, or a certified copy of it, is attached to the
        phytosanitary certificate for re-export;

(b)     the plant, plant product or other object concerned has not been grown, produced or processed
        to change its nature since its introduction in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ;

(c)     the plant, plant product or other object concerned has not been exposed to any risk of
        infestation or contamination with quarantine pests or regulated non-quarantine pests, listed as
        such ►M1 for the purposes of imports into ◄ the third country of destination, during ►M1 its
        storage in ◄ ►M2 Guernsey ◄;

(d)     the identity of the plant, plant product or other object concerned has been maintained.

3. Article 100(2) shall apply mutatis mutandis.

4. ►M2 ----- ◄

5. ►M2 ----- ◄

6. Electronic phytosanitary certificates for re-export shall be provided ►M2 in a form and manner
approved by the competent authority in writing ◄, ►M1 where the use of electronic phytosanitary
certificates is permitted by the competent authority ◄.

                                            ►M1 Article 102
                                        Pre-export certificates ◄

                                           CHAPTER VII
                               Supporting measures by the Commission

                                         ►M1 Article 103
                          Establishment of electronic notification system◄

                                         ►M1 Article 104
      Information items, format and deadlines of notifications, and notifications in the case of
                                  suspected presence of pests◄

                                              CHAPTER VIII
                                             Final provisions

                                             ►M2 Article 105
                                              Regulations ◄

▼M8

                                               Article 105A
                                                Penalties

1. The appropriate authority may, by regulations, lay down the rules on penalties applicable to
infringements of this Regulation or of any EU tertiary legislation (3), or regulations, made under it. The
penalties provided for must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.

2. Regulations under this Article may create offences.

3. Regulations may provide for an offence under the regulations to be triable—

(a)     summarily, or


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    61/95
(b)   either summarily or on indictment.

4. Regulations may provide for an offence under the regulations that is triable either way to be
punishable—

(a)   on summary conviction in England and Wales, with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
      months or a fine (or both);

(b)   on summary conviction in Scotland, with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or
      a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (or both);

(c)   on conviction on indictment, with imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine (or
      both).

5. Regulations may provide for a summary offence under the regulations to be punishable—

(a)   in England and Wales, with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a fine (or
      both);

(b)   in Scotland, with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding
      level 5 on the standard scale (or both).



                                          ►M1 Article 106
                                        Urgency procedure◄

                                          ►M1 Article 107
                                       Committee procedure◄

▼M7

                                           Article 108
               Additional regulation making powers of the appropriate authority ◄

1. For the purpose set out in paragraph 2, the appropriate authority may by regulations:

(a)   amend this Regulation, any other item of Preserved EU law made under it or any other item of
      Preserved EU law relating to plant health;

(b)   amend or repeal —

      (i)    the Plant Health (Implementation) (Guernsey) Ordinance, 2020, or any enactment made
             under that Ordinance or any enactment made under the Plant Health (Enabling
             Provisions) (Guernsey) Law, 2014, or

      (ii)   any regulations made under section 5 of the Brexit Law, insofar as the same relate to the
             implementation of an item of Preserved EU law relating to plant health;

(c)   provide for the disapplication of any item of Preserved EU law relating to plant health;

(d)   provide that any item of Preserved EU law relating to plant health or any other enactment,
      insofar as it relates to plant health, shall have effect subject to such exceptions, adaptations and
      modifications as may be prescribed by regulations; or

(e)   make provision for the purpose of dealing with matters arising out of or related to any item of
      Preserved EU law relating to plant health.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 62/95
2. The purpose referred to in paragraph I is to make equivalent provision, in Guernsey legislation
relating to plant health, to that in force, or known to be coming into force, in any part of the United
Kthgdom, except for Northern Ireland, in retained EU law relating to plant health or in any enactment
implementing the same subject to any modifications, adaptations or exceptions which the appropriate
authority considers necessary or expedient to adapt the provisions to Guernsey.

3. The power in paragraph 1 includes a power to make provision as to the creation and punishment
of offences in respect of contraventions of any item of Preserved EU law, any enactment referred to in
point (b) of paragraph 1 or made under this Article and as to the creation of new duties, obligations,
liabilities, remedies, penalties, sanctions and other consequences but subject to the provisions of
paragraph 4.

4. The power conferred by paragraphs 1 and 3 to make provision as to the creation and punishment
of offences does not include power —

(a)    to provide for offences to be triable only on indictment;

(b)    to authorise the imposition, on summary conviction of an offence, of a term of imprisonment or a
       fine exceeding the limits of jurisdiction for the time being imposed on the Magistrates Court by
       section 9 of the Magistrate’s Court (Guernsey) Law, 2008; or

(c)    to authorise the imposition, on conviction on indictment of any offence, of a term of
       imprisonment exceeding two years.

5. This Article is without prejudice to other powers of the appropriate authority to make regulations
under other provisions of this Regulation.

6. Regulations of the appropriate authority under this Article shall be laid before a meeting of the
States of Deliberation as soon as possible after being made; and if at that or the next meeting the
States of Deliberation resolve that the regulations be annulled, the regulations shall cease to have
effect but without prejudice to anything done under them or to the making of new regulations.

7. In this Article:

(a)    ‘Brexit Law’ means the European Union (Brexit) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law, 2018;

(b)    ‘implementation’ and related expressions have the meaning given by section 12(1) of the Brexit
       Law;

(c)    ‘plant health’ means protective measures against pests of plants and other matters in relation to
       plant health;

(d)    ‘Preserved EU law’ has the meaning given by section 3 of the Brexit Law; and

(e)    ‘retained EU law’ has the meaning in section 6(7) of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018.

                                                Article 109
                                                 Repeals

1. Directive 2000/29/EC is repealed, without prejudice to Article 165(2), (3) and (4) of
Regulation (EU) 2017/625

2. The following Directives are repealed:

(a)    Directive 69/464/EEC;

(b)    Directive 74/647/EEC;


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                               63/95
(c)   Directive 93/85/EEC;

(d)   Directive 98/57/EC;

(e)   Directive 2006/91/EC;

(f)   Directive 2007/33/EC.

3. References to the acts repealed in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be construed as
references to this Regulation and shall be read in accordance with the correlation table set out in
Annex IX.

                                           Article 110
                             Amendment of Regulation (EU) No 228/2013

In Article 24(2) of Regulation (EU) No 228/2013, the following subparagraph is added:

‘Union financing of the programmes for the control of pests in the outermost regions of the Union shall
be implemented in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 652/2014 of the European Parliament and of
the Council (*).

                                           Article 111
                               Amendment of Regulation (EU) 652/2014

Regulation (EU) No 652/2014 is amended as follows:

(1)   in Article 1, point (e) is replaced by the following:

      ‘(e)   on protective measures against pests of plants;’;

(2)   in Article 5(2), the following point is added:

      ‘(c)   the programmes for the control of pests in the outermost regions of the Union as referred
             to in Article 25;’;

(3)   in Article 16(1), points (a), (b) and (c) are replaced by the following:

      ‘(a)   measures to eradicate a pest from an infested area, taken by the competent authorities
             pursuant to Article 17(1), Article 28(1), Article 29(1) or Article 30(1) of Regulation (EU)
             2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council (**);

      (b)    measures to contain a priority pest, listed pursuant to Article 6(2) of Regulation (EU)
             2016/2031, against which Union containment measures have been adopted pursuant to
             Article 28(2) of that Regulation, in an infested area from which that priority pest cannot be
             eradicated, where those measures are essential to protect the Union territory against
             further spread of that priority pest. Those measures shall concern the eradication of that
             pest from the buffer zone surrounding that infested area if it is found to be present in that
             buffer zone; and

      (c)    prevention measures taken against the spread of a priority pest, listed pursuant to
             Article 6(2) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031, against which Union measures have been
             adopted pursuant to Article 28(3) of that Regulation, where those measures are essential
             to protect the Union territory against further spread of that priority pest.

      (**) Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October
            2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU)
            No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 64/95
             of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC,
             98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC (OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4).’;"

(4)   Article 17 is replaced by the following:

      ‘Article 17

      Conditions

      The measures referred to in Article 16 may qualify for grants provided that they have been
      applied immediately and the applicable provisions laid down in the relevant Union law have
      been complied with, and provided that one or more of the following conditions are fulfilled:

      (a)    they concern Union quarantine pests, listed pursuant to Article 5(2) of Regulation (EU)
             2016/2031 as not known to occur in the Union territory;

      (b)    they concern pests, not listed as Union quarantine pests, which are subject to a measure
             adopted by the competent authority of a Member State pursuant to Article 29(1) of
             Regulation (EU) 2016/2031;

      (c)    they concern pests, not listed as Union quarantine pests, which are covered by a
             measure adopted by the Commission pursuant to Article 30(1) of Regulation (EU)
             2016/2031;

      (d)    they concern priority pests listed pursuant to Article 6(2) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031.

      For measures fulfilling the condition laid down in point (b) of the first paragraph, the grant shall
      not cover costs incurred later than two years after the entry into force of the measure adopted
      by the competent authority of the Member State concerned pursuant to Article 29 of Regulation
      (EU) 2016/2031, or incurred after the expiry of that measure. For measures fulfilling the
      condition laid down in point (c) of the first paragraph, the grant shall not cover costs incurred
      after the expiry of the measure adopted by the Commission pursuant to Article 30(1) of
      Regulation (EU) 2016/2031.’;

(5)   in paragraph 1 of Article 18, point (d) is replaced by the following:

      ‘(d)   costs of compensation to the owners concerned for the value of the destroyed plants,
             plant products or other objects subject to the measures referred to in Article 16, limited to
             the market value of such plants, plant products and other objects as if they were not
             affected by those measures; the salvage value, if any, shall be deducted from the
             compensation; and’;

(6)   Article 19 is amended as follows:

      (a)    the first paragraph is replaced by the following:

             ‘Grants may be awarded to Member States for annual and multiannual survey
             programmes that they carry out concerning the presence of pests (“survey programmes”),
             provided that those survey programmes comply with at least one of the following three
             conditions:

             (a)    they concern Union quarantine pests listed pursuant to Article 5(2) of Regulation
                    (EU) 2016/2031 as not known to occur in the Union territory;

             (b)    they concern priority pests listed pursuant to Article 6(2) of Regulation (EU)
                    2016/2031; and


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  65/95
               (c)    they concern pests not listed as Union quarantine pests which are covered by a
                      measure adopted by the Commission pursuant to Article 30(1) of Regulation (EU)
                      2016/2031.’;

       (b)     the third paragraph is replaced by the following:

               ‘For measures fulfilling the condition laid down in point (c) of the first paragraph, the grant
               shall not cover costs incurred after the expiry of the measure adopted by the Commission
               pursuant to Article 30(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031.’;

(7)    in Article 20, a new point is inserted before point (a):

       ‘(-a)   costs for visual examinations;’;

(8)    in Article 47, point 2 is replaced by the following:

       ‘(2)    The following Article is inserted:

       “Article 15a

       Member States shall provide that anyone who becomes aware of the presence of a pest listed
       in Annex I or Annex II or a pest covered by a measure pursuant to Article 16(2) or 16(3), or has
       reason to suspect such a presence, shall immediately notify the competent authority, and, if so
       requested by that competent authority, shall provide the information concerning that presence
       which is in its possession. Where the notification is not submitted in writing, the competent
       authority shall officially record it.”.’.

                                            Article 112
                              Amendment of Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014

In Article 2(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014, point (d) is replaced by the following:

‘(d)   pests of plants listed pursuant to Article 5(2) or Article 32(3), or subject to measures pursuant to
       Article 30(1), of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council (***);

                                                Article 113
                                     Entry into force and application

1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the
Official Journal of the European Union.

It shall apply from 14 December 2019. However:

(a)    point 8 of Article 111 shall apply from 1 January 2017;

(b)    Article 100(3) and Article 101(4) shall apply from 1 January 2021.

2. The acts referred to in points (a), (c), (d) and (f) of Article 109(2) are repealed with effect from
1 January 2022. In the event of conflict between the provisions of those acts and the provisions of this
Regulation, the provisions of this Regulation shall prevail.

►M1 ----- ◄

Done at Strasbourg, 26 October 2016.

For the European Parliament

The President



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                     66/95
M. SCHULZ

For the Council

The President

I. LESAY



(1) OJ C 170, 5.6.2014, p. 104.

(2) Position of the European Parliament of 15 April 2014 (not yet published in the Official Journal) and
position of the Council at first reading of 18 July 2016 (not yet published in the Official Journal).
Position of the European Parliament of 26 October 2016 (not yet published in the Official Journal).

(3) Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into
the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the
Community (OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1).

(4) Council Directive 66/401/EEC of 14 June 1966 on the marketing of fodder plant seed (OJ 125,
11.7.1966, p. 2298/66).

(5) Council Directive 66/402/EEC of 14 June 1966 on the marketing of cereal seed (OJ 125,
11.7.1966, p. 2309/66).

(6) Council Directive 68/193/EEC of 9 April 1968 on the marketing of material for the vegetative
propagation of the vine (OJ L 93, 17.4.1968, p. 15).

(7) Council Directive 2002/54/EC of 13 June 2002 on the marketing of beet seed (OJ L 193,
20.7.2002, p. 12).

(8) Council Directive 2002/55/EC of 13 June 2002 on the marketing of vegetable seed (OJ L 193,
20.7.2002, p. 33).

(9) Council Directive 2002/56/EC of 13 June 2002 on the marketing of seed potatoes (OJ L 193,
20.7.2002, p. 60).

(10) Council Directive 2002/57/EC of 13 June 2002 on the marketing of seed of oil and fibre plants
(OJ L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 74).

(11) Council Directive 2008/72/EC of 15 July 2008 on the marketing of vegetable propagating and
planting material, other than seed (OJ L 205, 1.8.2008, p. 28).

(12) Council Directive 2008/90/EC of 29 September 2008 on the marketing of fruit plant propagating
material and fruit plants intended for fruit production (OJ L 267, 8.10.2008, p. 8).

(13) OJ L 123, 12.5.2016, p. 1.

(14) Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February
2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member
States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers(OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13).

(15) Council Directive 74/647/EEC of 9 December 1974 on control of carnation leaf-rollers (OJ L 352,
28.12.1974, p. 41).

(16) Council Directive 2006/91/EC of 7 November 2006 on control of San José Scale (OJ L 312,
11.11.2006, p. 42).


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                67/95
(17) Council Directive 69/464/EEC of 8 December 1969 on control of Potato Wart Disease (OJ L 323,
24.12.1969, p. 1).

(18) Council Directive 93/85/EEC of 4 October 1993 on control of Potato Ring Rot (OJ L 259,
18.10.1993, p. 1).

(19) Council Directive 98/57/EC of 20 July 1998 on control of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith)
Yabuuchi et al. (OJ L 235, 21.8.1998, p. 1).

(20) Council Directive 2007/33/EC of 11 June 2007 on the control of potato cyst nematodes and
repealing Directive 69/465/EEC (OJ L 156, 16.6.2007, p. 12).

(21) Regulation (EU) No 652/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014
laying down provisions for the management of expenditure relating to the food chain, animal health
and animal welfare, and relating to plant health and plant reproductive material, amending Council
Directives 98/56/EC, 2000/29/EC and 2008/90/EC, Regulations (EC) No 178/2002, (EC) No 882/2004
and (EC) No 396/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Directive 2009/128/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council and Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European
Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Decisions 66/399/EEC, 76/894/EEC and
2009/470/EC (OJ L 189, 27.6.2014, p. 1).

(22) Regulation (EU) No 228/2013 of the European Parliament and the Council of the 13 March 2013
laying down specific measures for agriculture in the outermost regions of the Union and repealing
Council Regulation (EC) No 247/2006 (OJ L 78, 20.3.2013, p. 23).

(23) Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October
2014 on the prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien species (OJ
L 317, 4.11.2014, p. 35).

(24) Council Directive 98/56/EC of 20 July 1998 on the marketing of propagating material of
ornamental plants (OJ L 226, 13.8.1998, p. 16).

(25) Council Directive 1999/105/EC of 22 December 1999 on the marketing of forest reproductive
material (OJ L 11, 15.1.2000, p. 17).

(26) Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature
and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, 7.9.1987, p. 1).

(27) ISO 3166-1:2006, Codes for the representation of names of countries and their subdivisions —
Part 1: Country codes. International Organisation for Standardization, Geneva.

(28) Regulation (EC) No 1005/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September
2009 on substances that deplete the ozone layer (OJ L 286, 31.10.2009, p. 1).

(29) Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October
2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market and repealing Council
Directives 79/117/EEC and 91/414/EEC (OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p. 1).

(30) Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012
concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products (OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p.
1).




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                             68/95
(31) Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002
laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food
Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety (OJ L 31, 1.2.2002, p. 1).




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                         69/95
                                      ANNEX I
      CRITERIA FOR THE QUALIFICATION OF PESTS ACCORDING TO THEIR RISK TO ►M2
                                   GUERNSEY ◄

                                                SECTION 1
 Criteria to identify pests which qualify as a quarantine pest, as referred to in Article 3, Article
                      6(1), Article 7, Article 29(2) ►M1 ----- ◄ and Article 49(3)

(1)    Identity of the pest

       The taxonomic identity of the pest shall be clearly defined or, alternatively, the pest shall have
       been shown to produce consistent symptoms and to be transmissible.

       The taxonomic identity of the pest shall be defined at species level or, alternatively, a higher or
       lower taxonomic level, where that taxonomic level is scientifically appropriate based on its
       virulence, host range or vector relationships.

(2)    Presence of the pest in the territory in question

       One or more of the following conditions shall apply:

       (a)   the pest is not known to be present in the territory in question;

       (b)   the pest is not known to be present in the territory in question, except in a limited part of
             it;

       (c)   the pest is not known to be present in the territory in question, except for scarce,
             irregular, isolated and infrequent presences in it.

       Where point (b) or (c) applies, the pest shall be considered to be not widely distributed.

(3)    Capability of entry, establishment and spread of the pest in the territory in question

       (a)    Capability of entry

             The pest shall be considered capable of entry into the territory in question, or, if present
             but not widely distributed, into the part of that territory where it is absent (‘relevant part of
             the endangered area’), either by natural spread, or if all of the following conditions are
             fulfilled:

             (i)     it is associated, as regards plants, plant products or other objects which are moved
                     into the territory in question, with those plants, plant products and other objects in
                     the territory where they originate or from where they are moved into the territory in
                     question;

             (ii)    it survives during transport or storage;

             (iii)   it may be transferred to a suitable host plant, plant product or other object in the
                     territory in question.

       (b)   Capability of establishment

             The pest shall be considered capable of ‘establishment’ in the territory in question, or, if
             present but not widely distributed, in the part of that territory where it is absent, if all of the
             following conditions are fulfilled:




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                       70/95
            (i)     hosts of the pest and, where relevant, vectors for transmission of the pest are
                    available;

            (ii)    the decisive environmental factors are favourable for the pest concerned and,
                    where applicable, its vector, enabling it to survive periods of climatic stress and
                    complete its life cycle;

            (iii)   cultivation practices and control measures applied in that territory are favourable;

            (iv)    the survival methods, reproductive strategy, genetic adaptability of the pest and its
                    minimum viable population size support its establishment.

      (c     Capability of spread

            The pest shall be considered capable of territorial spread in the territory in question, or, if
            present but not widely distributed, in the part of that territory where it is absent, if one or
            more of the following conditions is fulfilled:

            (i)     the environment is suitable for natural spread of the pest;

            (ii)    barriers to natural spread of the pest are insufficient;

            (iii)   commodities or conveyances allow for movement of the pest;

            (iv)    hosts and, where relevant, vectors of the pest are present;

            (v)     cultivation practices and control measures applied in that territory are favourable;

            (vi)    natural enemies and antagonists of the pest are not present or not sufficiently
                    capable of suppressing the pest.

(4)   Potential economic, social and environmental impact

      The entry, establishment and spread of the pest in the territory in question, or, if present but not
      widely distributed, in the part of that territory where it is absent, shall have an unacceptable
      economic, social and/or environmental impact on that territory, or the part of that territory where
      it is not widely distributed, as regards one or more of the following points:

      (a)   crop losses in terms of yield and quality;

      (b)   costs of control measures;

      (c)   costs of replanting and/or losses due to the necessity of growing substitute plants;

      (d)   effects on existing production practices;

      (e)   effects on street trees, parks and natural and planted areas;

      (f)   effects on native plants, biodiversity and ecosystem services;

      (g)   effects on the establishment, spread and impact of other pests, for example due to the
            capacity of the pest concerned to act as a vector for other pests;

      (h)   changes to producer costs or input demands, including control costs and costs of
            eradication and containment;

      (i)   effects on producer profits that result from changes in quality, production costs, yields or
            price levels;




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   71/95
        (j)     changes to domestic or foreign consumer demand for a product resulting from quality
                changes;

        (k)     effects on domestic and export markets and prices paid, including effects on export
                market access and likelihood of phytosanitary restrictions imposed by trading partners;

        (l)     resources needed for additional research and advice;

        (m)     environmental and other undesired effects of control measures;

        (n)     effects on Natura 2000 ►M2 -----◄ or other protected areas;

        (o)     changes in ecological processes and the structure, stability or processes of an
                ecosystem, including further effects on plant species, erosion, water table changes, fire
                hazards, nutrient cycling;

        (p)     costs of environmental restoration and prevention measures;

        (q)     effects on food security and food safety;

        (r)     effects on employment;

        (s)     effects on water quality, recreation, tourism, landscape heritage, animal grazing, hunting,
                fishing.

                                             SECTION 2
      Criteria to identify ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests which qualify as a priority pest as
                                  referred to in Article 6(1) and (2)

►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests shall be considered to have the most severe economic, social or
environmental impact in respect of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ if their entry, establishment and spread fulfils
one or more of the following points:

(a)     Economic impact: the pest has the potential to cause major losses in terms of the direct and
        indirect effects referred to in point (4) of Section 1 for plants with a significant economic value in
        ►M2 Guernsey ◄.

        The plants referred to in the first subparagraph may be trees that are not in production.

(b)     Social impact: the pest has the potential to cause one or more of the following effects:

        (i)     a significant employment decrease in the agriculture, horticulture or forestry sector
                concerned or industries related to those sectors, including tourism and recreation;

        (ii)    significant risks to food security or food safety;

        (iii)   the disappearance of, or long-term large-scale damage to, important tree species growing
                or cultivated in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or tree species of high importance in terms of
                landscape as well as cultural or historical heritage for ►M2 Guernsey ◄.

(c)     Environmental impact: the pest has the potential to cause one or more of the following effects:

        (i)     significant effects on biodiversity and ecosystems services, including effects on species
                and habitats ►M2 listed under Council Directives 92/43/EEC and Directive 2009/147/EC
                of the European Parliament and of the Council ◄;

        (ii)    significant and long-term increases of the use of plant protection products on the plants
                concerned;


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                     72/95
      (iii)   the disappearance of, or long-term large-scale damage to, important tree species growing
              or cultivated in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or tree species of high importance in terms of
              landscape as well as cultural or historical heritage for ►M2 Guernsey ◄

                                          SECTION 3
 Criteria for a preliminary assessment to identify pests which provisionally qualify as a ►M2
 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest requiring temporary measures as referred to in Article 29(1) and
                                    Article 30►M1 (A1) ◄

                                          Subsection 1
  Criteria for a preliminary assessment to identify pests which provisionally qualify as a ►M2
   Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest requiring temporary measures as referred to in Article 29(1)

(1)   Identity of the pest

      The pest shall meet the criterion defined in point (1) of Section 1.

(2)   Presence of the pest in the ►M2 Guernsey ◄

      The pest is not previously known to be present in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ Based on the information
      available to ►M1 the competent authorities◄, the pest is also not previously known to be
      present in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , or is considered to fulfil the conditions set out in point (2)(b) or
      (c) of Section 1 as regards ►M2 Guernsey ◄

(3)   Probability of establishment and spread of the pest in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , or the specific part(s)
      of ►M2 Guernsey ◄

      Based on the information available to the ►M1 competent authorities◄, the pest meets the
      criteria defined in point (3)(b) and (c) of Section 1 as regards ►M2 Guernsey ◄

(4)   Potential economic, social and environmental impact of the pest

      Based on the information available to the ►M1 competent authorities◄, the pest would have an
      unacceptable economic, social and/or environmental impact on ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , if it
      established and spread in ►M2 Guernsey ◄

      That impact shall include at least one or more of the direct effects listed under point (4)(a) to (g)
      of Section 1.

                                          Subsection 2
  Criteria for a preliminary assessment to identify pests which provisionally qualify as a ►M2
  Guernsey ◄ quarantine pest requiring temporary measures as referred to in Article 30►M1
                                             (A1) ◄

(1)   Identity of the pest

      The pest shall meet the criterion defined in point (1) of Section 1.

(2)   Presence of the pest in ►M2 Guernsey ◄

      The pest is not previously known to be present in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , or is considered to fulfil
      the conditions set out in point (2)(b) or (c) of Section 1 as regards ►M2 Guernsey ◄

(3)   Probability of establishment and spread of the pest in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , or the specific part(s)
      of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ where it is not present




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  73/95
      Based on the information available ►M1 ----- ◄, the pest meets the criteria defined in
      point (3)(b) and (c) of Section 1 as regards ►M2 Guernsey ◄

(4)   Potential economic, social and environmental impact of the pest

      Based on the information available ►M1 ----- ◄, the pest would have an unacceptable
      economic, social and/or environmental impact on ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , if it established and
      spread in ►M2 Guernsey ◄

      That impact shall include at least one or more of the direct effects listed under point (4)(a) to (g)
      of Section 1.

                                            SECTION 4
Criteria to identify pests which qualify as a ►M2 Guernsey ◄ regulated non-quarantine pest as
                                 referred to in Articles 36 and 38

(1)   Identity of the pest

      The pest shall meet the criterion defined in point (1) of Section 1.

(2)   Probability of spread in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ of the pest

      The transmission of the pest shall be assessed to take place mainly via specific plants for
      planting, rather than via natural spread or via movement of plant products or other objects.

      That assessment shall include, as appropriate, the following aspects:

      (a)   the number of life cycles of the pest on the hosts concerned;

      (b)   the biology, epidemiology and survival of the pest;

      (c)   possible natural, human-assisted or other pathways for transmission of the pest to the
            host concerned and pathway efficiency, including mechanisms of dispersal and dispersal
            rate;

      (d)   subsequent infestation and transmission of the pest from the host concerned to other
            plants and vice versa;

      (e)   climatological factors;

      (f)   cultural practices before and after harvest;

      (g)   soil types;

      (h)   susceptibility of the host concerned and relevant stages of host plants;

      (i)   presence of vectors for the pest;

      (j)   presence of natural enemies and antagonists of the pest;

      (k)   presence of other hosts susceptible to the pest;

      (l)   prevalence of the pest in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ;

      (m)   intended use of the plants.

(3)   Potential economic, social and environmental impact of the pest




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  74/95
      Infestations of the plants for planting referred to in point (2) with the pest shall have an
      unacceptable economic impact on the intended use of those plants as regards one or more of
      the following points:

      (a)   crop losses in terms of yield and quality;

      (b)   extra costs of control measures;

      (c)   extra costs of harvesting and grading;

      (d)   costs of replanting;

      (e)   losses due to the necessity of growing substitute plants;

      (f)   effects on existing production practices;

      (g)   effects on other host plants at the place of production;

      (h)   effects on the establishment, spread and impact of other pests due to the capacity of the
            pest concerned to act as a vector for those other pests;

      (i)   effects on producer costs or input demands, including control costs and costs of
            eradication and containment;

      (j)   effects on producer profits that result from changes in production costs, yields or price
            levels;

      (k)   changes to domestic or foreign consumer demand for a product resulting from quality
            changes;

      (l)   effects on domestic and export markets and prices paid;

      (m)   effects on employment.



(1) Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild
fauna and flora (OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7).

(2) Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on
the conservation of wild birds (OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7).




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                75/95
                                    ANNEX II
       MEASURES AND PRINCIPLES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE RISKS OF PESTS

                                             SECTION 1
  Measures to manage the risks of quarantine pests as referred to in Article 17(1), Article 21,
  Article 25(2), Article 28(4) ►M1 ----- ◄, Article 29(1), Article 30(5) ►M1 ----- ◄, ►M1 Article
       40(3A), Article 41(3A), Article 53(3), Article 54(3A)◄ Article 54(3) and Article 75(2)

The management of the risks of quarantine pests shall consist of one or more, as appropriate, of the
following measures:

(1)   Measures targeting prevention and elimination of infestation of cultivated and wild plants

      (a)    Restrictions as regards the identity, nature, origin, ancestry, provenance and production
             history of cultivated plants.

      (b)    Restrictions on the cultivation, harvesting and use of plants.

      (c)    Restrictions on the use of plant products, premises, land, water, soil, growing media,
             facilities, machinery, equipment and other objects.

      (d)    Surveillance, visual examination, sampling and laboratory testing of plants, plant
             products, premises, land, water, soil, growing media, facilities, machinery, equipment and
             other objects for the presence of quarantine pests.

      (e)    Surveillance for breakdown or change in the effectiveness of a resistant plant species or
             plant variety which relates to a change in the composition of the quarantine pest or its
             biotype, pathotype, race or virulence group.

      (f)    Physical, chemical and biological treatment of plants, plant products, premises, land,
             water, soil, growing media, facilities, machinery, equipment and other objects, infested or
             potentially infested with quarantine pests.

      (g)    Destruction of plants, plant products and other objects infested or potentially infested with
             quarantine pests or for preventive purposes.

      (h)    Information, data recording, communication and reporting obligations.

      (i)    Registration of professional operators concerned.

      For the purposes of point (b), those measures may include requirements with regard to the
      testing of plant species and plant varieties for resistance to the quarantine pest concerned and
      the listing of plant species and plant varieties found to be resistant to the quarantine pest
      concerned.

      For the purposes of point (f), those measures may include requirements with regard to:

      (i)    the registration, authorisation and official supervision of professional operators applying
             the treatment concerned;

      (ii)   the issuance of a phytosanitary certificate, ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport, label or other
             official attestation for the treated plants, plants products or other objects and the placing
             of the mark referred to in Article 96(1) following the application of the treatment
             concerned.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   76/95
(2)   Measures targeting consignments of plants, plants products and other objects

      (a)    Restrictions on the identity, nature, origin, provenance, ancestry, production method,
             production history and traceability of plants, plant products and other objects.

      (b)    Restrictions on the introduction, movement, use, handling, processing, packaging,
             storage, distribution and destination of plants, plant products and other objects.

      (c)    Surveillance, visual examination, sampling, laboratory testing of plants, plant products
             and other objects for the presence of quarantine pests, including through subjection to
             quarantine procedures and pre-export inspections in third countries.

      (d)    Physical, chemical and biological treatment and, where appropriate, destruction of plants,
             plant products and other objects infested or potentially infested with quarantine pests.

      (e)    Information, data recording, communication and reporting obligations.

      (f)    Registration of professional operators concerned.

      For the purposes of points (a) to (d), those measures may include requirements with regard to:

      (i)    the issuance of a phytosanitary certificate, ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport, label or other
             official attestation, including the placing of the mark referred to in Article 96(1) to attest
             compliance with points (a) to (d);

      (ii)   the registration, authorisation and official supervision of professional operators applying
             the treatment referred to in point (d).

(3)   Measures targeting pathways for quarantine pests, other than consignments of plants, plant
      products or other objects

      (a)    Restrictions on the introduction and movement of quarantine pests as a commodity.

      (b)    Surveillance, visual examination, sampling and laboratory testing and where appropriate
             destruction of quarantine pests as a commodity.

      (c)    Restrictions on plants, plant products and other objects carried by travellers.

      (d)    Surveillance, visual examination, sampling and laboratory testing and where appropriate
             treatment or destruction of plants, plant products and other objects carried by travellers.

      (e)    Restrictions on vehicles, packaging and other objects used in transport of commodities.

      (f)    Surveillance, visual examination, sampling and laboratory testing and where appropriate
             treatment or destruction of vehicles, packaging and other objects used in transport of
             commodities.

      (g)    Information, data recording, communication and reporting obligations.

      (h)    Registration of professional operators concerned.

                                             SECTION 2
Principles for the management of the risks of pests as referred to in Article 17(1), Article 18(3),
Article 21, Article 28(4) ►M1 ----- ◄, Article 29(1), Article 30(5) ►M1 ----- ◄, Article 31(1), Article




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                     77/95
 37►M1 (5C) ◄ and (8), ►M1 Article 40(3B), Article 41(3B), Article 49(2), Article 53(3A), Article
      54(3B)◄, Article 72(3), Article 74(3), Article 75(2), Article 79(3) and Article 80(3)

The management of the risks of ►M2 Guernsey ◄ quarantine pests, ►M1 PFA◄quarantine pests
and ►M2 Guernsey ◄ regulated non-quarantine pests shall respect the following principles:

(1)   Necessity

      Measures to manage the risk of a pest shall be applied only where such measures are
      necessary to prevent the entry, establishment and spread of that pest.

(2)   Proportionality

      Measures taken to manage the risk of a pest shall be proportionate to the risk posed by the pest
      concerned and the level of protection that is required.

(3)   Minimal impact

      Measures taken to manage the risk of a pest shall represent the least restrictive measures
      available, and result in the minimum impediment to the international movement of people,
      commodities and conveyances.

(4)   Non-discrimination

      Measures taken to manage the risk of a pest shall not be applied in such a way as to constitute
      either a means of arbitrary or unjustified discrimination or a disguised restriction, particularly on
      international trade. They shall be no more stringent for third countries than measures applied to
      that same pest if present within ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , if third countries can demonstrate that they
      have the same phytosanitary status and apply identical or equivalent phytosanitary measures.

(5)   Technical justification

      Measures taken to manage the risk of a pest shall be technically justified on the basis of
      conclusions reached by using an appropriate risk analysis or, where applicable, another
      comparable examination and evaluation of available scientific information. Those measures
      should reflect, and, where appropriate, be modified or removed to reflect, new or updated risk
      analysis or relevant scientific information.

(6)   Feasibility

      Measures taken to manage the risk of a pest should be such as to allow that the objective of
      those measures is likely achieved.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   78/95
                                       ANNEX III
      CRITERIA TO ASSESS HIGH-RISK PLANTS, PLANT PRODUCTS OR OTHER OBJECTS AS
                              REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 42

The criteria to be taken into account for the assessment referred to in Article 42 are the following:

(1)     as regards plants for planting other than seeds:

        (a)   they are introduced into the Union usually in the form of a shrub or tree or they are
              present in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ in such form or are taxonomically related to such plants;

        (b)   they are collected in the wild or grown from plants collected in the wild;

        (c)   they are grown outdoors or grown from plants grown outdoors in the third countries,
              group of third countries or specific areas of third countries concerned;

        (d)   they are known to host commonly hosted pests known to have a major impact on plant
              species which are of major economic, social or environmental importance to ►M2
              Guernsey ◄ ;

        (e)   they are known to commonly harbour pests without signs and symptoms of those pests,
              or with a latent period for the expression of those signs or symptoms, implying that the
              presence of pests is likely to be missed during inspections at introduction into ►M2
              Guernsey ◄ ;

        (f)   they are perennial plants commonly traded as old plants;

(2)     as regards other plants, plant products or other objects:

        (a)   they are known to host and provide a significant pathway for commonly hosted pests
              known to have major impact on plant species which are of a major economic, social or
              environmental importance to ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ;

        (b)   they are known to commonly harbour and provide a significant pathway for pests without
              signs and symptoms of those pests, or with a latent period for the expression of those
              signs or symptoms, implying that the presence of pests is likely to be missed during
              inspections at introduction into ►M2 Guernsey ◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 79/95
                                    ANNEX IV
  ELEMENTS TO IDENTIFY PLANTS OR PLANT PRODUCTS WHICH ARE LIKELY TO POSE
NEWLY IDENTIFIED PEST RISKS OR OTHER SUSPECTED PHYTOSANITARY RISKS FOR ►M2
                   Guernsey ◄ , AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 49

Plants or plant products from third countries shall be considered likely to pose pest risks for ►M2
Guernsey ◄ , as referred to in Article 49(1), where those plants or plant products fulfil at least three of
the following conditions, including at least one of the conditions provided in point (1)(a), (b) and (c):

(1)   Characteristics of the plants or plant products:

      (a)    they belong to, or are produced from, a plant genus or family known to commonly host
             pests regulated as quarantine pests in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or in third countries;

      (b)    they belong to, or are produced from, a plant genus or family known to host commonly
             hosted pests known to have major impact on plant species grown in ►M2 Guernsey ◄
             which have major economic, social or environmental importance to ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ;

      (c)    they belong to, or are produced from, a plant genus or family known to commonly harbour
             pests without signs and symptoms of those pests, or with a latent period for the
             expression of those signs or symptoms of at least three months, implying that the
             presence of pests on those plants or plant products is likely to be missed during official
             controls at introduction into ►M2 Guernsey ◄ , without recourse to sampling and testing
             or submission to quarantine procedures;

      (d)    they are grown outdoors or grown from plants grown outdoors in the third countries of
             origin;

      (e)    they are not shipped in closed containers or packaging, or when shipped in such a way,
             the shipments because of their size cannot be opened in closed premises for purposes of
             official controls at introduction into ►M2 Guernsey ◄

(2)   Origin of the plants or plant products:

      (a)    they originate from, or are moved from, a third country which is the source of repetitive
             notifications of interception of quarantine pests not listed ►M1 in Annex 2 to the
             Phytosanitary Conditions Regulation ◄;

      (b)    they originate from, or are moved from, a third country which is not a contracting party to
             the IPPC.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                  80/95
                                 ANNEX V
 CONTENTS OF PHYTOSANITARY CERTIFICATES FOR INTRODUCTION INTO ►M2 Guernsey
                                    ◄

                                            PART A
              Phytosanitary certificates for export as referred to in Article 76(1)




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                   81/95
Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                82/95
                                             PART B
             Phytosanitary certificates for re-export as referred to in Article 76(1)




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                     83/95
Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                84/95
                                   ANNEX VI
 CRITERIA TO IDENTIFY PLANTS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 73 WHICH DO NOT REQUIRE A
                          PHYTOSANITARY CERTIFICATE

The assessment referred to in Article 73 shall take into account the following criteria:

(1)   the plants do not host ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ or provisional ►M2 Guernsey
      quarantine pests◄ ◄ subject to measures adopted pursuant to Article 30, or commonly hosted
      pests which may impact on plant species grown in ►M2 Guernsey ◄ ;

(2)   the plants have a history of compliance with the requirements for introduction into ►M2
      Guernsey ◄ relevant to the third country or countries of origin;

(3)   no indication of outbreak(s) is linked to the introduction of the plants concerned from one or
      more third countries, and those plants have not been subject to repetitive interceptions of ►M1
      ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ or provisional ►M2 Guernsey quarantine pests◄ ◄ during
      the introduction into ►M2 Guernsey ◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                             85/95
                                           ANNEX VII
                                   ►M1 UK ◄ PLANT PASSPORTS

                                        PART A
►M1 UK ◄ plant passports ►M1 ----- ◄ as referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 83(2)

(1)    The ►M1 UK plant passport for the movement of plants, plant products and other objects within
       ►M2 Guernsey ◄, the introduction of plants, plant products and other objects into ►M2
       Guernsey ◄ from a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ or the introduction of plants, plant products
       and other objects into a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ from ►M2 Guernsey ◄◄ shall contain
       the following elements:

       (a)   ►M1 the words ‘UK Plant Passport’ in its upper right-hand corner in English ◄;

       (b)   ►M1 ----- ◄

       (c)   the letter ‘A.’, followed by the botanical name of the plant species or taxon concerned, in
             the case of plants and plant products, or, where appropriate, the name of the object
             concerned, and, optionally, the name of the variety;

       (d)   the letter ‘B.’, followed by ►M1 ----- ◄ the registration number of the professional
             operator concerned who issues the ►M4 UK ◄ plant passport or for whom the ►M4 UK
             ◄ plant passport is issued by the competent authority ►M1 or the◄ ►M2 Relevant
             British Island authority ◄;

       (e)   the letter ‘C.’, followed by the traceability code of the plant, plant product or the other
             object concerned;

       (f)   the letter ‘D.’, where applicable followed by:

             (i)    the name of the third country of origin, or

             (ii)   ►M1 if originating in or from ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or a ►M2 Relevant British Island
                    ◄, ‘GB’;◄

       ►M4 (g)      the letter ‘E.’, where applicable followed by ‘GB(NI)’. ◄

(2)    The traceability code referred to in point (1)(e) may also be supplemented by a reference to a
       unique traceability barcode, hologram, chip or other data carrier, present on the trade unit.

                                            PART B
      ►M1 UK plant passports for movement into ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄ and ►M2
           Relevant British Island pest-free areas◄ , as referred to in Article 83(4)◄

(1)    The ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport for movement into and within ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey pest-free
       areas◄ and for movement into ►M2 Relevant British Island pest-free areas◄ ◄ shall contain
       the following elements:

       (a)   ►M1 the words ‘UK Plant Passport — PFA’ in its upper right-hand corner in English;◄

       (b)   immediately underneath those words, the scientific name(s) or the code(s) of the
             respective ►M1 PFA quarantine pest(s) or ►M2 Relevant British Island quarantine pest
             ◄(s)◄;

       (c)   ►M1 ----- ◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                    86/95
      (d)   the letter ‘A.’, followed by the botanical name of the plant species or taxon concerned, in
            the case of plants and plant products, or, where appropriate, the name of the object
            concerned and, optionally, the name of the variety;

      (e)   the letter ‘B.’, followed by ►M1 ----- ◄ the registration number of the professional
            operator concerned who issues the ►M4 UK ◄ plant passport or for whom the ►M4 UK
            ◄ plant passport is issued by the competent authority ►M1 or the◄ ►M2 Relevant
            British Island authority ◄;

      (f)   the letter ‘C.’, followed by the traceability code of the plant, plant product or the other
            object concerned;

      (g)   the letter ‘D.’, where appropriate followed by:

            (i)    the name of the third country of origin, or

            (ii)   ►M1 if originating in or from ►M2 Guernsey ◄ or a ►M2 Relevant British Island
                   ◄, ‘GB’◄, in the case of replacement of ►M4 a UK ◄ plant passport, the
                   registration number of the professional operator concerned who issued the initial
                   ►M4 UK ◄ plant passport or for whom the initial ►M4 UK ◄ plant passport was
                   issued by the competent authority as referred in Article 93(1) and (2);

      ►M4 (h)      the letter ‘E.’, where applicable followed by ‘GB(NI)’.◄

(2)   The traceability code referred to in point (1)(f) may also be supplemented by a reference to a
      unique traceability barcode, hologram, chip or other data carrier, present on the trade unit.

                                        PART C
 ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports ►M1 ----- ◄, combined with a certification label, as referred to in
                       the second subparagraph of Article 83(5)

(1)   The ►M1 UK plant passport for the movement of plants, plant products and other objects within
      ►M2 Guernsey ◄, the introduction of plants, plant products and other objects into ►M2
      Guernsey ◄ from a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ or the introduction of plants, plant products
      and other objects into a ►M2 Relevant British Island ◄ from ►M2 Guernsey ◄◄, combined in
      a joint label with the official label for seeds or other propagating material referred to ►M1 in the
      relevant legislation on the marketing of seeds and other propagating material ◄, shall contain
      the following elements:

      (a)   ►M1 the words ‘UK Plant Passport’ in its upper right-hand corner in English ◄;

      (b)   ►M1 ----- ◄.

      The ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport shall be positioned in the joint label immediately above, and
      have the same width as, that official label.

(2)   Point (2) of Part A shall apply accordingly.

                                              PART D
   ►M1 UK ◄ plant passports for movement into and within ►M1 ►M2 Guernsey pest-free
  areas◄ and for movement into ►M2 Relevant British Island pest-free areas◄ ◄, combined
       with a certification label, as referred to in the third subparagraph of Article 83(5)

(1)   The ►M1 UK plant passport for movement into and within ►M2 Guernsey pest-free areas◄
      and for movement into ►M2 Relevant British Island pest-free areas◄ ◄, combined in a joint


Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                   87/95
      label with the official label for seeds or other propagating material referred to ►M2 respectively
      in, Article 10(1) of Directive 66/401/EEC, Article 10(1) of Directive 66/402/EEC, Article 10(1) of
      Directive 68/193/EEC, Article 12 of Directive 2002/54/EC, Article 28(1) of Directive 2002/56/EC,
      and Article 12(1) of Directive 2002/57/EC◄, shall contain the following elements:

      (a)   the words ‘►M1 UK ◄ plant passport— PZ’ in the upper right-hand corner of the joint
            label in one of the official languages of the Union and in English, if different, separated by
            a slash;

      (b)   immediately underneath those words, the scientific name(s) or code(s) of the ►M1 PFA
            quarantine pest(s) or ►M2 Relevant British Island quarantine pest ◄(s)◄ concerned;

      (c)   ►M1 ----- ◄.

      The ►M1 UK ◄ plant passport shall be positioned in the joint label immediately above, and
      have the same width as, that official label or, where applicable, that master certificate.

(2)   Point (2) of Part B shall apply accordingly.




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                                 88/95
                               ►M2 ANNEX VIII
   CONTENTS OF PHYTOSANITARY CERTIFICATES FOR EXPORT, RE-EXPORT AND PRE-
   EXPORT AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 100(3), ARTICLE 101(4) AND ARTICLE 102(6) ◄




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                89/95
                                       ANNEX IX
                                   CORRELATION TABLE

Council Directive 69/464/EEC                       This Regulation

Article 1                                          Article 28(1)

Article 2                                          Article 28(1)(e)

Articles 3, 4 and 5                                Article 28(1)(d)

Article 6                                          Article 28(1)(f)

Article 7                                          —

Article 8                                          Article 8

Article 9                                          Article 31(1)

Articles 10 and 11                                 Article 28(1)(d)

Articles 12 and 13                                 —



Council Directive 93/85/EEC                        This Regulation

Article 1                                          Article 28(1)

Article 2                                          Article 28(1)(g)

Article 3                                          Articles 14(1) and 15(1)

Articles 4 to 8                                    Article 28(1)(a) to (d)

Article 9                                          —

Article 10                                         Article 8

Article 11                                         Article 31

Article 12                                         Article 28(1)

Articles 13 to 15                                  —

Annexes I to V                                     Article 28(1)



Council Directive 98/57/EC                         This Regulation

Article 1                                          Article 28(1)

Article 2                                          Article 28(1)(g)

Article 3                                          Articles 14(1) and 15(1)

Article 4 to 7                                     Article 28(1)(a) to (c)

Article 8                                          —

Article 9                                          Article 8

Article 10                                         Article 31



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                90/95
Article 11                                         Article 28(1)

Articles 12 to 14                                  —

Annexes I to VII                                   Article 28(1)



Council Directive 2007/33/EC                       This Regulation

Article 1                                          Article 28(1)

Articles 2 and 3                                   Article 28(1) and (2)

Articles 4 to 8                                    Article 28(1)(g)

Articles 9 to 13                                   Article 28(1) and (2)

Article 14                                         Article 8

Article 15                                         Article 31

Article 16                                         Article 28(1)

Article 17                                         Article 107

Articles 18 to 20                                  —

Annexes I to IV                                    Article 28(1)



Council Directive 2000/29/EC                       This Regulation

Article 1(1)                                       Article 1(1) and (2)

Article 1(2)                                       —

Article 1(3)                                       Article 1(3)

Article 1(4)                                       — (*)

Article 1(5) and (6)                               —

Article 2(1)(a)                                    Article 2, point (1)

Article 2(1)(b)                                    Article 2, point (2), first subparagraph

Article 2(1)(c)                                    Article 2, point (3)

Article 2(1)(d)                                    Article 2, point (4)

Article 2(1)(e)                                    Article 1(1) and (2)

Article 2(1)(f)                                    Article 78

Article 2(1)(g)                                    — (*)

Article 2(1)(h)                                    Articles 32 to 35

Article 2(1)(i), first subparagraph                Article 76 (*)

Article 2(1)(i), second and third subparagraphs    — (*)

Article 2(1)(j) to (n)                             — (*)



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                           91/95
Article 2(1)(o)                                    Article 2, point (7)

Article 2(1)(p), (q) and (r)                       — (*)

Article 2(2)                                       Article 2, point (2), second subparagraph

Article 3(1)                                       Article 5(1)

Article 3(2) and (3)                               Articles 5(1), 37(1) and 41(1)

Article 3(4)                                       Articles 5(1) and 37(1)

Article 3(5)                                       Articles 32(2) and 54(1)

Article 3(6)                                       Articles 5(2) and 32(3)

Article 3(7)                                       Articles 5(2) and (3), 28(1) and 37(2)

Articles 3(8) and (9)                              Articles 8, 39, 48 and 58

Article 4(1)                                       Article 40(1)

Article 4(2)                                       Article 53(1)

Article 4(3)                                       —

Article 4(4)                                       —

Article 4(5)                                       Articles 8, 48 and 58

Article 4(6)                                       Article 46

Article 5(1)                                       Articles 40(1) and 41(1)

Article 5(2)                                       Article 53(1)

Article 5(3)                                       Articles 40(3) and 53(3)

Article 5(4)                                       Articles 41(1) and 75

Article 5(5)                                       Articles 8, 48 and 58

Article 5(6)                                       Article 46

Article 6(1) to (4)                                Article 87(1), (2) and (3)

Article 6(5), first and second subparagraphs       Article 87(1), (2) and (3)

Article 6(5), third subparagraph                   Articles 65 and 68

Article 6(5), fourth subparagraph                  Article 9(3)

Article 6(5), fifth subparagraph                   Article 81

Article 6(6)                                       Articles 65 and 69

Article 6(7)                                       Article 81

Article 6(8), first indent                         —

Article 6(8), second indent                        Article 57

Article 6(8), third indent                         Article 87(4)

Article 6(8), fourth indent                        Articles 66, 69 and 90



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                         92/95
Article 6(8), fifth indent                         —

Article 6(8), sixth indent                         Article 81

Article 6(9)                                       Article 66

Article 10(1)                                      Articles 78, 83(5), 85, 86 and 87

Article 10(2)                                      Articles 79, 80 and 81

Article 10(3)                                      Article 93

Article 10(4), first indent                        Article 83(7) and (8)

Article 10(4), second, third and fourth indent     —

Article 11(1)                                      Article 87(1)

Article 11(2)                                      —

Article 11(3)                                      — (*)

Article 11(4)                                      Article 92(2) and (3)

Article 11(5)                                      Article 92(2) and (3)

Article 12(1)                                      — (*)

Article 12(2)                                      Articles 69(4), 93(5) and 95(3) (*)

Article 12(3)                                      — (*)

Article 12(4)                                      Articles 41(4) and 95(5) (*)

Article 13(1) and (2)                              Article 76(5) (*)

Article 13(3) and (4)                              — (*)

Article 13a(1) and (2)                             — (*)

Article 13a(3)                                     Article 76 (*)

Article 13a(4)                                     Article 76 (*)

Article 13a(5)                                     — (*)

Article 13b                                        — (*)

Article 13c(1)(a)                                  — (*)

Article 13c(1)(b)                                  Article 65 (*)

Article 13c(1)(c)                                  — (*)

Article 13c(2) to (4)                              — (*)

Article 13c(6)                                     Article 94 (*)

Article 13c(7)                                     Article 77 (*)

Article 13c(8)                                     Articles 40(4), 41(4), 53(4), 54(4) and 103 (*)

Article 13d                                        — (*)

Article 13e                                        Articles 100 and 101



Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                          93/95
Article 14                                         Articles 5(3) and (4), 32(3), 37(2) and (3),
                                                   40(2), 41(2), 53(3), 54(3), 72(2) and (3), 74(2)
                                                   and (3), 79(2) and (3) and 80(2) and (3)

Article 15(1)                                      Article 41(3), first subparagraph

Article 15(2)                                      Article 41(3), second subparagraph

Article 15(3)                                      Article 71(3)

Article 15(4)                                      —

Article 16(1)                                      Article 9(1) and (2) and Article 17

Article 16(2), first subparagraph                  Article 29

Article 16(2), second and third subparagraph       Article 13

Article 16(2), fourth subparagraph                 —

Article 16(3)                                      Article 30

Article 16(4)                                      Articles 28(1), 30(1) and 49(1)

Article 16(5)                                      Articles 28(6), 30(7) and 49(4)

Article 18                                         Article 107

Article 20                                         —

Article 21(1) to (5)                               — (*)

Article 21(6)                                      Article 103

Article 21(7) and (8)                              —

Article 27                                         —

Article 27a                                        — (*)

Article 28 and 29                                  —

Annex I, Part A                                    Article 5(2)

Annex I, Part B                                    Article 32(3)

Annex II, Part A, Section I                        Article 5(2)

Annex II, Part A, Section II                       Article 37(2)

Annex II, Part B                                   Article 32(3)

Annex III, Part A                                  Article 40(2)

Annex III, Part B                                  Article 53(2)

Annex IV, Part A                                   Article 41(2)

Annex IV, Part B                                   Article 54(2)

Annex V, Part A, Point I                           Article 79(1)

Annex V, Part A, Point II                          Article 80(1)




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                          94/95
Annex V, Part B, Point I                           Article 72

Annex V, Part B, Point II                          Article 74

Annex VI                                           —

Annex VII                                          Annex VIII

Annex VIII                                         —

Annex VIIIa                                        — (*)

Annex IX                                           —

(*) See Article 109(1).




Institut für nationale und internationale Angelegenheiten der Pflanzengesundheit
Guernsey, Verordnung (EU) 2016/1631                                                95/95
