  1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
Subsidiary Legislation made under s.13.


                   Imported Food Regulations 1988

                                      LN.1988/020
                                                           Commencement        1.3.1988

    Amending                            Relevant current                  Commencement
    enactments                            provisions                          date

   LN. 1988/003      rr. 2(1), 5(1), 11-12                                     1.2.1988
       1988/034      rr. 2, 6(3), 10(1), 11(1), 12(3)                          1.3.1988
       2000/054      r. 18, Sch. 11.                                          27.7.2000




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                             Page 1 of 38
      1964-07                                Food and Drugs
     1988/020                        Imported Food Regulations 1988

                          ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

Regulation

                                          PART I.
                                       PRELIMINARY.

1.     Title and commencement.
2.     Interpretation.
3.     Presumption as to food commonly used for human consumption.
4.     Enforcement.

                                        PART II.
                                  ALL IMPORTED FOOD.

5.     Prohibition on importation of unfit food.
6.     Examination of imported food.
7.     Special examinations.
8.     Consent of the Customs Officer.
9.     Powers of the Customs Officer

                                     PART III.
                              MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS.

10.    Interpretation and application of Part III.
11.    Requirements as to health marks etc for imported meat.
12.    Requirements as to health certificate.
13.    Lost, damaged, or defective health marks and certificates.
14.    Disposal of meat imported contrary to the regulations.
15.    Powers of a justice of peace.
16.    Prohibition on the importation of meat required to be exported.

                                          PART IV.
                                          GENERAL.

17.    Record to be kept of food destroyed.
18.    Fees.
19.    Offences and penalties.
20.    Court may include a justice who has examined the food.
21.    Examination outside business hours.
22.    Disputes as to compensation.
23.    Protection for officers.
24.    Application of various provisions of the Act.

                  © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                         Page 2 of 38
                             Food and Drugs                                       1964-07
                     Imported Food Regulations 1988                              1988/020
25.     Revocations.

                                          SCHEDULE 1.
                         Articles of food to which Part III does not apply.

                                       SCHEDULE 2.
            Meat products which are exempt from the requirements of Regulation 12.

                                        SCHEDULE 3.
                       Requirements as to health marks for imported meat.

                                       SCHEDULE 4.
              Requirements as to wrapping, packing and transport of imported meat.

                                         SCHEDULE 5.
             Meat or poultry meat in respect of which specific recognition is required.

                                          SCHEDULE 6.
         Health certificate for fresh meat for consignment to a member state of the EEC.

                                         SCHEDULE 7.
                              Public Health certificate for fresh meat.

                                         SCHEDULE 8.
                                Health certificate for meat products.

                                       SCHEDULE 9.
 Health certificate for fresh poultry meat intended for consignment to a member state of the
                                              EEC

                                         SCHEDULE 10.
      Label to be affixed to large packages of poultry meat intended for a certain destination.

                                        SCHEDULE 11.
                                       Food inspection fees.




                    © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                     Page 3 of 38
   1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
  1988/020                           Imported Food Regulations 1988

                                          PART 1.
                                       PRELIMINARY.

Title and commencement.

1. These regulations may be cited as the Imported Food Regulations 1988 and shall come into
operation on the 1st day of March, 1988.

Interpretation.

2. In these regulations unless the context otherwise requires -

   ‘authorised officer’ means an authorised officer of the Government and for the purposes of
         these regulations has the meaning otherwise assigned to it by Section 31 of the Act
         but does not include the Chief Environmental Health Officer;

   ‘competent authority’ means an authority having power under the laws in force in any
        country to examine food and to certify as to its fitness for human consumption;

   ‘customs officer’ has the meaning assigned to it in the Imports and Exports Act 1986;

   ‘Director’ means the Chief Environmental Health Officer;

   ‘food’ includes drink, chewing gum and other products of a like nature and use, and articles
         and substances used as ingredients in the preparation of food or drink or of such
         products, but does not include -

       (a) water, live animals or birds,

       (b) articles and substances used only as drugs, or

       (c) milk, which has the meaning given to it in the Milk Regulations 198 ;

   ‘fresh meat’ means the flesh or other edible parts of a mammal or bird, which has not been
         subjected to any treatment or process other than chilling, freezing, vacuum packing
         or packing in a controlled atmosphere and includes minced chopped or mechanically
         recovered meat, and meat treated by the addition of seasonings;

   ‘the Government’ means the Government of Gibraltar;

   ‘hovercraft’ means a vehicle which is designed to be supported when in motion wholly or
        partly by air expelled from the vehicle to form a cushion of which the boundaries
        include the ground, water or the surface beneath the vehicle;

                  © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                  Page 4 of 38
                            Food and Drugs                                        1964-07
                   Imported Food Regulations 1988                                1988/020

   ‘importer’, in relation to imported food, includes any person who, whether as owner,
        consignor, consignee, agent or broker, is in possession of the food or in any way
        entitled to the custody of or control of it;

   ‘master’, in relation to a ship, aircraft or hovecraft, includes the officer or any other person
        for the time being in charge or command of the ship, aircraft or hovercraft;

   ‘the Act’ means the Food and Drugs Act.

Presumption as to food commonly used for human consumption.

3.For the purposes of these regulations, any food commonly used for human consumption
shall, if imported for sale or for use in the preparation of food for sale, be presumed, until the
contrary is proved, to have been imported for sale, or, as the case may be, for use in the
preparation of food for sale, for human consumption.

Enforcement.

4.The authority responsible for the enforcement of these regulations shall be the Government
of Gibraltar.

                                         PART II.
                                   ALL IMPORTED FOOD.

Prohibition on importation of unfit food.

5.(1) No person shall import into Gibraltar any food intended for sale for human
consumption-

       (a) which has been rendered injurious to health by means of any operation described
           in section 3(1) of the Act;

       (b) which has been examined by a competent authority and found at the time of
           examination not to be fit for human consumption;

       (c) which is otherwise unfit for human consumption or is unsound or unwholesome;
           or

       (d) in the preparation of which any such food as aforesaid has been used.

  (2) In any proceedings for an offence against paragraph (1)(c) of this regulation, it shall be
a defence for the defendant to prove that at the time when he imported the food he did not

                  © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                     Page 5 of 38
   1964-07                                      Food and Drugs
  1988/020                            Imported Food Regulations 1988

know, and could not with reasonable diligence have ascertained, that it was unfit for human
consumption or unsound or unwholesome.

Examination of imported food.

6.(1) An authorised officer may at all reasonable times examine any food intended for sale
for human consumption which is imported into Gibraltar, and where on examination it appears
to the authorised officer that any such food is being or has been imported in contravention of
regulation 5, he may by notice in writing to the importer and to any other person in possession
of the food require that, until the food has been dealt with by a justice of the peace, it shall not,
without the consent of the authorised officer, be moved from the place of examination or from
any other place specified in the notice.

  (2) If on such examination being made it appears to an authorised officer that the food is
being or has been imported in contravention of regulation 5, he may deal with it as food falling
within section 10(1) of the Act (which relates to the examination and seizure of suspected
food); and subsections (2) to (4) of that section shall apply in relation to such food and to
regulation 5 as they apply in relation to food seized under that section and to section 9 of the
Act (which relates to offences).

  (3) If the food is fresh meat, or is a meat product as defined in regulation 10(1), the
following further provisions shall apply.

       (a) Every notice served under paragraph (1) shall

             (i)    specify the grounds upon which it is based, and

            (ii)    inform the person to whom it is addressed of his right to serve a counter-
                    notice in accordance with subparagraph (d) below, if the food is subject to
                    any of the directives specified in subparagraph (b) below.

       (b) The directives referred to in subparagraph (a) are Council Directive 64/433/EEC
           on health problems affecting intra-Community trade in fresh meat; Council
           Directive 71/118/ EEC on health problems affecting trade in fresh poultrymeat;
           and Council Directive 77/99/EEC on health problems affecting intra-Community
           trade in meat products.

       (c) The authorised officer shall after service of the notice provide the Director with
           full details of the food and the reasons for its rejection or condemnation.

       (d) A person served a notice under paragraph (1) above may, within seven days of
           receipt thereof, serve a counter-notice in writing on the authorised officer, stating
           that the food is subject to one of the directives specified in subparagraph (b) above,

                   © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                       Page 6 of 38
                    Food and Drugs                                        1964-07
           Imported Food Regulations 1988                                1988/020
    and requiring him, before the food is dealt with by a justice of the peace, to obtain
    the opinion of an independent veterinary expert, to be nominated by the Director,
    as to the condition of the food and the validity of any matter specified in the notice
    as a ground on which it is based.

(e) Upon receipt of such a counter-notice the authorised officer shall inform the
    Director of its contents and request the nomination by him of an independent
    veterinary expert for the said purpose.

(f) If it appears to the Director that the food is food which is not subject to any of the
    directives specified in subparagraph (b) above, he shall so inform the person
    serving the notice under subparagraph (d), whereupon the food shall be dealt with
    by a justice of the peace.

(g) If it appears to the Director that the food is food which is subject to any of the
    directives specified in subparagraph (b) above, he shall arrange for the
    Commission of the European Economic Community to be consulted as to the
    nomination of an appropriate independent veterinary expert, who shall be a
    national of a member state of the said Community other than the exporting country,
    Gibraltar or the United Kingdom.

(h) The Director shall nominate an independent veterinary expert, acting on the advice
    of the Commission of European Economic Community, to determine–

     (i)    whether the food is being, or has been, imported in contravention of
            regulation 5, and

    (ii)    the accuracy and relevance of any matter specified under subparagraph
            (a)(i) above as a ground on which the notice served under paragraph (1)
            above was based.

(i) The independent veterinary expert so nominated shall examine the food and
    determine the matters referred to in subparagraph (h) above, and shall give his
    written opinion thereon to the authorised officer.

(j) Within seven days of receipt by him of that written opinion the authorised officer-

     (i)    shall make it available to the person who, under subparagraph (d) above,
            has required it to be obtained, and

    (ii)    may rescind the notice given by him under paragraph (1) above by serving
            written notice to that effect on that person.


           © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                            Page 7 of 38
   1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
  1988/020                           Imported Food Regulations 1988

       (k) If, within seven days after receipt by him of that written opinion the authorised
           officer has not rescinded the notice given by him under paragraph (1) above, the
           food shall be dealt with by a justice of the peace.

  (4) An authorised officer may require any person who imports any food intended for sale
for human consumption to take the food to any such place as the authorised officer may direct
for the purpose of examining the food.

Special examinations.

7.(1) Where an authorised officer is of the opinion that a special procedure is necessary for
the examination of food, or where at the request of the importer he has recourse to such special
procedure, the importer shall provide all such facilities as the authorised officer may
reasonably require for the examination of such food.

  (2) An authorised officer may by notice in writing to the importer or to any other person
in possession of the imported food prohibit or restrict the removal or delivery of the food
during any period, not exceeding six days (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and public
holiday), which may reasonably be required for the examination of the food: and the notice
shall specify the period and the procedure required for that examination.

  (3) When a notice under paragraph (2) of this regulation has been given to an importer or
to any other person in possession of the imported food he may appeal against the notice to a
magistrates court, and the court may direct that the notice be withdrawn or that such shorter
period be fixed as appears reasonable in the circumstances.

Consent of the Customs Officer.

8. Where the duties of a customs officer with regard to the examination of a cargo or
consignment comprising food have not been wholly discharged, no examination of the food
shall be made or sample procured for the purposes of these regulations without his consent;
but every customs officer shall afford such facilities as the circumstances require for such
examination of the food to be made or sample to be taken.

Power of customs officer.

9.(1) An authorised officer may request a customs officer (either orally or in writing) to
prohibit the removal of imported food which has not been cleared from customs charge until
it has been examined by an authorised officer and such a request may be made in relation to a
particular consignment of food or in relation to food of any class or description specified in
the request. A request made orally under this paragraph shall be confirmed in writing.



                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                   Page 8 of 38
                           Food and Drugs                                        1964-07
                   Imported Food Regulations 1988                               1988/020
  (2) Where a request has been made under the last preceding paragraph, the customs officer
shall by notice in writing give to the importer or master of the ship, aircraft or hovercraft in
which the food is imported require that, until the food has been examined by an authorised
officer, it shall not be removed from the place specified in the notice, and he shall at the same
time inform the enforcing authority of the effect of the notice.

  (3) An authorised officer shall, without undue delay, examine any food in respect of which
a notice has been given by a customs officer under this regulation and shall send to that officer
a copy of any notice or certificate issued by him in accordance with these regulations, or a
statement in writing of any action taken by him under any other provision of these regulations
in respect of that food.

  (4) Where a customs officer has given notice under paragraph (2) of this regulation
forbidding removal of any food, such food shall not, prior to us inspection by an authorised
officer, be removed by any person contrary to the terms of the notice except with the written
permission of either such officer.

                                      PART III.
                              MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS.

Interpretation and application of Part III.

10.(1) In this part-

   ‘bulk lard’ means lard or any other rendered mammal or poultry fat transported unpackaged
         in the tank of a ship, aircraft, hovercraft or road vehicle;

   ‘carcase’ means the whole body of a slaughtered animal or bird after bleeding, skimming
         (except pigs) or plucking, evisceration (including removal of the thick skirt and
         kidneys) and removal of the limbs at the carpus (except birds) and tarsus, the head,
         the tail (except birds) and the udder;

   ‘designated person’ means a person having power under the laws in force in a country of
         origin to examine food and to certify as to its fitness for human consumption;

   ‘health mark’ means a label, mark, seal, brand, stamp or other voucher;

   ‘meat product’ means any product prepared wholly or partly from fresh meat (which has
         undergone treatment to ensure a certain degree of preservation) but excluding fresh
         meat and those products specified in Schedule 1;

   ‘offal’ means fresh meat other than that of the carcase as defined in this paragraph, whether
         or not naturally connected to the carcase;

                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                   Page 9 of 38
   1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
  1988/020                           Imported Food Regulations 1988


  ‘package’ means an outer container of any material into which any fresh meat or meat
       product is placed, but shall not include a bulk container which may become part of a
       road vehicle or of a trailer to such a vehicle; and ‘packaging’ shall be construed
       accordingly;

  ‘pig’ includes a boar, sow and hog;

  ‘poultry’ means domestic fowls, turkeys, guinea fowls, ducks and geese;

  ‘scraps and trimmings’ means small pieces and trimmings being muscular or other tissues
        or fat weighing less than one hundred grammes, which have been removed from an
        animal during the preparation of wholesale cuts, the boning, cutting or trimming of
        fresh meat or the preparation of fresh meat for the retail trade;

  ‘transport’ means the movement or conveyance of any fresh meat or meat product from one
        place to another place;

  ‘wrapping’ means the protection of fresh meat or meat product by the use of an initial
        wrapping of any material or initial container in direct contact with fresh meat or meat
        product concerned, and also the initial wrapping material or initial container itself,
        and ‘wrapped’ shall be construed accordingly.

  (2) This Part applies to any fresh meat, or meat product, but does not apply to any article
of food specified in Schedule 1

Requirements as to health marks etc for imported meat.

11.(1) No person shall import into Gibraltar for sale for human consumption any fresh meat,
meat product or bulk lard, from any place elsewhere than the United Kingdom unless it bears
a health mark which -

       (a) shall be so placed as to be legible and clearly visible;

       (b) conforms to the requirements of Schedule 3; and

       (c) is recognised by the Chief Environmental Health Officer in accordance with
           paragraph (3) of this regulation.

  (2) No person shall import into Gibraltar for sale for human consumption any fresh meat
or meat product unless it has been wrapped and packed, and is transported, in accordance with
the requirements of Schedule 4.


                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                Page 10 of 38
                           Food and Drugs                                       1964-07
                  Imported Food Regulations 1988                               1988/020
  (3) The Chief Environmental Health Officer shall recognise a health mark which appears
to him to show-

       (a) that the fresh meat to which it relates, or the meat from which the meat product to
           which it relates was prepared, was derived from mammals or birds inspected
           before and immediately after death, or in the case of mammals or birds killed when
           wild, was derived from mammals or birds inspected immediately after death only,
           and passed in accordance with criteria satisfactory to the Chief Environmental
           Health Officer; and

       (b) that the dressing, packing and other preparation of the fresh meat or meat product
           was carried out with all necessary precautions for the prevention of danger to
           health,

   and the recognition may be made subject to conditions and any such recognition or
        condition may be varied or revoked.

  (4) In relation to any fresh meat of a description specified in Schedule 5 there shall he
included in the recognition referred to in paragraph (3) of this regulation a statement to the
effect that the said recognition extends to that description of fresh meat; and any such
recognition which does not contain a statement to that effect shall be deemed not to confer any
recognition in respect of any description of meat set out in Schedule 5.

  (5) The Chief Environmental Health Officer shall keep a record of every health mark
recognised by him and of any conditions to which such recognition is subject to, and such
record shall be available for inspection by members of the public during normal working hours.

Requirements as to health certificates.

12.(1) No person shall import into Gibraltar for sale for human consumption any fresh meat
which is derived from domestic bovine animals (including buffalo), swine, sheep, goats,
solipeds or poultry, or any meat product (other than a meat product listed in Schedule 2) in the
preparation of which any fresh meat was used, except under a permit granted by the Chief
Environmental Health Officer.

  (2) It shall be a condition of every such permit, that any fresh meat or meat product
described in paragraph (1) of this regulation is accompanied by a health certificate which is
valid in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (4) of this regulation.

  (3) Except that it shall not be a condition of any such permit for any meat product described
in paragraph (1) of this regulation which has been manufactured and packed in the United
Kingdom to be accompanied by a health certificate.


                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                 Page 11 of 38
   1964-07                                    Food and Drugs
  1988/020                            Imported Food Regulations 1988

 (4)   A health certificate is valid if-

       (a) in the case of a certificate which relates to fresh meat which is derived from
           domestic bovine animals (including buffalo), swine, sheep, goats or solipeds
           imported from the Channel Islands or from any member state of the European
           Economic Community it corresponds in form and content to the model in Schedule
           6, and it contains the information specified in that model;

       (b) in the case of a certificate which relates to fresh meat which is derived from
           domestic bovine animals (including buffalo), swine, sheep, goats or solipeds
           imported from any country not being the Channel islands or a member state of the
           European Economic Community, it corresponds in form and content to the model
           in Schedule 7, and it contains the information specified in that model;

       (c) in the case of a certificate which relates to meat products imported from any
           country, except for paragraph (3) of this regulation, it corresponds in form and
           content to the model in Schedule 8 and it contains the information specified in that
           model or equivalent information;

       (d) in the case of a certificate which relates to poultry meat, it corresponds in form and
           content to the model in Schedule 9 and contains the information specified in that
           model;

       (e) it is expressed at least in the English language; and

       (f) it is issued by a designated person.

Lost, damaged or defective health marks and certificates

13.(1) In any case where the importation into Gibraltar of any fresh meat or meat product is
not permitted by an authorised officer, having regard to the provisions of regulation 11 or 12,
he may forthwith notify the Director to that effect, and in that case shall furnish him with all
relevant information in his possession.

  (2) On receipt of such notification and information the Director shall make such enquiries
as he considers appropriate, and shall communicate the results of his enquiries to the authorised
officer.

  (3) If, after taking into consideration the results of the Director’s enquiries, and after
consultation with the Director, the authorised officer is satisfied that -




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                  Page 12 of 38
                           Food and Drugs                                        1964-07
                  Imported Food Regulations 1988                                1988/020
       (a) the fresh meat or meat product originally came from a country in respect of which
           a health mark is for the time being recognised by the Director pursuant to
           regulation 11;

       (b) the fresh meat or meat from which the meat product was prepared, was derived
           from mammals or birds, as the case may be, inspected before and immediately
           after death, or in the case of mammals or birds killed while wild, was derived from
           mammals or birds inspected immediately after death only, by a designated person
           and passed in accordance with criteria satisfactory to the Director; and

       (c) the dressing, packing and other preparation of the fresh meat or meat product were
           carried out with all necessary precautions for ‘the prevention of danger to health,

         and notifies the Director in writing to that effect, the provisions of regulations 11 and
         12 shall have effect in relation to the fresh meat or meat product as if it had been
         accompanied by a health mark or certificate or both in compliance with the relevant
         requirements of those regulations.

Disposal of meat imported contrary to the regulations.

14.(1) If upon examination of any food an authorised officer is of the opinion that it comprises
any fresh meat or meat product imported into Gibraltar in contravention of the provisions of
regulation 11 or 12 or that it comprises any fresh meat or meat product to which regulation
13(1) applies, he shall notify in writing the importer, or the master of the ship, aircraft or
hovercraft or the driver of the road vehicle in which the food is so imported that any such meat
or meat product must not be removed for any purposes other than its exportation from
Gibraltar.

  (2) Unless the authorised officer proposes to notify the Director under regulation 13(1),
any notice served under paragraph (1) shall -

       (a) specify the grounds upon which it is based;

       (b) notify the person to whom it is addressed of his right to serve a counter-notice in
           accordance with subparagraph (5)(b) below, if the food is subject to any of the
           directives specified in regulation 6(3)(b); and

       (c) notify the person to whom it is addressed that the food may be destroyed or
           disposed of, so that it cannot be used for human consumption, unless -

            (i)    within a time specified in the notice, being not less than seven days after
                   receiving the notice, the importer gives a written undertaking of the
                   authorised officer to export the food at his own expense within fourteen

                  © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                   Page 13 of 38
   1964-07                                     Food and Drugs
  1988/020                            Imported Food Regulations 1988

                    days from the date of the undertaking, or to prove in proceedings before a
                    justice of the peace, that the importation or removal of the food into
                    Gibraltar is not contrary to regulations 11 or 12;

            (ii)    within seven days after written opinion of an independent veterinary expert
                    has been made available to him under paragraph (14) below, the importer
                    gives a written undertaking to the authorised officer in the terms required
                    under subparagraph (c)(i) above; or

           (iii)     the authorised officer rescinds the notice.

  (3) In the case of food in respect of which the authorised officer proposes to notify the
Director under regulation 13(1), the notice referred to in paragraph (2) above shall be given if,
after completion of the enquiries and consultation required under regulation 13(3), the
authorised officer fails to notify the Director that he is satisfied as to the matters set out in
regulation 13(3).

  (4) The authorised officer shall, after service of a notice under paragraph (2) above,
provide the Director with full details of the food and the reasons of its rejection or
condemnation.

 (5)   A person served with a notice under paragraph (2) above, may-

       (a) within the time specified in the notice, give an undertaking in writing to the
           authorised officer

             (i)    to export the food to which the notice relates, at his own expense, within
                    fourteen days after the date of the undertaking; or

            (ii)    to prove in proceedings before a justice of the peace that the importation or
                    removal of the food into Gibraltar is not contrary to regulations 11 or 12;
                    or

       (b) within seven days after service of the notice, serve a counter-notice in writing upon
           the authorised officer, stating that the food is food which is subject to one of the
           directives specified in regulation 6(3)(b), and requiring him to obtain the opinion
           of an independent veterinary expert, to be nominated by the Director as to the
           condition of the food and the validity of any matter specified in the notice as
           ground on which it is based.

  (6) If within the time specified in any notice given under paragraph (2) above, the
authorized officer has not received either a counter-notice or such written undertaking as
described in the notice, or if within that time, the authorised officer has received an undertaking

                   © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                    Page 14 of 38
                            Food and Drugs                                         1964-07
                   Imported Food Regulations 1988                                 1988/020
that the importer will, at his own expense, export the food and the importer has failed to export
it within fourteen days after receipt of the undertaking, the authorised officer may supervise
its destruction or disposal by such means and in such manner as to prevent it from being used
for human consumption.

  (7) Where in pursuance of this regulation, the importer has given an undertaking to prove
that the importation or removal of the food into Gibraltar is not contrary to regulation 11 or
12, the authorised officer shall, within 24 hours after receipt of the undertaking, take steps to
obtain the decision of a justice of the peace with respect thereto.

  (8) If upon examination of any food in respect of which a customs officer has given a
notice under regulation 9, an authorised officer is of the opinion that its importation or removal
into Gibraltar is not contrary to regulation 11 or 12, he shall give a certificate authorising its
removal unless he takes action in respect of it under any other provision of these regulations.

  (9) Upon receipt of a counter-notice served under paragraph (5)(b) above, the authorised
officer shall inform the Director of its contents and request the nomination by him of an
independent veterinary expert for the said purpose.

  (10) If it appears to the Director that the food is food which is not subject to any of the
directives specified in regulation 6(3)(b), he shall so inform the person serving the notice under
paragraph (3)(b) above, whereupon the importer may give an undertaking in accordance with
paragraph (2)(c)(i) above, failing which the authorised officer may take appropriate action
under paragraph (6) above.

  (11) If it appears to the Director that the food is food which is subject to any of the directives
specified in regulation 6(3)(b), he shall arrange for the Commission of the European Economic
Community to be consulted as to the nomination of an appropriate independent veterinary
expert, who shall be a national of a member state of the said Community other than the
exporting country, Gibraltar or the United Kingdom.

  (12) The Director shall nominate an independent veterinary expert, acting on the advice of
the Commission of the European Economic Community to determine -

       (a) whether the food is being, or has been, imported in contravention of regulation 11
           or 12; and

       (b) the accuracy and relevance of any matter specified under paragraph (2)(b) above
           as a ground on which the notice served under paragraph (2) above was based.

  (13) The independent veterinary expert so nominated shall examine the food and determine
the matters referred to in paragraph (2)(a) above, and shall give his written opinion thereon to
the authorised officer.

                  © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                     Page 15 of 38
   1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
  1988/020                           Imported Food Regulations 1988


 (14) Within seven days of receipt by him of the written opinion, the authorised officer -

            (i)     shall make it available to the person who, under paragraph (5)(b) above,
                    has required it to be obtained, and

            (ii)    may rescind the notice given by him under paragraph (2) above by serving
                    written notice to that effect on that person.

  (15) If, within seven days after receiving the written opinion, the authorised officer has not
rescinded the notice given by him under paragraph (2) above, the importer may give to the
authorised officer a written undertaking in accordance with paragraph (2)(c)(ii) above, failing
which the authorised officer may take appropriate action under paragraph (6) above.

  (16) Where, in pursuance of paragraph (1) above, an authorised officer has given a notice
forbidding the removal of any food, it shall not be removed by any person contrary to the terms
of the notice except with the written permission of the authorised officer.

Powers of a justice of the peace.

15.(1) Where, in pursuance of regulation 14, an application is made to a justice of the peace
in respect of any fresh meat or meat product and he is satisfied that the importer has failed to
prove that the importation or removal into Gibraltar of the fresh meat or meat product was not
contrary to the provisions of regulation 11 or 12, he shall condemn the fresh meat or meat
product and order it to be destroyed or disposed of under the supervision of an authorised
officer by such means and in such manner as to prevent it from being used for human
consumption.

  (2) Where on such application the justice of the peace is satisfied that the importation or
removal into Gibraltar of the fresh meat or meat product is not contrary to the provision of
regulation 11 or 12 he shall order the rescission of the notice prohibiting its removal.

Prohibition on the importation of meat required to be exported.

16. No person shall land in Gibraltar any fresh meat or meat product in respect of which a
notice has been given in any part of the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands or the Isle of
Man under regulation 16(1) of the Imported Food Regulations 1984 (England and Wales) or
any other regulation to the like effect then in force in any part of the United Kingdom, the
Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.

                                         PART IV.
                                         GENERAL.


                   © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                 Page 16 of 38
                           Food and Drugs                                        1964-07
                  Imported Food Regulations 1988                                1988/020
Record to be kept of food destroyed.

17.Where in pursuance of these regulations any food is destroyed or otherwise disposed of
under the supervision of an authorised officer, the Governrnent, before the destruction or other
disposal of the food, shall cause a description of, and such other details as will suffice to
identify, the food to be recorded and shall keep the record in their custody for a period of not
less than 12 months from the date of destruction or other disposal of the food.

Fees.

18. There shall be paid for the inspection of food the fees set out in Schedule 11 of these
Regulations.

Offences and penalties.

19. If any person contravenes or fails to comply with any of the provisions of these regulations,
he shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable:

        (a) on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding £1,000 and

        (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
            two years or both.

Court may include a justice who has examined the food.

20. The justice of the peace before whom any food is brought under regulation 6 or 14 may,
but need not, be a member of the court before which a person is charged with an offence under
regulation 5, 11 or 12, as the case may be, in relation to the food.

Examination outside business hours.

21.(1) Where an importer specifically requests the Government, during the normal business
hours of the Government, and for sound reasons, to carry out for the purposes of these
regulations at a specified time outside business hours any examination of food intended for
sale for human consumption which is imported into Gibraltar from a Member State, the
Government shall arrange for an authorised officer to carry out such examination as he may
consider necessary at that time.

  (2) The Government may, in respect of any examination carried out in pursuance of
paragraph (1) of this regulation, make such charge (if any) as the Government considers
reasonable for that service.



                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                  Page 17 of 38
   1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
  1988/020                          Imported Food Regulations 1988

  (3) Any charge made by the Government by virtue of paragraph (2) of this regulation shall
be payable by the importer making the request.

  (4) Any charge due to the Government by virtue of this regulation may (without prejudice
to any other method of recovery) be recovered summarily as a civil debt.

Disputes as to compensation.

22. Any dispute as to compensation arising under these regulations shall be determined, and
any compensation awarded thereunder shall be recoverable, in like manner as if the dispute
had arisen or the award had been made under the Act, and section 57 of the Act (which relates
to disputed compensation) shall apply accordingly.

Protection for officer.

23. Section 61 of the Act (which relates to protection for officers acting in good faith) shall
have effect for the purposes of these regulations as if references therein to that Act were
references to these regulations.

Application of various provisions of the Act.

24.(1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this regulation, the following provisions of the Act shall
apply for the purposes of these regulations as if references therein to proceedings, or a
prosecution, under or taken or brought under the Act included references to proceedings, or a
prosecution, as the case may be, taken or brought for an offence under these regulations:-

       (a) section 46(2) and (3) (which relates to prosecutions);

       (b) section 47(1) and (2) (which relates to evidence of analysis);

       (c) section 49 (which relates to the power of a court to require analysis by the
           Government Chemist in the United Kingdom);

       (d) section 50 (which relates to a contravention due to some person other than the
           person charged);

       (e) section 51(2) (which relates to the conditions under which a warranty may be
           pleaded as a defence);

       (f) section 52 (which relates to offences in relation to warranties and certificates of
           analysis).



                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                Page 18 of 38
                           Food and Drugs                                         1964-07
                   Imported Food Regulations 1988                                1988/020
(2)    Section 49 of the Act shall apply for the purposes of these regulations as if the reference
therein to section 46(3) of the Act included a reference to that subsection as applied by
paragraph (1) of this regulation.

Revocations.

25. The Imported Food Regulations 1981 are hereby revoked.




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                   Page 19 of 38
   1964-07                                  Food and Drugs
  1988/020                         Imported Food Regulations 1988

                                      SCHEDULE 1.

            ARTICLES OF FOOD TO WHICH PART III DOES NOT APPLY.

Vitamin concentrates containing meat.
Pharmaceutical products containing meat.
Gelatine.
Rennet.
Meat products, of which meat is not a principal ingredient and which do not contain fragments
of meat.




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                               Page 20 of 38
                          Food and Drugs                                       1964-07
                  Imported Food Regulations 1988                              1988/020
                                       SCHEDULE 2.

     MEAT PRODUCTS WHICH ARE EXEMPT FROM THE REQUIREMENTS OF
                          REGULATION 12.


1.Meat extracts, meat consomme and stock, meat sauces and similar products not containing
fragments of meat.

2.Whole, broken or crushed bones, meat peptones, meat powder, pork-rind powder, blood
plasma, dried blood, dried blood plasma, cellular proteins, bone extracts and similar products.

3.Fats melted down from animal tissues.

4.Stomachs, bladders and intestines, cleaned and bleached, salted or dried.

5.Products containing fragments of meat, but which contain a quantity of meat or meat product
not exceeding ten per cent of the total weight of the final product ready for use, after
preparation in accordance with the instructions for use issued by the manufacturer.




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                Page 21 of 38
   1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
  1988/020                          Imported Food Regulations 1988

                                       SCHEDULE 3.

         REQUIREMENTS AS TO HEALTH MARKS FOR IMPORTED MEAT.

1.The meat of all solipeds, ruminating animals and swine, and venison shall bear a health mark
as specified below.

       (a) A health mark shall before importation have been applied to the meat on all
           carcases, half-carcases, quarter-carcases and halfcarcases cut into no more than
           three pieces and to livers. The health mark shall have been applied either by hot
           branding or stamping with marking ink, and shall have been applied in the
           following places:

            (i)    the external surface of the thighs, loins, back, breast and shoulder of each
                   carcase weighing more than sixty-five kilograms; and

           (ii)    the extenal surface of the thighs and on the shoulders of all other carcases.

       (b) Livers of bovine animals, swine and solipeds shall bear a health mark which has
           been applied by hot-branding.

       (c) If meat has been wrapped and packaged in accordance with Schedule 4, the
           packaging shall bear a health mark; in addition such meat may also bear a health
           mark.

       (d) Cuts of meat and offal, other than livers, which have not been wrapped or
           packaged, shall bear a health mark which has been applied by hot branding or by
           a stamping with marking ink.

       (e) Meat including pieces weighing less than 100 grammes, shall be wrapped and
           packaged and a health mark be borne on both the wrapping and packaging.

       (f) Portions of meat wrapped for direct retail sale shall bear a health mark on both the
           wrapping and packaging.

2. Poultry meat shall bear a health mark in the manner following:-

       (a) large packages containing poultry carcases which may be consigned from a poultry
           slaughterhouse to either:

            (i)    a poultry cutting plant for cutting the carcases, or,



                  © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                 Page 22 of 38
                          Food and Drugs                                        1964-07
                  Imported Food Regulations 1988                               1988/020
           (ii)    restaurants, canteens, institutions or similar outlets for direct supply to a
                   final consumer after preparation of the poultry meat by a process involving
                   the application of heat, or similar packages of poultry carcases which may
                   be consigned from a poultry cutting plant to a meat products plant for
                   treatment, shall bear a health mark and also a label in the form which is
                   described in Schedule 11;

       (b) individual carcases shall bear a health mark on the wrapping or on the carcase in
           such a manner that it is clearly visible under the wrapping, and also on any
           packaging;

       (c) large packages containing cuts of poultry meat and offal which may be consigned
           from a poultry slaughterhouse or a poultry cutting plant to a meat products
           establishment for treatment shall bear a health mark and also a label in the form
           which is described in Schedule 11;

       (d) the wrapping and packaging of individual cuts of poultry meat and offal shall bear
           a health mark.

3.Fresh meat, other than that to which paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 applies, shall bear a health
mark which shall have been applied:

       (a) either to the meat or to the wrapping thereof, and

       (b) to any packaging thereof.

4.Meat products shall bear a health mark which shall have been applied:

       (a) either to the meat product or to the wrapping thereof, and

       (b) to any packaging thereof.

5.Bulk lard shall be presumed to bear a health mark in the following circumstances:-

       (a) a health mark shall accompany any bulk lard which is transported in any ship,
           aircraft, hovercraft or road vehicle;

       (b) the health mark shall indicate the position of any tank containing lard, to which it
           may relate, in any ship, aircraft or hovercraft in which such lard is transported;

       (c) the health mark shall state the quantity of lard carried in any tank containing such
           lard; and


                  © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                 Page 23 of 38
   1964-07                                    Food and Drugs
  1988/020                           Imported Food Regulations 1988

       (d) a health mark shall contain a certificate to the effect that any tank, pipe and pump
           which may have been used for the loading of such lard into the tank had been
           inspected and found to be clean before the loading of the lard into the tank.

6.In all cases where a health mark has been applied to packaging, or is printed on packaging,
it shall have been applied or printed in such a manner so that the health mark shall be destroyed
when the package is opened, unless the packaging is not capable of being used again as
packaging.




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                  Page 24 of 38
                           Food and Drugs                                        1964-07
                  Imported Food Regulations 1988                                1988/020
                                        SCHEDULE 4.

 REQUIREMENTS AS TO WRAPPING, PACKING AND TRANSPORT OF IMPORTED
                              MEAT.


1.The wrapping of fresh meat or meat products shall comply with the following conditions:-

       (a) it shall be transparent and colourless, unless it fulfils, at the same time, the
           protective requirements of packaging;

       (b) it shall not alter the organoleptic characteristics of the meat;

       (c) it shall not be capable of transmitting to the meat any substances harmful to human
           health;

       (d) it shall not be used again for wrapping meat, but earthenware containers for meat
           products and wrappings which fulfil the protective requirements of packaging may
           be used again after cleaning and disinfection.

2.Poultry carcases, parts of poultry or poultry offal shall be suitably enclosed in wrapping.

3.The packaging of fresh meat or meat products shall comply with the following conditions:-

       (a) it shall be strong enough to ensure the effective protection of the meat during
           transportation and handling;

       (b) it shall not contain fresh meat of more than one species of animal;

       (c) it shall not be used again for a similar purpose, unless it is made of impervious and
           corrosion-resistant materials, which are easy to clean, and it has first been cleansed
           and disinfected.

4.Fresh meat and meat products shall be transported in sealed means of transport, designed
and equipped in such a manner so that the following temperatures for the meat are maintained
during the course of transport:-

          (a)   for carcases and cuts (ex-             -not higher than +7°C (chilled)
                including rabbit meat, hare meat       -not higher than-12°C (frozen)
                and poultry meat)

          (b)   for offals (excluding rabbit offals,   -not higher than +3°C
                hare offals and poultry offals)

                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                  Page 25 of 38
   1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
  1988/020                          Imported Food Regulations 1988


         (c)   for rabbit meat, hare meat, poultry    -not higher than +4°C
               meat, rabbit offals, hare offals and
               poultry offals

         (d)    for meat products                     -temperature as specified on the label
                                                      (when appropriate)

5.Fresh meat shall not be transported in a vehicle or container which is not clean or has not
been disinfected before use. Vehicles or containers used for this purpose shall not show any
evidence of having been used for the transport of live animals or birds.

6.Fresh meat and meat products shall not be transported in a vehicle or container with any
other products likely to contaminate or to affect the hygiene of the meat, unless appropriate
precautions are taken to prevent such an occurrence.




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                 Page 26 of 38
                          Food and Drugs                                       1964-07
                  Imported Food Regulations 1988                               1988/020
                                      SCHEDULE 5.

 MEAT OR POULTRY MEAT IN RESPECT OF WHICH SPECIFIC RECOGNITION IS
                           REQUIRED.

1.Fresh meat comprising, or forming part of, the head of any animal or bird.

2.Any part of a carcass which has been chopped or minced, with or without the addition of any
spices, cereal products, salt, flavouring, vegetables or other ingredient.

3.Scraps and trimmings.

4.Boneless veal appearing to an authorised officer to be from calves less than three months
old.




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                Page 27 of 38
    1964-07                                                  Food and Drugs
   1988/020                                       Imported Food Regulations 1988

                                                     SCHEDULE 6.

                                              HEALTH CERTIFICATE.

For fresh meat for consignment to a Member State (1) of the EEC

No(2)

Exporting country. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ministry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Department . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ref . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (Optional)

I. Identification of meat
Meat of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                         (Animal species)
Nature of cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nature of packaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Number of cuts or packages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Month(s) and years(s) when frozen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Net weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

II. Origin of meat
Address(es) and veterinary approval number(s) of the approved slaughterhouse(s)
................................

Address(es) and veterinary approval number(s) of the approved cutting plant(s) Address(es)
and veterinary approval number(s) of the approved store(s)
................................................

III. Destination of meat
The meat will be sent from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                          (Place of loading)

to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (Country and place of destination)

by the following means of transport (3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Name and address of consignor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


Name and address of consignee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                       © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                                Page 28 of 38
                                       Food and Drugs                                                        1964-07
                           Imported Food Regulations 1988                                                    1988/020

IV. Health attestation
‘I, the undersigned official veterinarian, certify that the meat described above was obtained
under the conditions governing production and control laid down in Directive 64/443/EEC on
health problems affecting intra-Community trade in fresh meat and that it is, therefore,
considered as such to be fit for human consumption.’

Date at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

 ........................
  (Signature of the official veterinarian)
                                    ____________________

  (1) Fresh meat: in accordance with the Directive referred to in IV of this certificate, this
means all parts fit for human consumption from domestic bovine animals, swine, sheep and
goats and solipeds which have not undergone any preserving process; however, chilled and
frozen meat shall be considered to be fresh meat.

  (2)      Optional.

  (3) In the case of rail trucks and lorries, state the registration number, in the case of aircraft
the flight number, and in the case of boats the name, and where necessary the number of the
container.




                         © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                                              Page 29 of 38
    1964-07                                                       Food and Drugs
   1988/020                                           Imported Food Regulations 1988

                                                         SCHEDULE 7.

                                           PUBLIC REALTII CERTIFICATE.


For fresh meat (1) intended for. . . . . . . . . (Name of EEC Member State)

                                                                                          No . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (2)

Exporting country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ministry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Department . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ref . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                     (Optional)

I. Identification of meat
Meat of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                         (Animal species)

Nature of cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Nature of packaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Number of cuts or packages. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Month(s) and year(s) when frozen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Net weight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

II.   Origin of meat
Address(es) and veterinary approval number(s) of the approved slaughterhouse(s)


. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Address(es) and veterinary approval number(s) of the approved cutting plant(s)



Address(es) and veterinary approval number(s) of the approved store(s)


                          © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                                            Page 30 of 38
                                      Food and Drugs                                         1964-07
                          Imported Food Regulations 1988                                     1988/020
III.  Destination of meat
The meat will be sent from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                           (Place of loading)

          to. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                     (Country and place of destination)

by the following means of transport (3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Name and address of consignor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Name and address of consignee. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IV.     Health attestation
I, the undersigned official veterinarian, certify that:

    a)      -the meat described above (4).

            -the label affixed to the packages of meat described above (4), bear(s) (4) a mark to
            the effect that the meat comes wholly from animals slaughtered in slaughterhouses
            approved for exporting to the country of destination;

    b)      the meat was obtained under the conditions governing production and control
            contained in Council Directive 72/462/EEC and that it is therefore considered as such
            to be fit for human consumption;

    c)      the meat has been cut in an approved cutting plant (4);

    d)      the meat has/has not been subject to an examination for trichinosis or, where Article
            3 of Directive 77/96/EEC applies, has undergone cold treatment;

    e)      the means of transport and the loading conditions of meat of this consignment meet
            the hygiene requirements laid down in respect of export to the country of destination.

Done at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

................................
  (Signature of the official veterinarian)
                                   ______________________

  (1) Fresh meat within the meaning of Article 2(b) of Directive
64/433/EEC.


                        © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                              Page 31 of 38
  1964-07                                  Food and Drugs
  1988/020                         Imported Food Regulations 1988

 (2)   Optional.

  (3) For railway wagons or goods vehicles the registration number should be given, for
aircraft the flight number and for ships the name.

 (4)   Delete as appropriate.




                   © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                          Page 32 of 38
                                          Food and Drugs                                                                  1964-07
                             Imported Food Regulations 1988                                                             1988/020
                                                             SCHEDULE 8.

                             HEALTH CERTIFICATE FOR MEAT PRODUCTS (I).


                                                                                          No. (2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Exporting country:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ministry: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Department concerned: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ref. (2). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I. Identification of meat products
Products manufactured with meat from: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                             (Animal species)

Nature of products (3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Nature of packaging: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Number of individual items or of packages: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Storage and transport temperature (4): . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Storage life (4): . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Net weight: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

II.   Meat products from
Address(es) and veterinary approval number(s) of the approved processing establishment(s):.
..............

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

III.  Destination of meat products
The meat products will be seen from. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                          (Place of loading)

II.    to. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . by the following means of
transport (5). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Name and address of consignor:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


                           © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                                                            Page 33 of 38
    1964-07                                              Food and Drugs
   1988/020                                       Imported Food Regulations 1988


Name and address of consignee:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IV.     Health attestation
I, the undersigned, certify that:

         (a) the meat products described above were manufactured from fresh meat or meat
             products under conditions that comply with the standards laid down in Directive
             77/99/EEC(6):

         (b) the said meat products, their wrappings or packaging, bear a mark proving that
             they have all come from approved establishments (6):

         (c) the fresh pig meat used in the manufacture of the meat products has/has not been
             (6) subjected to a trichinae detection test;

         (d) the transport vehicles and equipment and the loading conditions of this
             consignment comply with the hygiene requirements laid down in Directive
             77/99/EEC.

Done at . . . . . . . .on. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                       (Signature)
                                            Stamp                          (Name in capital letters)

            (1)     Under Article 2 of Directive 77/99/EEC.
            (2)     Optional.
            (3)     Possible indication of ionizing radiation for medical reasons.
            (4)     Where an indication is given in accordance with Article 4 of Directive
                    77/99/EEC.
            (5)     Indicate the registration number (railway, wagons and trucks), the flight number
                    (aircraft) or the name (ship).
            (6)     Delete as appropriate.




                        © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                     Page 34 of 38
                                        Food and Drugs                                                    1964-07
                           Imported Food Regulations 1988                                                1988/020
                                                          SCHEDULE 9.

                                                  HEALTH CERTIFICATE.


For fresh poultrymeat (1) intended for consignment to a Member State of the EEC

                                                                                             No. (2)   ................

Exporting country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ministry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Competent Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ref. (2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I. Identification of meat
Meat of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                              (Animal species)

Nature of cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Nature of packaging. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Number of packages. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Net weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

II.   Origin of meat
Address(es) and veterinary approval number(s) of the slaughterhouse(s) (4)

................................................

................................................

Address(es) and veterinary approval number(s) of the approved cutting premises (4)

........................................

III.  Destination of meat
The meat will be sent


                          © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                                           Page 35 of 38
    1964-07                                                   Food and Drugs
   1988/020                                            Imported Food Regulations 1988

from. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Place of loading)

to. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Country and place of destination)

by the following means of transport (3)

Name and address of consignor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Name and address of consignee. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IV.     Health attestation
I, the undersigned, official veterinarian, certify that:

          (a) -the poultry meat described (4)
            -the packaging of the meat described above (4) bears a mark proving that-the meat
            comes from animals slaughtered in approved slaughterhouses (4);
            -the meat was cut in approved cutting premises (4);

          (b) this meat has been passed as fit for human consumption following a veterinary
              inspection carried out in accordance with the Council Directive of 15 February
              1971 on health problems affecting trade in fresh poultry meat;

          (c) the transport vehicles or containers and the loading conditions of this consignment
              meet the hygiene requirements laid down in that Directive.

    Done at          on. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                                                                                (. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . )
                                                                                   (Signature of official veterinarian)

    (1)     Fresh poultry meat: fresh meat from the following species-live domestic hens,
            turkeys, guinea fowls, ducks and geese which have not been treated to ensure their
            preservation; however, poultry meat which has been chilled or frozen shall be
            considered to be fresh.

    (2)     Optional.

    (3)     For railway wagons and lorries the registration number, for aircraft the flight number
            and for ships the name should be given.

    (4)     Delete as appropriate.



                        © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                                                    Page 36 of 38
                   Food and Drugs                                 1964-07
            Imported Food Regulations 1988                        1988/020
                             SCHEDULE 10.

LABEL TO BE AFFIXED TO LARGE PACKAGES OF POULTRY MEAT INTENDED
FOR A CERTAIN DESTINATION


          INTENDED USE: CUTTING/TREATMENT (1) ADDRESS
                         OF DESTINATION:




                          (1) Delete as appropriate




           © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                   Page 37 of 38
   1964-07                                   Food and Drugs
  1988/020                          Imported Food Regulations 1988

                                      SCHEDULE 11.

                                                                                Regulation 18.

                                FOOD INSPECTION FEES

Fees for the inspection of certain foods

1. The fees set out in the second column of the table below shall be paid for the inspection of
the food products set out in the first column of the table:

              FOOD PRODUCT                   INSPECTION FEE
       Frozen meat or poultry                6 pence per 10 kilograms

       Fresh or chilled meat or poultry      6.6 pence per kilogram.




                 © Government of Gibraltar (www.gibraltarlaws.gov.gi)

                                                                                Page 38 of 38
