 Based on Articles 7 and 8 of the Law on Plant Health ("Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia" No. 29/05,
81/08, 20/09, 57/10, 17/11, 148/11, 69/13 , 43/14, 158/14, 149/15, 39/16 and 83/18), the Minister of Agriculture,
Forestry and Water Economy adopted


                                                     BOOK OF RULES ON LISTS
                             OF HARMFUL ORGANISMS, PLANTS, PLANT PRODUCTS AND
                                                  OTHER OBJECTS AND ITEMS (*)


                                                                   Article 1
This Book of Rules shall prescribe the Lists of harmful organisms, plants, plant products and other objects and
items.
                                                                  Article 2
List I part A Harmful organisms whose introduction and distibution in the Republic of North Macedonia is prohibited,
is given in Annex 1 which is an integral part of this Book of Rules.
List II part A Harmful organisms whose introduction and distribution in the Republic of North Macedonia is
prohibited if they are present on certain plants and plant products, is given in Annex 2 which is an integral part of
this Book of Rules.
List III part A Prohibition on import of plants, plant products and other objects and items in the Republic of North
Macedonia is given in Annex 3 which is an integral part of this Book of Rules.
List IV part A Special phytosanitary requirements that must be met as a condition for import or movement of plants,
plant products and other objects and items on the entire territory of the Republic of North Macedonia, is given in
Annex 4 which is an integral part of this Book of Rules.
List VPlants, plant products and other objects and items that should be subject to plant health inspection if they
are moved inside the Republic of North Macedonia or are introduced on the territory of the Republic of North
Macedonia, is given in Annex 5 which is an integral part of this Book of Rules
List VI Plants and plant products for which special arrangements may be prescribed is given in Annex 6 which is
an integral part of this Book of Rules.


                                                                   Article 3
The Lists of harmful organisms, plants, plant products and other objects and items ("Official Gazette of the Republic
of Macedonia" no. 65/10) shall cease to be valid on the day of commencement of the application of this Book of
Rules




(*) This Book of Rules shall harmonize the Commission Regulation (EU) 2019/2072 of 28 November 2019 establishing uniform conditions for the
implementation of Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council, regarding the protection measures against harmful plant
organisms and repealing Commission Regulation (EC) no. 690/2008 and amending Commission Regulation (EU) 2018/2019 (CELEX no. 32019R2072).
                                                        Article 4
This Book of Rules shall enter into force on the following day of its publication in the "Official Gazette of the Republic
of North Macedonia", and shall start to apply from 01.09.2021.




No. 103 –6/3 Minister of Agriculture,
 April 2021 forestry and water economy
Skopje Arjanit Hoxha




                                                   2
                                                                                                    Annex 1




                                                    LIST I

                                                   Part A

   HARMFUL ORGANISMS WHOSE INTRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION IN THE REPUBLIC OF NORTH
                             MACEDONIA IS PROHIBITED

                                                  Section 1

 Harmful organisms that do not occur in any part of the Republic of North Macedonia and are relevant for
                                          the whole territory

       (a) Insects, mites and nematodes at all stages of their development
  1. Acleris spp. (non - European)
1.1. Agrilus anxius Gory
1.2. Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire
1.3. Anthonomus eugenii Cano
  2. Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch)
  3. Anomala orientalis Waterhouse
  4. Anoplophora chinensis (Thomson)
4.1. Anoplophora glabripennis (Motschulsky)
4.2. Aromia bungii (Faldermann)
5. Anthonomus grandis Boheman
6. Arrhenodes minutus Drury
6.1. Bactericera cockerelli (Sulc.)
7. Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non-European populations), virus vectors (Begomovirus) such as:
       (а) Bean golden mosaic virus
       (b) Cowpea mild mottle virus
       (c) Lettuce infectious yellows virus
       (d) Pepper mild tiger virus
       (e) Squash leaf curl virus
       (f) Euphorbia mosaic virus
       (g) Florida tomato virus
7.1 Carposina sasakii Matsumara
8. Cicadellidae (non - European), known as vectors of Pierce's disease (caused by Xylella fastidiosa), such
     as:
       (a) Carneocephala fulgida Nottingham
       (b) Draeculacephala minerva Ball
       (c) Graphocephala atropunctata (Signoret)
       (d) Homalodisca vitripennis (Germar)
9. Choristoneura spp. (non - European)
10. Conotrachelus nenuphar (Herbst)
10.0. Dendrolimus sibiricus Tschetverikov
10.1. Diabrotica barberi Smith and Lawrence
10.2. Diabrotica undecimpunctata howardi Barber
10.3. Diabrotica undecimpunctata undecimpunctata Mannerheim
10.4. Diabrotica virgifera zeae Krysan & Smith
10.5. Diaphorina citri Kuway


                                              3
10.6. Grapholita packardi Zeller
11. Heliothis zea (Boddie)
11.1. Hirschmanniella spp., except Hirschmanniella gracilis (de Man) Luc and Goodey
11.2. Keiferia lycopersicella (Walsingham)
12. Liriomyza sativae Blanchard
13. Longidorus diadecturus Eveleigh and Allen
14. Monochamus spp. (non - European)
15. Myndus crudus Van Duzee
16. Nacobbus aberrans (Thorne) Thorne and Allen
16.1. Naupactus leucoloma Boheman
16.2. Neoleucinodes elegantalis (Guenée)
16.3. Oemona hirta (Fabricius)
17. Phymatotrichopsis omnivora (Duggar) Hennebert
18. Polygraphus proximus Blandford
19. Premnotrypes spp. (non-European)
20. Pseudopityophthorus minutissimus (Zimmermann)
21. Pseudopityophthorus pruinosus (Eichhoff)
21.1. Rhynchophorus palmarum (L.)
21.2. Saperda candida Fabricius
22. Scaphoideus luteolus (Van Duzee)
23. Spodoptera eridania (Cramer)
24. Spodoptera frugiperda (Smith)
25. Spodoptera litura (Fabricus)
26. Thrips palmi Karny
27. Tephritidae (non - European) such as:
       (a) Anastrepha fraterculus (Wiedemann)
       (b) Anastrepha ludens (Loew)
       (c) Anastrepha obliqua Macquart
       (d) Anastrepha suspensa (Loew)
       (e) Dacus ciliatus Loew
       (f) Dacus curcurbitae Coquillet
       (g) Dacus dorsalis Hendel
       (h) Dacus tryoni (Froggatt)
       (i) Dacus tsuneonis Miyake
       (j) Dacus zonatus Saund.
       (k) Epochra canadensis (Loew)
       (l) Pardalaspis cyanescens Bezzi
       (m) Pardalaspis quinaria Bezzi
       (n) Pterandrus rosa (Karsch)
       (o) Rhacochlaena japonica Ito
       (p) Rhagoletis cingulata (Loew)
       (q) Rhagoletis completa Cresson
       (r) Rhagoletis fausta (East-Sacken)
       (s) Rhagoletis indifferens Curran
       (t) Rhagoletis mendax Curran
       (u) Rhagoletis pomonella Walsh
       (v) Rhagoletis ribicola Doane
       (w) Rhagoletis suavis (Loew)
27.1. Thaumatotibia leucotreta (Meyrick)
28. Xiphinema americanum Cobb sensu lato (non - European populations)
29. Xiphinema bricolense Ebsary, Vrain & Graham


                                             4
30. Xiphinema californicum Lamberti and Bleve-Zacheo
31. Xiphinema inaequale Khan et Ahmad [XIPHNA]
32. Xiphinema intermedium Lamberti & Bleve-Zacheo
33. Xiphinema rivesi (non-EU populations) Dalmasso [XIPHRI]
34. Xiphinema tarjanense Lamberti & Bleve-Zacheo


* quarantine harmful organisms for the Republic of North Macedonia based on risk assessment:

1. Heterodera glycines Ichinova *
2. Spodoptera littoralis (Boisduval)*

** harmful organisms present in the EU but not present in the Republic of North Macedonia:

1. Bursaphelenchus xylophilus (Steiner and Bührer) Nickle et al.**
2. Globodera pallida (Stone) Behrens **
3. Globodera rostochiensis (Wollenweber) Behrens **
4. Meloidogyne chitwoodi Golden et al. (all populations) **
5. Meloidogyne fallax Karssen **
6. Opogona sacchari (Bojer) **
7. Pityophthorus juglandis Blackman **
8. Popillia japonica Newman **
9. Rhizoecus hibisci Kawai and Takagi**
10. Trioza erytreae Del Guercio **


       (b) Bacteria

 1. Candidatus Liberibacter spp., causative agent Huanglongbing citrus / citrus greens
 2. Xanthomonas citri pv. aurantifolii
 2.1. Xanthomonas citri pv. Citri

** harmful organisms present in the EU but not present in the Republic of North Macedonia:

 1. Clavibacter michiganensis (Smith) Davis et al. ssp. sepedonicus (Spieckermann and Kotthoff) Davis et
 al.**
 2. Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al. **
 2.1 Ralstonia pseudosolanacearum Safni et al.
 2.2 Ralstonia syzygii subsp. celebesensis Safni et al.
 2.2 Ralstonia syzygii subsp. indonesiensis Safni et al.
 3. Xylella fastidiosa (Wells et al.) **


       (c) Fungi and oomycetes
 1. Ceratocystis fagacearum (Bretz) Hunt
 2. Chrysomyxa arctostaphyli Dietel
 3. Cronartium spp. (non - European)
 3.1. Elsinoë australis Bitanc. & Jenk
 3.2. Elsinoë citricola XL Fan, RW Barreto & Crous
 3.3. Elsinoë fawcettii Bitanc. & Jenk
 4. Endocronartium spp. (non - European)
 5. Guignardia laricina (Saw.) Yamamoto and Ito
 6. Gymnosporangium spp. (non - European)
 7. Coniferiporia (Inonotus) weirii (Murril) Kotlaba and Pouzar


                                               5
 8. Coniferiporia sulphurascens (Pilát) LW Zhou & YC Dai
 9. Melampsora farlowii (Arthur) Davis
10. Mycosphaerella larici-leptolepis Ito et al.
11. Mycosphaerella populorum GE Thompson
12. Phoma andina Turkensteen
12.0. Phyllosticta citricarpa (McAlpine) Van der Aa
13. Phyllosticta solitaria Ellis & Everhart
14. Septoria lycopersici Speg. var. malagutii Ciccarone and Boerema
15. Thecaphora solani Barrus
15.0. Tilletia indica Mitra
16. Trechispora brinkmannii (Bresad.) Rogers
17. Gremmeniella abietina (Lag. Morelet)
18. Hamaspora longissima (Thum.) Korn.
19. Phytophthora kernoviae Brasieret al.
20. Phytophthora ramorum Werres, De Cock & Man in 't Veld

* quarantine harmful organisms for the Republic of North Macedonia based on risk assessment:

1. Tilletia controversa Kühn*

** harmful organisms present in the EU but not present in the Republic of North Macedonia:

1. Fusarium circinatum Nirenberg & O'Donnell**
2. Geosmithia morbida Kolarík, Freeland, Utley & Tisserat**
3. Melampsora medusae Thümen**
4. Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilbersky) Percival**

       (d) Viruses, viroids and phytoplasmas
2. Potato viruses and virus-like organisms such as:
      (a) Andean potato latent virus
      (b) Andean potato mottle virus
      (c) Arracacha virus B, oca strain
      (d) Potato black ringspot virus
      (e) Potato virus T
      (f) Non - European isolates of potato viruses A, M, S, V, X and Y (including Yo, Yn and Yc) and Potato
             leafroll virus
3. Tobacco ringspot virus
4. Tomato ringspot virus
5. Viruses and virus-like organisms of Cydonia Mill., Fragaria L., Malus Mill., Prunus L., Pyrus L., Ribes L., Rubus
   L. and Vitis L., such as:
       (a) Blueberry leaf mottle virus
       (b) Cherry rasp leaf virus (American)
       (c) Peach mosaic virus (American)
       (d) Peach phony rickettsia
       (e) Peach rosette mosaic virus
       (f) Peach rosette mycoplasm
       (g) Peach X-disease mycoplasm
       (h) Peach yellows mycoplasm
       (i) Plum line pattern virus (American)
       (j) Raspberry leaf curl virus (American)
       (k) Strawberry latent 'C' virus
       (l) Strawberry vein banding virus


                                                6
       (m) Strawberry witches' broom mycoplasm
       (n) Non-european viruses and virus-like organisms of Cydonia Mill., Fragaria L., Malus Mill., Prunus L.,
             Pyrus L., Ribes L., Rubus L. и Vitis L.
 6. Viruses transmitted by Bemisia tabaci Genn., such as:
      (a) Bean golden mosaic virus
      (b) Cowpea mild mottle virus
      (c) Lettuce infectious yellows virus
      (d) Pepper mild tiger virus
      (e) Squash leaf curl virus
       (f) Euphorbia mosaic virus
      (g) Florida tomato virus
  7. Tospoviruses:
      (a) Tomato chlorotic spot virus
      (b) Groundnut ring spot virus
      (c) Groundnut bud necrosis virus
      (d) Watermelon silver mottle virus
      (e) Melon spotted wilt virus
      (f) Iris yellow spot orthotospovirus
   8. Melon yellowing-associated virus
   9. Squash vein yellowing virus
   10. Sweet potato chlorotic stunt virus
   11. Sweet potato mild mottle virus
   12. Tomato chocolate virus
   13. Tomato marchitez virus
   14. Tomato mild mottle virus
   15. Tomato leaf curl New Delhi virus

* quarantine harmful organisms for the Republic of North Macedonia based on risk assessment:

1. Rice viruses *:
       (a) Barley yellow dwarf virus (Rice yellow dwarf virus)
       (b) Rice dwarf virus
       (c) Rice stripe virus

      (d) Rice black-streaked dwarf virus
      (e) Rice hoja blanca virus
      (f) Rice transitory yellowing virus
      (g) Rice yellow mottle virus
      (h) Rice tungro bacilliform virus
      (i) Rice tungro spherical virus

2. Zucchini yellow mosaic virus *

** harmful organisms present in the EU but not present in the Republic of North Macedonia:

1.. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma ulmi’ (Elm phloem necrosis) **


       (a) Parasitic plants
 1. Arceuthobium spp. (non - European)




                                                 7
                                                   LIST I

                                                   Part A

  HARMFUL ORGANISMS WHOSE INTRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION IN THE REPUBLIC OF NORTH
                            MACEDONIA IS PROHIBITED

                                                  Section 2

   Harmful organisms that do occur in the Republic of North Macedonia and are relevant for the whole
                                              territory


       (a) Insects, mites and nematodes at all stages of their development

* quarantine pests for the Republic of North Macedonia based on risk assessment:


    1. Ceratitis capitata (Wiedemann)*

       (c) Fungi and oomycetes

    1. Colletotrichum acutatum Simonds. *




                                              8
Annex 2

                                                    LIST II

                                                    Part A

Harmful organisms whose introduction and distribution in the Republic of North Macedonia is prohibited
                      if they are present on certain plants and plant products

                                                   Section 1

Harmful organisms that do not occur in any part of the Republic of North Macedonia and are relevant for
                                         the whole territory



      (a) Insects, mites and nematodes at all stages of their development
      Types of harmful organisms                          Plants, plant products and other objects and items
                                                          that are subject to contamination
      1.     Aculops fuchsiae Keifer                      plants of Prunus L. intended for planting, other than
                                                          seeds
      2.     Aleurocanthus spp.                           plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                          and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
      3.     Anthonomus bisignifer (Schenkling)                plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other than
                                                               seeds
      4.     Anthonomus signatus (Say)                         plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other than
                                                               seeds
      5.     Aonidiella citrina Coquillet                      plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                               and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
      6.     Aphelenchoïdes besseyi Christie                   seeds of Oryza spp.
      7.     Aschistonyx eppoi Inouye                          plants of Juniperus L., other than fruits and seeds,
                                                               originating in non-European countries
      8.     Carposina niponensis Walsingham                   plants of Cydonia Mill., Malus Mill., Prunus L. and Pyrus
                                                               L., other than seeds originating in non-European
                                                               countries
      9.     Harmony prunivora Walsh                           plants of Crataegus L., Malus Mill., Photinia Ldl.,
                                                               Prunus L. and Rosa L., intended for planting other than
                                                               seeds and fruits of Malus Mill. and Prunus L.,
                                                               originating in non-European countries
      10.    Eotetranychus lewisi McGregor                     plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                               and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
      11.    Grapholita inopinata Heinrich                     plants of Cydonia Mill., Malus Mill., Prunus L. and Pyrus
                                                               L., other than seeds originating in non-European
                                                               countries
      12.    Hishomonus phycitis                               plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                               and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
      13.    Leucaspis japonica Ckll.                          plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                               and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
      14.    Listronotus bonariensis (Kuschel)                 seeds of Cruciferae, Gramineae and Trifolium spp.,
                                                               originating in Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Chile, New
                                                               Zealand and Uruguay



                                               9
15.   Margarodes, non - European species,           plants of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds
      such as:
      (a) Margarodes vitis (Phillipi)
      (b) Margarodes vredendalensis de
      Klerk
      (c) Margarodes prieskaensis
      Jakubski


16.   Acrobasis pyrivorella Mats                    plants of Pyrus L., intended for planting, other than
      (Numonia pyrivorella (Matsumura))             seeds, originating in non-European countries
17.   Oligonychus perditus Pritchard and Baker      plants of Juniperus L., other than fruits and seeds,
                                                    originating in non-European countries
18.   Pissodes spp. (non - European)             coniferous plants (Coniferales), other than fruits and
                                                 seeds, coniferous tree (Coniferales) with bark, and
                                                 isolated coniferous bark (Coniferales), originating in
                                                 non-European countries
19.   Radopholus citrophilus Huettel Dickson and plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
      Kaplan                                     and their hybrids, except fruits and seeds and plants of
                                                 Araceae, Marantaceae, Musaceae, Persea spp.,
                                                 Strelitziaceae,rooted or attached to or associated with
                                                 a growing substrate,
20.   Scirtothrips aurantii Faure                plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                 and their hybrids, other than seeds
21.   Scirtothrips dorsalis Hood                    plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                    and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
22.   Scirtothrips citri (Moultex)                  plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                    and their hybrids, other than seeds
23.   - Scolytidae spp. (non - European)            coniferous plants (Coniferales), taller than 3m, other
                                                    than fruits and seeds, coniferous tree (Coniferales) with
                                                    bark, and isolated coniferous bark (Coniferales),
                                                    originating in non-European countries
24.1. Scrobipalpopsis solanivora Povolny            tubers of Solanum tuberosum L.
25.   Tachypterellus quadrigibbus Say               plants of Cydonia Mill., Malus Mill., Prunus L. and Pyrus
                                                    L., other than seeds originating in non-European
                                                    countries
26.   Toxoptera citricida Kirk.                     plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                    and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
27.   Unaspis citri Comstock                        plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                    and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
28.   Parabemisia myricae (Kuwana)                  plants from Citrus L., Prunus L., Diospyrus kaki


* quarantine harmful organisms for the Republic of North Macedonia based on risk assessment:

1     Scaphoideus titanus Ball*                     plants of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds

2.    Agrilus mali *                                plants of Malus Mill., intended for planting, other than
                                                    seeds, originating in non-European countries



                                       10
      3.     Bemisia tabaci Geen. (European species)*       Plants for planting and seedlings, other than seeds of:
                                                            Solanacae, Cucurbitacae, Geraniacae, Asteraca,
                                                            Brassicacae,       Malvacae,     Fabacae,      Alliacae,
                                                            Chenopodiacae.
      4.     Cacoecimorpha pronubana Hb.*                   plants for planting of Dianthus L., Dendranthema (DC)
                                                            Des Moul. (Chrysanthemum), Rosa L.
      5.     Ceroplastes spp. *                             plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.
                                                            and their hybrids and plants of Prunus L., Malus Mill.,
                                                            Cydonia Mill., intended for planting
      6.     Ditylenchus angustus Butler *                  seeds of Oryza spp.

      7.     Eotetranychus orientalis *                     plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                            and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds

      8.     Eumerus strigatus Fall. Eumerus tuberculatus bulbs of Hyacinthus L., Tulipa L., Narcissus L.,
             L. *                                         Amaryllus L., Hippeastrum Hehb., Leucojum L., Scilla
                                                          L., Vallota Salisb ex Herb., Iris L., Galtonia (Beker)
      9.     Icerya purchasi Mask. *                      plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.
                                                          and their hybrids and plants of Prunus L., Malus Mill.,
                                                          Cydonia Mill., intended for planting
      10.    Lampetia equestris Fabr. *                   bulbs of Amaryllus L., Hippeastrum Herb., Hyacinthus
                                                          L., Galtonia candicans (Baker) Decne, Iris L., Leucojum
                                                          L., Narcissus L., Tulipa L., Scilla L., Vallota Salisb ex
                                                          Herb
      11.    Pseudococcus comstocki Kuw*                  plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.
                                                          and their hybrids, Prunus L., Malus Mill., Cydonia Mill.

      ** harmful organisms present in the EU but not present in the Republic of North Macedonia:


      1      Radopholus similis**                           plants of Marantaceae, Musaceae, Araceae,
                                                            Strelitziaceae, rooted or with an attached or associated
                                                            rootstock



(b) Bacteria
       Types of harmful organisms                            Plants, plant products and other objects and items
                                                             that are subject to contamination
      1.    Acidovorax citrulli (PSDMAC)*                    plants for planting, including seeds of Citrullus lanatus,
                                                             Citrullus lanatus var. citroides, Cucumis melo, Cucumis
                                                             sativus, Cucurbita moschata, Cucurbita pepo
      2.    Citrus variegated chlorosis                      plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
                                                             and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
      3.    Erwinia (Pantoea) stewartii (Smith) Dye          seeds of Zea mays L.
      4.    Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzae (Ishiyama) seeds of Oryza spp.
            Dye and pv. oryzicola (Fang.
            et al. Dye


      * quarantine harmful organisms for the Republic of North Macedonia based on risk assessment:




                                             11
     1.      Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. insidiosus      seeds of alfalfa (Medicago sativa)
             (McCulloch) Davis et al.*


     2.      Dickeya chrysanthemi Samson, Legendre,       planting material of ornamental plants (Dianthus,
             Christen, Fischer-Le Saux, Achouak & Gardan* Chrysanthemum)

             ** Renamed from Erwinia chrysanthemi pv.
             Chrysanthemi
     3.      Curtobacterium flaccumfaciens pv.                bean and soybean seeds (Phaseolus vulgaris, Glycine
             Flaccumfaciens (Hedges) Collins & Jones*         max)



     ** harmful organisms present in the EU but not present in the Republic of North Macedonia:


     4.      Paraburkholderia caryophylli (Yabuuchi et al.)   planting material of ornamental plants (Chrysanthemum
             Sawana, Adeolu & Gupta*                          )

             ** Renamed from Burkholderia caryophylli
             (Burkholder) Yabuuchi et al.



(c) Fungi and oomycetes
      Types of harmful organisms                              Plants, plant products and other objects and items
                                                              that are subject to contamination
      1.       Alternaria alternata (Fr.) Keissler (non-      plants of Cydonia Mill, Malus Mill and Pyrus L. intended
               European pathogenic isolates)                  for planting, other than seeds, originating in non-
                                                              European countries
      1.1.     Аnisogramma anomala (Peck) E. Müller           plants of Corylus L., intended for planting, other than
                                                              seeds, originating in Canada and the United States of
                                                              America
      2.       Apiosporina morbosa (Schwein.) v. Arx          plants of Prunus L. intended for planting, other than
                                                              seeds
      3.       Atropellis spp.                                plants of Pinus L., other than fruits and seeds, isolated
                                                              bark and wood of Pinus L
      4.       Ceratocystis virescens (Davidson) Moreau       plants of Acer saccharum Marsh., other than fruits and
                                                              seeds, originating in the United States and Canada,
                                                              wood of Acer saccharum Marsh., including wood which
                                                              has not kept its natural round surface, originating in the
                                                              United States and Canada
      6.       Cercoseptoria pini-densiflorae (Hori and       plants of Pinus L., other than fruits and seeds, wood of
               Nambu) Deighton;                               Pinus L
               (sin. Davidsoniella virescens)
      7.       Cercospora angolensis Carv. and Mendes;        plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf.,
               (sin. Pseudocercospora angolensis)             and their hybrids, other than seeds
      8.       Diaporthe vaccinii Shaer                       plants of Vaccinium spp., intended for planting, other
                                                              than seeds
      9.       Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. albedinis (Kilian    plants of Phoenix spp., other than fruits and seeds
               and Maire) Gordon



                                                12
 10.     Guignardia piricola (Nosa) Yamamoto          plants of Cydonia Mill., Malus Mill., Prunus L. and Pyrus
                                                      L., other than seeds originating in non-European
                                                      countries
 11.     Puccinia pittieriana Hennings                plants of Solanaceae, other than fruits and seeds
 12.   Scirrhia acicola (Dearn.) Siggers; (sin.   plants of PinusL, other than fruits and seeds
       Lecanosticta acicola)
 12.1. Stegophora ulmea (Schweinitz: Fries) Sydow plants of Ulmus L. and Zelkova L., intended for planting,
       & Sydow                                    other than seeds
 13.     Venturia nashicola Tanaka and Yamamoto       plants of Pyrus L., intended for planting, other than
                                                      seeds, originating in non-European countries
 1.      Alternaria mali Roberts*                     plants of Malus Mill. intended for planting, other than
                                                      fruits and seeds
 2.      Stenocarpella maydis (Berk.) Sutton*         seeds of Zea mays



 * quarantine harmful organisms for the Republic of North Macedonia based on risk assessment:

 3.      Tilletia controversa KuhnI (Triticum aestivum seeds of Triticum aestivum
         (TRZAX))*

 ** harmful organisms present in the EU but not present in the Republic of North Macedonia:

 1.      Ceratocystis platani Ell. et Halsted f.sp.   planting material of Platanus L
         Walter**



(d) Viruses and virus-like organisms
  Types of harmful organisms                               Plants, plant products and other objects and
                                                           items that are subject to contamination
 01. Beet curly top virus (Hybrigeminivirus; sin. Potato   Solanaceae,       Brassicaceae,       Violaceae,
     green dwarf virus, Sugarbeet curly leaf virus, Tomato Geraniaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Caryophyllaceae,
     yellows virus: Curtovirus, family Geminiviridae)      Fabaceae, Asteraceae, Linaceae, Apiaceae.
     (vector: beet leafhopper (Circulifer tenellus)
 1. Beet curly top virus (non-European isolates)           plants of Beta vulgaris L. intended for planting,
                                                           other than seeds
 2.    Black raspberry latent virus                         plants of Rubus L. intended for planting
 3.    Cadang-Cadang viroid                                 plants of Palmae L., intended for planting, other
       (sin. Coconut cadang-cadang viroid)                  than seeds, originating in non-European countries
 4.    Cherry leafroll virus                                plants of Rubus L. intended for planting

 4.1. Chrysanthemum stem necrosis virus                     plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul. and
                                                            Solanum lycopersicum L., intended for planting,
                                                            other than seeds
 5.    Citrus mosaic virus                                  plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus
                                                            Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds

 6.    Citrus tristeza virus                                plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus
                                                            Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds


                                          13
7.   Leprosis                                         plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus
     (Citrus leprosis virus)                          Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
8.   Little cherry pathogen                           plants of Prunus cerasus L., Prunus avium L.,
                                                      Prunus incisa Thunb., Prunus sargentii Rehd.,
                                                      Prunus serrula Franch., Prunus serrulata Lindl.,
                                                      Prunus speciosa (Koidz.) Ingram, Prunus
                                                      subhirtella Miq., Prunus yedoensis Matsum., and
                                                      their hybrids and cultivars, intended for planting,
                                                      other than seeds
9.   Naturally spreading psorosis                     plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus
     (sin. Citrus psorosis ophiovirus)                Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
10. Palm lethal yellowing mycoplasm                   plants of Palmae L., intended for planting, other
                                                      than seeds, originating in non-European countries
11. Prunus necrotic ringspot virus                    plants of Prunus L., Rubus L. intended for planting
12. Satsuma dwarf virus                               plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus
                                                      Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
13. Citrus tatter leaf virus                          plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus
                                                      Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
14. Witches' broom (MLO)                              plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus
                                                      Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
15. Apple mosaic virus                                plants for plants for planting of Cydoniaoblonga
                                                      Mill., Malus Mill., Prunus avium L., Prunus
                                                      armeniaca L., Prunus cerasus L., Prunus
                                                      domestica L
16. Apple proliferation mycoplasm                     plants for planting other than seeds, of Malus Mill
    (sin. Candidatus Phytoplasma mali Seemüller &
    Schneider [PHYPMA)

17. Apricot chlorotic leafroll mycoplasm(Candidatus   Plants for planting, other than seeds, of
    Phytoplasma prunorum)                             Prunusavium        L.,     Prunusarmeniaca     L.,
                                                      Prunuscerasus L., Prunusdomestica L.,
                                                      Prunusdulcis (Mill.) DA Webb, Prunuspersica (L.)
                                                      Batsch, Prunussalicina Lindley
18. Cherry rasp leaf virus                            plants for planting of Prunusavium, Prunuspersica,
                                                      Malus Mill


19   Cherry necrotic rusty mottle disease             plants for planting of Prunus avium L., Prunus
                                                      cerasus L


20. Pear decline mycoplasm (Ca. Phytoplasma pyri)     plants for planting, other than seeds, ofPyrus L.

21. Impatiens necrotic spot virus                     plants for planting other than seeds, of Begonia x
                                                      hiemalis Fotsch, Impatiens L. New Guinea Hybrids




                                         14
                                                LIST II

                                                Part A

Harmful organisms whose introduction and distribution in the Republic of North Macedonia is prohibited
                      if they are present on certain plants and plant products

                                               Section 2


                                          15
     Harmful organisms that do occur in the Republic of North Macedonia and are relevant for the whole
                                                territory


(a) Insects, mites and nematodes at all stages of their development
 Types of harmful organisms                  Plants, plant products and other objects and items that are subject
                                             to contamination
 1. Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie          plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other than seeds

2.     Daktulosphaira vitifoliae (Fitch)          plants for planting of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds

3.     Diabrotica virgifera virgifera Le Conte*   Zea mays

4.     Ditylenchus destructor Thorne              flower bulbs and corms of Crocus L., miniature cultivars and their hybrids
                                                  of the genus Gladiolus Tourn. ex L., such as Gladiolus callianthus Marais,
                                                  Gladiolus colvillei Sweet, Gladiolus nanus hort., Gladiolus ramosus hort.,
                                                  Gladiolus tubergenii hort., Hyacinthus L., Iris L., Trigridia Juss, Tulipa L.,
                                                  intended for planting , and potato tubers (Solanum tuberosum L.),
                                                  intended for planting Trigridia Juss, Tulipa L., intended for planting and
                                                  potato tubers (Solanum tuberosum L.),intended for planting
5.     Ditylenchus dipsaci (Kühn) Filipjev        seeds and bulbs of Allium ascalonicum L., Allium cepa L. and Allium
                                                  schoenoprasum L., intended for planting and plants of Allium porrum L.,
                                                  intended for planting, bulbs and corms of Camassia Lindl., Chionodoxa
                                                  Boiss., Crocus flavus Weston 'Golden Yellow', Galanthus L., Galtonia
                                                  cancans (Baker) Decne, Hyacinthus L., Ismene Herbert, Muscari Miller,
                                                  Narcissus L., Ornithogalum L., Puschkinia Adams, Scilla L., Tulipa L.,
                                                  intended for planting, and seeds of Medicago sativa L.
6.     Circulifer haematoceps                     plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids,
                                                  other than fruits and seeds
6.2. Circulifer tenellus                          plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids,
                                                  other than fruits and seeds
6.3. Helicoverpa armigera (Hübner)                plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul, Dianthus L., Pelargonium l'Hérit.
                                                  ex Ait. and of the family Solanaceae, intended for planting, other than
                                                  seeds
7.     Frankliniella occidentalis Perg *          plants of Capsicum annum, Cucumis sativus, Prunus L., Dendranthema
                                                  x grandiflorum, Gerbera jamesonii, Medicago sativa, Rosa large-flowered
                                                  bush hybrids intended for planting, other than seeds
8.     Parasaissetia nigra (Nietner)              plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids,
                                                  other than fruits and seeds
9.     Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard)         cut flowers, leafy vegetables of Apium graveolens L. and plants of
                                                  herbaceous species, intended for planting, other than:
                                                  bulbs,
                                                  corms,
                                                  plants of the family Gramineae,
                                                  rhizomes,
                                                  seeds.
10. Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess)                  cut flowers, leafy vegetables of Apium graveolens L. and plants of
                                                  herbaceous species, intended for planting, other than:
                                                  bulbs,
                                                  corms,


                                                  16
                                               plants of the family Gramineae,
                                               rhizomes,
                                               seeds.
11. Paysandisia archon (Burmeister)            plants of Palmae, intended for planting, with a stem diameter of over 5 cm
                                               at the base and belonging to the following genera: Brahea Mart., Butia
                                               Becc., Chamaerops L., Jubaea Kunth, Livistona R. Br., Phoenix L., Sabal
                                               Adans., Syagrus Mart., Trachycarpus H. Wendl., Trithrinax Mart.,
                                               Washingtonia Raf.



(b) Bacteria
 Types of harmful organisms                     Plants, plant products and other objects and items that are subject
                                                to contamination
2.   Clavibacter michiganensis spp.             plants of Solanum lycopersicum L. intended for planting
     michiganensis (Smith) Davis et al.
3.   Erwinia amylovora (Burr.) Winsl. et al.    plants of Amelanchier Med., Chaenomeles Lindl., Cotoneaster Ehrh.,
                                                Crataegus L., Cydonia Mill., Eriobotrya Lindl., Malus Mill., Mespilus L.,
                                                Photinia davidiana (Dcne.) Cardot, Pyracantha Roem., Pyrus L. and
                                                Sorbus L., intended for planting, other than seeds

4.   Erwinia chrysanthemi pv. dianthicola       plants of Dianthus L. intended for planting, other than seeds
     (Hellmers) Dickey
5.   Pseudomonas caryophylli (Burkholder)       plants of Dianthus L. intended for planting, other than seeds
     Starr and Burkholder
6.   Pseudomonas syringae pv. persicae          plants of Prunus persica (L.) Batsch and Prunuspersica var. nectarina
     (Prunier et al.) Young et al.              (Ait.) Maxim, intended for planting, other than seeds

7.   Xanthomonas campestris pv. phaseoli        seeds of Phaseolus L
     (Smith) Dye
8.   Xanthomonas arboricola pv. pruni (Smith) plants of Prunus L. intended for planting, other than seeds
     Vauterin et al.
9.   Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria plants of Solanum lycopersicum L. and Capsicum spp., intended for
     (Doidge) Dye                           planting
10. Xanthomonas fragariae Kennedy and           plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other than seeds
    King
11. Xylophilus ampelinus (Panagopoulos)         plants of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds
    Willems et al.
12. Rhizobium vitis (Ophel & Kerr) Young,       plants for planting of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds (Agrobacterium
    Kuykendall, Martinez-Romero, Kerr &         tumefaciens biotype 3)
    Sawada
13. Agrobacterium tumefaciens (Smith &          Cydonia oblonga Mill., Juglans regia L., Malus Mill., Prunus armeniaca
    Townsend) Conn                              L., Prunus avium L., Prunus cerasus L., Prunus domestica L., Prunus
                                                dulcis (Mill.) D. A. Webb, Prunus persica (L.) Batsch, Prunus salicina
                                                Lindley, Pyrus L., Vaccinium L., Rubus L.
                                                Sin: Rhizobium radiobacter          (Beijerinck & van Delden) Young,
                                                Kuykendall, Martinez-Romero, Kerr & Sawada




                                               17
14. Xanthomonas arboricola pv. corylina     plants of Corylus avellana (CYLAV)
    Miller, Bollen, Simmons, Gross & Barss)
    Vauterin, Hoste, Kersters & Swings.
15. Xanthomonas arboricola pv. juglandi     plants of Juglans regia L.
    (Pierce) Vauterin et al. [XANTJU]



(c) Fungi and oomycetes
Species of harmful organisms                       Plants, plant products and other objects and items that are subject
                                                   to contamination
3.   Cryphonectria parasitica (Murrill) Barr       plants of Castanea Mill and Quercus L., intended for planting, other than
                                                   seeds
4.   Didymella ligulicola (Baker, Dimock and       plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul. and Solanum lycopersicum L.,
     Davis) v. Arx                                 intended for planting, other than seeds
5.   Phialophora cinerescens (Wollenweber)         plants of Dianthus L. intended for planting, other than seeds
     van Beyma
6.   Phoma tracheiphila (Petri) Kanchaveli and plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids,
     Gikashvili                                other than seeds
7.   Phytophthora fragariae Hickmann var.          plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other than seeds
     fragariae
8.   Plasmopara halstedii (Farlow) Berl. and       seeds of Helianthus annuus L
     de Toni
9.   Puccinia horiana Henn.                        plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul. and Solanum lycopersicum L.,
                                                   intended for planting, other than seeds
10. Scirrhia pini Funk and Parker                  plants of Pinus L. intended for planting, other than seeds
11. Verticillium   albo-atrum      Reinke      and plants of Humulus lupulus L., intended for planting, other than seeds
    Berthold
12. Verticillium dahliae Klebahn                   plants of Humulus lupulus L., intended for planting, other than seeds
13. Phytophthora cactorum                          seedlings of Cydonia oblonga Mill., Fragaria L., Juglans regia L., Malus
                                                   Mill., Prunus armeniaca L., Prunus avium L., Prunus cerasus L., Prunus
                                                   domestica L., Prunus dulcis (Mill.) D. A. Webb, Prunus persica (L.)
                                                   Batsch, Prunus salicina Lindley, Pyrus L.

* quarantine harmful organisms for the Republic of North Macedonia based on risk assessment:

1.   Monilinia fructicola (G.Winter) Honey*        plants for planting of Prunus L.
2.   Phytophthora cambivora (Petri) Buisman* seedlings of Castanea sativa Mill., Pistacia vera L

3.   Phytophthora cinnamomi Rands *                seedlings of Castanea sativa Mill

4.   Phytophthora fragariae C.J. Hickman*          seedlings of Fragaria L.

5.   Phytophthora rubi Man in t Veld *             seedlings of Rubus L.



      (d) Viruses and virus-like organisms



                                                 18
Species of harmful organisms                 Plants, plant products and other objects and items that are subject
                                             to contamination
1.    Arabis mosaic virus                    Plants of Fragaria L. andRubus L., intended for planting, other than
                                             seeds
2.    Beet leaf curl virus                   plants of Beta vulgaris L. intended for planting, other than seeds
3.    Chrysanthemum                          plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul. and Solanum lycopersicum
      stunt viroid                           L., intended for planting, other than seeds
6.    Grapevine flavescence dorée            plants of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds
      MLO


7.    Plum pox virus                         plants of Prunus L. intended for planting, other than seeds


7.1. Potato spindle tuber viroid PSTVd       plants for planting (including seeds) of Solanum lycopersicum L.
                                             and its hybrids, Capsicum annuum L., Capsicum frutescens L. and
                                             plants of Solanum tuberosum L.
8.    Potato stolbur mycoplasm               plants of Solanaceae L. intended for planting, other than seeds

9.    Raspberry ringspot virus               Plants of Fragaria L. andRubus L., intended for planting, other than
                                             seeds
10. Spiroplasma citri Saglio et al.          plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids,
                                             other than fruits and seeds
11. Strawberry crinkle virus                 plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other than seeds

12. Strawberry latent ringspot virus         Plants of Fragaria L. andRubus L., intended for planting, other than
                                             seeds
13. Strawberry mild yellow edge virus        plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other than seeds

14. Tomato black ring virus                  Plants of Fragaria L. andRubus L., intended for planting, other than
                                             seeds
15. Tomato spotted wilt virus                plants of Apium graveolens L., Capsicum annuum L., Cucumis melo L.,
                                             Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul., all varieties of New Guinea hybrids ,
                                             Impatiens, Lactuca sativa L., Solanum lycopersicum L., Nicotiana
                                             tabacum L., of which there shall be evidence that they are intended for
                                             sale to professional tobacco production Solanum melongena L. and
                                             Solanum tuberosum L., intended for planting, other than seeds
16.   Tomato yellow leaf curl begomovirus    plants of Solanum lycopersicum L. intended for planting, other than
                                             seeds




                                            19
                                                                                                                             Anne 3

                                                                    LIST III

                                                                    Part A

             Prohibition on introduction of plants, plant products and other objects and items in the Republic of
                                                             North Macedonia



No.       Description                       Tariff Code (ТC)           Country of origin:1
1.        Plants of Abies Mill., Cedrus ex 0602 20 20                  Third countries other than: EU Member States, as well as
          Trew,          Chamaecyparis                                 Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and
                                            ex 0602 20 80
          Spach, Juniperus L., Larix                                   Herzegovina, Canary Islands, Faroe Islands, Georgia, Iceland,
          Mill., Picea A. Dietr., Pinus L., ex 0602 90 41              Liechtenstein, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Russia
          Pseudotsuga Carr. and                                        (only the following parts: Central Federal District, Northwestern
          Tsuga Carr., other than fruits ex 0602 90 45                 Federal District, Southern Federal District, North-Caucasian
          and seeds.                        ex 0602 90 46              Federal District and Volga Federal District), San Marino, Serbia,
                                                                       Great Britain, Turkey, Switzerland and Ukraine.
                                          ex 0602 90 47
                                          ex 0602 90 50
                                          ex 0602 90 70
                                          ex 0602 90 99
                                          ex 0604 20 20
                                          ex 0604 20 40




      1
       Third countries for the Republic of North Macedonia are European countries and non-European countries. European
      countries are countries of the European Union: Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark (excluding Faroe Islands and
      Greenland), Germany (excluding Heligoland islands and Bessingen territory- Switzerland), Estonia, Ireland, Greece, Spain
      (excluding Ceuta and Melilla), France (including Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique, Réunion and Mayote, with the
      exception of the French overseas countries and territories covered by the fourth part of the TFEU: New Caledonia; Saint Pierre
      and Miquelon; Saint Barthélemy, Saint Marteen, Wallis and Futuna, French Polynesia; French Southern Territories), Croatia,
      Italy (excluding the municipalities of Livigno and Champion D'Italia and the national waters of Lake Lugano between the coast
      and the political boundary of the area between Ponte Teresa and Porto Cerezio), Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania , Luxembourg,
      Hungary, Malta, Netherlands (excluding the non-European territories), Austria, Poland, Portugal (including the Azores and
      Madeira), Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland, Sweden and Northern Ireland and other European countriesAlbania, Andorra,
      Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Great Britain, Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, Georgia, Iceland, Kosovo,
      Liechtenstein, Moldova, Monaco, Norway, Russia (European part: Central Federal District) , Southern Federal District, North
      Caucasus Federal District, Central Volga District), San Marino, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine, Montenegro, Switzerland. Non -
      European countries are all countries outside the European continent which include: countries of the American continent (North,
      Central and South America), countries of the African continent, countries of the Asian continent, countries of the Pacific, Australia
      and New Zealand.




                                                             20
2.   Plants of Castanea Mill. and ex 0602 10 90         Third countries other than: EU Member States, as well as
     Quercus L., with leaves other                      Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and
                                   ex 0602 20 20
     than fruits and seeds.                             Herzegovina, Canary Islands, Faroe Islands, Georgia, Iceland,
                                   ex 0602 20 80        Liechtenstein, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Russia
                                                        (only the following parts: Central Federal District, Northwestern
                                   ex 0602 90 41        Federal District, Southern Federal District, North-Caucasian
                                   ex 0602 90 45        Federal District and Volga Federal District), San Marino, Serbia,
                                                        Great Britain , Turkey, Switzerland and Ukraine.
                                   ex 0602 90 46
                                   ex 0602 90 48
                                   ex 0602 90 50
                                   ex 0602 90 70
                                   ex 0602 90 99
                                   ex 0604 20 90
                                   ex 1404 90 00
3.   Plants of Populus L. with ex 0602 10 90            Canada, Mexico and the United States.
     leaves, other than fruits and
                                   ex 0602 20 20
     seeds.
                                   ex 0602 20 80
                                   ex 0602 90 41
                                   ex 0602 90 45
                                   ex 0602 90 46
                                   ex 0602 90 48
                                   ex 0602 90 50
                                   ex 0602 90 70
                                   ex 0602 90 99
                                   ex 0604 20 90
                                   ex 1404 90 00

4.   Isolated bark of Castanea ex 1404 90 00            Third countries.
     Mill.
                               ex 4401 40 90

5.   Isolated bark of Quercus L., ex 1404 90 00         Canada, Mexico and the United States.
     other than Quercussuber L.
                                  ex 4401 40 90

6.   Isolated bark of        Acer ex 1404 90 00         Canada, Mexico and the United States.
     saccharum Marsh.
                                   ex 4401 40 90
7.   Isolated bark of Populus L.   ex 1404 90 00        Countries of the American continent.
                                   ex 4401 40 90



                                                   21
8.    Plants of Chaenomeles ex 0602 10 90                 third countries other than: EU Member States, as well as Albania,
      Lindl.,     Cydonia     Mill.,                      Andorra, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and
                                     ex 0602 20 20
      CrataegusL., Malus Mill.,                           Herzegovina, Canary Islands, Faroe Islands, Georgia, Iceland,
      Prunus L., Pyrus L., and ex 0602 20 80              Liechtenstein, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Russia
      Rosa L., intended for                               (only the following parts: Central Federal District, Northwestern
      planting, other than dormant ex 0602 40 00          Federal District, Southern Federal District, North-Caucasian
      plants, without leaves, ex 0602 90 41               Federal District and Volga Federal District), San Marino, Serbia,
      flowers and fruits.                                 Great Britain , Turkey, Switzerland and Ukraine.
                                     ex 0602 90 45
                                   ex 0602 90 46
                                   ex 0602 90 47
                                   ex 0602 90 48
                                   ex 0602 90 50
                                   ex 0602 90 70
                                   ex 0602 90 91
                                   ex 0602 90 99

9     Plants of Cydonia Mill., ex 0602 10 90              Third countries other than: EU member states, as well as
      Malus Mill., Prunus L. and                          Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
                                  ex 0602 20 20
      Pyrus L. and their hybrids                          Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Canary Islands,
      and Fragaria L intended for ex 0602 90 30           Egypt, Faroe Islands, Georgia, Iceland, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon
      planting, other than seeds.                         Libya, Liechtenstein, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
                                  ex 0602 90 41           New Zealand, Norway, Russia (only the following parts: Central
                                   ex 0602 90 45          Federal District, Northwestern Federal District, Southern Federal
                                                          District, North-Caucasian Federal District and Volga Federal
                                   ex 0602 90 46          District) San Marino, Serbia, Switzerland, Great Britain, Syria,
                                                          Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine and USA except Hawaii.
                                   ex 0602 90 48
                                   ex 0602 90 50
                                   ex 0602 90 70
                                   ex 0602 90 91
                                   ex 0602 90 9

10.   plants of Vitis L., other than ex 0602 10 10        Third countries, other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,
      fruits                                              Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
                                     ex 0602 20 10
                                                          Moldova, Great Britain and Switzerland.
                                   ex 0604 20 90
                                   ex 1404 90 00




                                                     22
11.   Plants of Citrus L., Fortunella ex 0602 10 90         Third countries, other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,
      Swingle, Poncirus Raf., and                           Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
                                       ex 0602 20 20
      their hybrids, other than fruits                      Moldova and Great Britain
      and seeds                        ex 0602 20 30
                                    ex 0602 20 80
                                    ex 0602 90 45
                                    ex 0602 90 46
                                    ex 0602 90 47
                                    ex 0602 90 50
                                    ex 0602 90 70
                                    ex 0602 90 91
                                    ex 0602 90 99
                                    ex 0604 20 90
                                    ex 1404 90 00

12.   Plants of Photinia Ldl., ex 0602 10 90                China, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Japan, Republic
      Intended for planting, other                          of Korea and USA.
                                   ex 0602 90 41
      than dormant plants, without
      leaves, flowers and fruits.  ex 0602 90 45
                                    ex 0602 90 46
                                    ex 0602 90 47
                                    ex 0602 90 48
                                    ex 0602 90 50
                                    ex 0602 90 70
                                    ex 0602 90 91
                                    ex 0602 90 99




                                                       23
13.   Plants of Phoenix spp., other ex 0602 20 20           Algeria, Morocco.
      than fruits and seeds
                                    ex 0602 20 80
                                     ex 0602 90 41
                                     ex 0602 90 45
                                     ex 0602 90 46
                                     ex 0602 90 47
                                     ex 0602 90 50
                                     ex 0602 90 70
                                     ex 0602 90 99
                                     ex 0604 20 90
                                     ex 1404 90 00
14.   Plants of the fam. Poaceae, ex 0602 90 50             Third countries, other than:
      other than plants of perennial
                                     ex 0602 90 91          EU member states, as well as Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
      ornamental grasses of the
                                                            Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canary
      subfamilies: Bambusoideae, ex 0602 90 99
                                                            Islands, Egypt, Faroe Islands, Georgia, Iceland, Israel, Jordan,
      Panicoideae and of the
                                                            Lebanon Libya, Liechtenstein, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
      genera Buchloe, Bouteloua
      Lag.,           Clamagrostis,                         Morocco, Norway, Russia (only the following parts: Central
                                                            Federal District, Northwestern Federal District, Southern Federal
      Cortaderia Stapf., Glyceria
      R. Br., Hakonechloa Mak. ex                           District, North-Caucasian Federal District and Volga Federal
                                                            District) San Marino, Serbia, Switzerland, Great Britain, Syria,
      Honda, Hystrix, Molinia,
      Phalaris L., Shibataea,                               Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine.
      Spartina Schreb., Stipa L.
      and Uniola L., intended for
      planting other than seeds.


15.   Tubers     of      Solanum ex 0701 10 00              Third countries, other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,
      tuberosum L., seed potatoes.                          Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
                                                            Moldova, Great Britain and Switzerland, Turkey, Egypt, Ukraine



16.   Plants of stolon- and tuber ex 0601 10 90             Third countries, other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,
      forming species of Solanum                            Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
                                       ex 0601 20 90
      L. or their hybrids, intended                         Moldova, Great Britain and Switzerland, Turkey, Egypt, Ukraine
      for planting, other than tubers ex 0602 90 50
      of Solanum tuberosum L. as
      specified under List III Part A, ex 0602 90 70
      item (15).                       ex 0602 90 91
                                     ex 0602 90 99




                                                       24
17.   Tubers of Solanum L. and ex 0601 10 90                Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to tubers listed in
      their hybrids, other than                             List IV, Part A, Section 1, third countries other than:
                                       ex 0601 20 90
      those listed in List III Part A,
                                                            (a) EU Member States, as well as Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Libya,
      points (15) and (16).            ex 0701 90 10        Morocco, Great Britain, Switzerland, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey
                                    ex 0701 90 50
                                                            or
                                    ex 0701 90 90
                                                            (b) those fulfilling the following conditions:
                                                            (i) are part of the following countries Albania, Andorra, Armenia,
                                                            Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canary Islands,
                                                            Faroe Islands, Georgia, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Moldova,
                                                            Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Russia (only the following parts:
                                                            Central Federal District, Northwestern Federal District, Southern
                                                            Federal District, North-Caucasian Federal District and Volga
                                                            Federal District), San Marino, Serbia and Ukraine.
                                                            and
                                                            (ii) found to be free from Clavibacter michiganensis ssp.
                                                            sepedonicus (Spieckermann and Kotthoff) Davis et al or
                                                            their legislation complies with the EU rules regarding the
                                                            protection againstClavibacter sepedonicus (Spieckermann and
                                                            Kottho) Nouioui et al.
18.   Plants     of   Solanaceae ex 0602 90 30              Third countries, other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,
      intended for planting, other                          Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
      than seeds and other than ex 0602 90 45               Moldova, Great Britain and Switzerland, Turkey, Egypt, Ukraine
      the items covered by List III ex 0602 90 46
      Part A, items (10), (11) or
      (12).                         ex 0602 90 48
                                    ex 0602 90 50
                                    ex 0602 90 70
                                    ex 0602 90 91
                                    ex 0602 90 99
19.   Soil that partially contains ex 2530 90 00            Third countries, other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,
      solid organic substances                              Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
                                   ex 3824 99 93
                                                            Moldova, Great Britain and Switzerland.



20.   Growing medium, other than ex 2530 10 00              Third countries, other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,
      soil, composed in whole or in                         Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
                                      ex 2530 90 00
      part of solid organic                                 Moldova, Great Britain and Switzerland.
      substances, other than that ex 2703 00 00
      composed entirely of peat or
      fiber of Cocos nucifera L., not ex 3101 00 00
      previously used for growing ex 3824 99 93




                                                       25
     of plants or for        any
     agricultural purposes




21   Citrus lemon(L.) N. Burm.f.                        Argentina
                                 ex 0805 50 10
     and Citrus sinensis(L.)
     Osbeck                      ex 0805 10 22
                                   ex 0805 10 24
                                   ex 0805 10 28
                                   ex 0805 10 80




                                                   26
                                                             Annex 4
                                                             LIST IV


                                                              Part A
    Special phytosanitary requirements that must be met as a condition for import or movement of plants,
    plant products and other objects and items on the entire territory of the Republic of North Macedonia


                                                            Section 1


               Plants, plant products and other objects and items originating in third countries2


              Plants, plant products and other objects and Special phytosanitary requirements
              items

    1. 1.     Whether or not they are listed in the TC of List V Official statement that the wood has undergone an
              Part B, wood of conifers (Coniferales), except that appropriate:
              of Thuja L. and Taxus L, other than in the form of:
                                                                     (a) heat treatment to achieve a minimum tree core
                   - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood temperature of 56 ° C for at least 30 minutes. There
                       waste or scrap obtained in whole or in part shall be evidence thereof by a mark "HT" put on the
                       from these conifers,                          wood or on the packaging in accordance with the
                   - wood packaging material, in the form of current usage and in the certificates referred to in the
                       packing cases, boxes, crates, drums, section "additional declaration",
                       barrels and similar packaging, pallets, box
                       pallets and other load boards, pallet collars or
                       used in the transport of objects of all kinds
                   - wood used to strengthen or support non- (b) fumigation with instructions approved in
                       timber loads                                  accordance with the procedure. There shall be
                   - tree of Libocedrus decurrens Torr. where evidence thereof by indicating on the certificates
                       there is evidence that the wood has been referred to in the "additional declaration" section. (ii)
                       processed or manufactured for pencils the active substance, the minimum wood temperature,
                       using heat treatment to achieve a
                       minimum temperature of 82 C0 for a period

2
 Third countries for the Republic of Nortn Macedonia are European countries and non-European countries.. European
countries are countries of the European Union: Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark (excluding Faroe Islands and
Greenland), Germany (excluding Heligoland islands and Bessingen territory- Switzerland), Estonia, Ireland, Greece, Spain
(excluding Ceuta and Melilla), France (including Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique, Réunion and Mayote, with the
exception of the French overseas countries and territories covered by the fourth part of the TFEU: New Caledonia; Saint Pierre
and Miquelon; Saint Barthélemy, Saint Marteen, Wallis and Futuna, French Polynesia; French Southern Territories), Croatia,
Italy (excluding the municipalities of Livigno and Champion D'Italia and the national waters of Lake Lugano between the coast
and the political boundary of the area between Ponte Teresa and Porto Cerezio), Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania , Luxembourg,
Hungary, Malta, Netherlands (excluding the non-European territories), Austria, Poland, Portugal (including the Azores and
Madeira), Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland, Sweden and Northern Ireland and other European countriesAlbania, Andorra,
Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Great Britain, Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, Georgia, Iceland, Kosovo,
Liechtenstein, Moldova, Monaco, Norway, Russia (European part: Central Federal District) , Southern Federal District, North
Caucasus Federal District, Central Volga District), San Marino, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine, Montenegro, Switzerland. Non -
European countries are all countries outside the European continent which include: countries of the American continent (North,
Central and South America), countries of the African continent, countries of the Asian continent, countries of the Pacific, Australia
and New Zealand.




                                                       27
               of seven to eight days, but including that       the rate (g / m3) and the exposure time expressed in
               which has not retained its natural round         hours (h);
               shape, originating in Canada, China,
               Japan , Republic of Korea, Mexico, Taiwan        or
               and USA, where Bursaphelenchus
                                                                 (c) chemical pressure impregnation with a product
               xylophilus (Steiner et Buhrer) Nickle et al.
               is known to occur.                               approved in accordance with the procedure. There
                                                                shall be evidence thereof by indicating on the
                                                                certificates referred to in the "additional declaration"
                                                                section, of the active ingredient, the pressure (psi or
                                                                kPa) and concentration (%),
                                                                and
                                                                official statement that after the treatment the wood was
                                                                transported until leaving the country. This statement is
                                                                issued outside the flight season of the vector
                                                                Monochamus, taking into account the safety margin of
                                                                four additional weeks at the beginning and end of the
                                                                expected flight season, or, except in the case of wood
                                                                free from any bark and with protective cover ensuring
                                                                that infestation with Bursaphelenchus xylophilus
                                                                (Steiner et Bührer) Nickle et al. or its vector cannot
                                                                occur .

1.2.   Whether or not listed in the TC of List V Part B, wood Official statement that the wood has undergone an
       of conifers (Coniferales), other than in the form of: appropriate:
           -   chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood        (a) heat treatment to achieve a minimum temperature
               waste or scrap obtained in whole or in part      of 56 ° C for a period of at least 30 minutes throughout
               from these conifers originating in Canada,       the wood (including the core); the latter shall be
               China, Japan, the Republic of Korea,             indicated in the certificates in the "additional
               Mexico, Taiwan and the United States,            declaration" section
               where      Bursaphelenchus          xylophilus
               (Steiner et Buhrer) Nickle et al. is known to    or
               occur
                                                                (b) fumigation with instructions approved in
                                                                accordance with the procedure. There shall be
                                                                evidence thereof by indicating on the certificates in the
                                                                "additional declaration" section. (ii) the active
                                                                ingredient, the minimum wood temperature, the rate (g
                                                                / m3) and the exposure time expressed in hours (h);
                                                                and
                                                                official statement that after the treatment the wood was
                                                                transported until leaving the country. This statement
                                                                shall be issued outside the flight season of the vector
                                                                Monochamus, taking into account the safety margin of
                                                                four additional weeks at the beginning and end of the
                                                                expected flight season, or, except in the case of wood
                                                                free from any bark and with protective cover ensuring
                                                                that        infestation      with       Bursaphelenchus




                                           28
                                                              xylophilus(Steiner et Bührer) Nickle et al. or its vector
                                                              cannot occur .

1.3.   Whether or not they are listed in the TC of List V Official statement that the wood
       Part B, wood of ThujaL, and TaxusL other than in
                                                              (a) is bark-free,
       the form of:
                                                              or
            - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood
                waste or scrap obtained in whole or in part. (b) has undergone kiln-drying to below 20% moisture
            - wood packaging material, in the form of content, expressed as a percentage of dry matter,
                packing cases, boxes, crates, drums, and achieved through an appropriate time / temperature
                similar packaging, pallets, box pallets and
                                                              schedule. There shall be evidenced thereof by a mark
                other load boards, supporting dunnage,
                used in the transport of objects of all kinds "Kiln-dried" or "KD" or another internationally
            - wood used for strengthening or support of recognized mark put on the wood or on the packaging
                non-timber load other than supporting in accordance with current usage,
                material used for support of wood
                                                              or
                consignments, made of wood of the same
                type and quality as the wood in the (c) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                consignment and which meets the same achieve a minimum tree core temperature of 56 ° C for
                phytosanitary requirements of the a duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                Republic of North Macedonia, as the wood profile oft he wood (including its core). There shall be
                in the consignment,
                                                              evidence thereof by a mark "HT" put on the wood or
                                                              on the packaging in accordance with the current usage
       but including wood that has not kept its natural and in the certificates referred to in the "additional
       round surface originating in Canada, China, Japan, declaration" section,
       the Republic of Korea, Mexico, Taiwan, and the
                                                              or
       United States, where Bursaphelenchus xylophilus
       (Steiner et Buhrer) Nickle et al. is known to occur    (d) has undergone appropriate fumigation with
                                                              instructions approved in accordance with the
                                                              procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
                                                              indicating on the certificates in the "additional
                                                              declaration" section. of the active ingredient, the
                                                              minimum wood temperature, the rate (g / m3) and the
                                                              exposure time expressed in hours (h);
                                                              or
                                                              (e) has undergone appropriate chemical pressure
                                                              impregnation with a product approved in accordance
                                                              with the procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
                                                              indicating on the certificates referred to in the
                                                              "additional declaration" section, of the active
                                                              ingredient, the pressure (psi or kPa) and concentration
                                                              (%),

1.5.   Whether or not listed in the TC of List V Part B, wood Official statement that the wood
       of conifers (Coniferales), other than in the form of:
                                                              (a) originates in areas known to be free from:
            - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood
                 waste or scrap obtained in whole or in part -Monochamus spp. (non - European)
                 from these conifers,                         -Pissodes spp. (non - European)
            - wood packing material, in the form of
                 packing cases, boxes, cases, crates,


                                          29
                barrels and similar packaging, pallets, box    - Scolytidae spp. (non - European)
                pallets and other loading packaging,
                fastening pallets used in the transport of     The area shall be mentioned on the certificate under
                objects of all types except support material   the rubric "place of origin",
                which is used for support of consignments
                                                               or
                of wood, made of wood of the same type
                and quality as the wood in the                 (b) is bark-free and free from grub holes caused by the
                consignment and which meets the same           genus Monochamus spp. (non - European) defined for
                phytosanitary requirements of the              this purpose as those are larger than 3 mm across,
                Republic of North Macedonia as the wood
                in the consignment,                            or

       but including wood that has not kept its natural (c) has undergone kiln-drying to below 20% moisture
       round shape, originating in Russia, Kazakhstan and content, expressed as a percentage of dry matter,
       Turkey.                                            achieved through an appropriate time / temperature
                                                          schedule. There shall be evidence thereof by a mark
                                                          "Kiln-dried" or "KD" or another internationally
                                                          recognized mark put on the wood or on the packaging
                                                          in accordance with the current usage,
                                                               or
                                                                (d) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                                                               achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
                                                               duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                                                               profile of he wood (including its core). There shall be
                                                               evidence thereof by a mark "HT" put on the wood or
                                                               on the packaging in accordance with the current usage
                                                               and in the certificates referred to in the "additional
                                                               declaration" section,
                                                               or
                                                               (e) has undergone appropriate fumigation with
                                                               instructions approved in accordance with the
                                                               procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
                                                               indicating on the certificates referred to in the
                                                               "additional declaration" section of the active
                                                               ingredient, the minimum wood temperature, the rate (g
                                                               / m 3 ) and the exposure time expressed in hours (h);
                                                               or
                                                               (f) has undergone appropriate chemical pressure
                                                               impregnation with a product approved in accordance
                                                               with the procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
                                                               indicating on the certificates referred to in the
                                                               "additional declaration" section, of the active
                                                               ingredient, the pressure (psi or kPa) and concentration
                                                               (%),

1.6.   Whether or not listed in the TC of List V Part B, wood Official statement that the wood
       of conifers (Coniferales), other than in the form of:




                                           30
           -  chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood        (a) is bark-free and has no grub holes caused by the
              waste or scrap obtained in whole or in part      genus Monochamus spp. (non - European) defined for
              from these conifers,                             the same purpose as wood larger than 3mm across,
           - wood packaging material, in the form of
              packing cases, boxes, crates, drums,             or
              barrels and similar packings, pallets, box
              pallets and other loading boards, pallet         (b) has undergone appropriate kiln-drying to below
              collars used in the transport of objects of      20% moisture content, expressed as a percentage of
              all types except dunnage supporting              dry matter, achieved through an appropriate time /
              consignments of wood, made of wood of            temperature schedule. There shall be evidence
              the same type and quality as the wood in         thereof by a mark "Kiln-dried" or "KD" or another
              the consignment and which meets the              internationally recognized mark put on the wood or on
              same phytosanitary requirements of the           the packaging in accordance with current usage,
              Republic of North Macedonia as the wood
              in the consignment, but including that           or
              which has not kept its natural round
                                                               (c) has undergone appropriate fumigation with
              surface, originating in third countries, other
              than:                                            instructions approved in accordance with the
          - Russia, Kazakhstan and Turkey,                     procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
          - European countries,                                indicating on the certificates referred to in the
          - Canada, China, Japan, the Republic of              "additional declaration" section of the active
             Korea, Mexico, Taiwan, and the United             ingredient, the minimum wood temperature, the rate (g
             States, where Bursaphelenchus xylophilus          / m 3 ) and the exposure time expressed in hours (h);
             (Steiner et Buhrer) Nickle et al. is known to
             occur                                             or
                                                               (d) has undergone an appropriate chemical pressure
                                                               impregnation with a product approved in accordance
                                                               with the procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
                                                               indicating on the certificates in the "additional
                                                               declaration" section, of the active ingredient, the
                                                               pressure (psi or kPa) and the concentration (%)
                                                               or
                                                               (e) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                                                               achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
                                                               duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                                                               profile of he wood (including its core). There shall be
                                                               evidence thereof by a mark "HT" put on the wood or
                                                               on the packaging in accordance with the current usage
                                                               and in the certificates referred to in the section
                                                               "additional declaration",

1.7.   Whether or not listed among the CN codes in List V Official statement that the wood
       part B, wood, in the form of chips, particles,
                                                          (a) originates in areas known to be free from:
       sawdust, shavings, wood waste or scrap obtained
       in whole or in part from these coniferous species - Monochamus spp (non - European)
       (Coniferales), originating from :
                                                          -Pissodes spp. (non - European)
              - Russia, Kazakhstan and Turkey,
              - NoNon-European countries other than - Scolytidae spp. (non - European)
                   Canada, China, Japan, the Republic of
                                                          The area shall be mentioned on the certificate under
                   Korea, Mexico, Taiwan, and the United
                   States,      where    Bursaphelenchus the rubric "place of origin",


                                           31
                  xylophilus (Steiner et Buhrer) Nickle et or
                  al. is known to occur
                                                           (b) has been produced from debarked round wood;
                                                               or
                                                               (c) has undergone kiln-drying to below 20% moisture
                                                               content, expressed as a percentage of dry matter,
                                                               achieved through an appropriate time / temperature
                                                               schedule.
                                                               or
                                                               (d) has undergone an appropriate fumigation with
                                                               instructions approved in accordance with the
                                                               procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
                                                               indicating on the certificates referred to in the
                                                               "additional declaration" section of the active
                                                               ingredient, the minimum wood temperature, the rate (g
                                                               / m 3 ) and the exposure time expressed in hours (h);
                                                               or
                                                               (e) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                                                               achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
                                                               duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                                                               profile of the wood (including the core); the latter shall
                                                               be indicated on the certificates in the "additional
                                                               declaration" section

1.8.   Whether or not they are listed in the CN codes of List Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to wood
       V Part B, wood of JuglansL, and PterocaryaKunth, referred to in List IV Part A Section 1, points (2.3), (2.4)
       other than in the form of:                             and (2.5), an official statement that the wood:
       -    chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood          (a) originates in an area free from Geosmithia morbida
            waste and scrap obtained in whole or in part       Kolarík, Freeland, Utley & Tisserat and its vector
            from these plants,
                                                               Pityophthorus thorus juglandis Blackman, established
       -    wood packaging material, in the form of
                                                               by the National Plant Protection Organization in
            packing cases, boxes, crates, drums and
                                                               accordance with relevant international standards for
            similar packaging, pallets, box pallets and
                                                               phytosanitary measures and which is mentioned on
            other load boards, pallet collars, dunnage,
                                                               the certificates in the section "additional declaration",
            whether or not actually used in the transport of
            objects of all kinds except dunnage supporting     or
            consignments of wood, which is constructed of
            wood of the same type and quality as the     (b) has undergone adequate heat treatment to achieve
            wood in the consignment and which meets the  a temperature of at least 56 ° C for at least 40
            same phytosanitary requirements of the       continuous minutes throughout the entire profile of the
            Republic of North Macedonia as the wood in   wood. There shall be evidence thereof by a mark "HT"
            the consignment,                             put on the wood or on the packaging in accordance
                                                         with the current usage and on the certificates referred
       but including that which has not kept its natural to in the section "additional declaration",
       round surface, originating in the USA.
                                                         or




                                          32
                                                             (c) has been squared to completely remove the natural
                                                             rounded surface.

1.9.   Whether or not they are listed in the CN codes of List Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to wood
       V Part B, isolated bark and wood of JuglansL, and referred to in List IV Part A Section 1, points (1.8.),
       PterocaryaKunth, other than in the form of:            (2.3), (2.4) and (2.5), an official statement that the
                - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood or the isolated bark:
                     wood waste and scrap obtained in (a) originate in an area free from Geosmithia morbida
                     whole or in part from these plants, Kolarík, Freeland, Utley & Tisserat and its vector
                     originating in USA                  Pityophthorus thorus juglandis Blackman, established
                                                         by the National Plant Protection Organization in
                                                         accordance with relevant international standards for
                                                         phytosanitary measures and which is mentioned on
                                                         the certificates in the section "additional declaration",
                                                             or
                                                             (b) have undergone an appropriate heat treatment
                                                                         to achieve a minimum temperature of 56 °
                                                             C for at least 40 minutes throughout the entire profile
                                                             of the wood. The latter shall be indicated on the
                                                             certificates.
2.     Wood packaging material, in the form of packing Wood packaging material:
       cases, boxes, cases, crates, drums and similar
       packings, pallets, box pallets and other load boards,    - is debarked, as specified in Annex I to the
                                                                     FAO International Standard for phytosanitary
       pallet collars, dunnage used in the transport of
                                                                     measures no. 15 Guidelines for the regulation
       objects of all types except raw wood of 6 mm                  of wood packaging material in international
       thickness or less, processed wood produced by                 trade,
       glue, heat and pressure, or a combination thereof,
       and dunnage supporting consignments of wood,             - is the subject of one of the approved
       which is constructed of wood of the same type and             treatments listed in Annex I to the FAO
       quality as the wood in the consignment and which              International Standard for phytosanitary
       meets the same phytosanitary requirements of                  measures no. 15 Guidelines for the regulation
       Republic of North Macedonia, as well as the wood              of wood packaging material in the international
       in the consignment coming from non-European                   trade,
       countries.
                                                                - displays a mark, as specified in Annex II to the
                                                                     FAO International Standard for phytosanitary
                                                                     measures no. 15 Guidelines for the regulation
                                                                     of wood packaging material in international
                                                                     trade, indicating that the wood packaging
                                                                     material has undergone an approved
                                                                     phytosanitary treatment in accordance with
                                                                     this standard.
2.1.   Wood of Acer saccharum Marsh., Including wood Official statement that the wood has undergone kiln-
       which has not retained its natural round surface, drying to below 20% moisture content, expressed as a
       other than in the form of:                            percentage of dry matter, achieved through an
                                                             appropriate time / temperature schedule. There shall
       - wood intended for the production of veneer
            sheets,                                          be evidence thereof by a mark "Kiln-dried" or "KD" or
                                                             another internationally recognized mark, put on the




                                          33
       -   chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood wood or on the packaging in accordance with to the
           waste and scrap,                          current usage.

       -   wood packaging material, in the form of packing
           cases, boxes, crates, drums and similar
           packaging, pallets, box pallets and other load
           boards, pallet collars, dunnage, whether or not
           actually used in the transport of objects of all
           kinds      except       dunnage     supporting
           consignments of wood, which is constructed of
           wood of the same type and quality as the wood
           in the consignment and which meets the same
           phytosanitary requirements of the Republic of
           North Macedonia as the wood in the
           consignment, originating in USA and Canada.

2.2.   Wood from Acer saccharum Mersh, intended for the Official statement that the wood originates in areas
       production of veneer boards, originating in the USA known to be free from Ceratocystis virescens
       and Canada.                                         (Davidson) Moreau and is intended for the production
                                                           of veneer boards.

2.3    Whether or not listed in the CN codes in List V part    Official statement that the wood
       B, wood from Fraxinus L., Juglans ailantifolia Carr.,
                                                         (a) originates in an area determined by the National
       Juglans mandshurica Maxim., Ulmus davidiana
                                                         Plant Protection Organization of the exporting country
       Planch., and Pterocarya rhoifolia Siebold & Zucc.,
                                                         to be free from Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire in
       except in the form of:
                                                         accordance with the procedure. The place of origin
           -   chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood shall be indicated on the certificates,
               waste, obtained in whole or in part from
               these trees,                              or
                                                               (b) the bark and at least 2.5 cm of the outer sapwood
           -   wood packaging material in the form of
                                                               have been removed in a facility authorized and
               packing cases, boxes, cases, crates, drums
                                                               supervised by the National Plant Protection
               and similar packaging, pallets, box pallets
               and other load boards, dunnage used in the      Organization;
               transport of objects of all types except        or
               dunnage supporting consignments of
               wood, which is constructed of wood of the       (c) the wood has undergone ionizing radiation to
               same type and quality as the wood in the        achieve a minimum absorbed dose of 1 kGy
               consignment and which meets the same            throughout the wood.
               phytosanitary requirements of the Republic
               of North Macedonia as the wood in the
               consignment,

       but including wood that has not kept its natural
       round surface, and furniture and other objects made
       of untreated wood, originating in Canada, China,
       the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Japan,
       Mongolia, the Republic of Korea, Russia, Taiwan,
       and the USA.

2.4.   Whether or not listed in the CN codes in List V part Official statement that the wood originates in an area
       B, wood in the form of chips, obtained in whole or in determined by the National Plant Protection



                                           34
       part from Fraxinus L., Juglans ailantifolia Carr,      Organization of the exporting country to be free from
       Juglans mandshurica Maxim. Ulmus davidiana             Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire in accordance with the
       Planch.,. and Pterocarya rhoifolia Siebold & Zucc.     procedure. The place of origin shall be indicated on the
       originating in Canada, China, Japan, Mongolia,         certificates,
       Republic of Korea, Russia, Taiwan and USA.

2.5    Whether or not listed in the CN codes in List V part   Official statement that the isolated bark originates in
       B, isolated bark from Fraxinus L., Juglans             an area determined by the National Plant Protection
       ailantifolia Carr, Juglans mandshurica Maxim.          Organization of the exporting country to be free from
       Ulmus davidiana Planch.,Jacq. and Pterocarya           Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire in accordance with the
       rhoifolia Siebold & Zucc originating in Canada,        procedure. The place of origin shall be indicated on the
       China, Japan, Mongolia, Republic of Korea, Russia,     certificates,
       Taiwan and USA.
3.     Wood of Quercus L., other than in the form of:         Official statement that the wood
          -    chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood (a) is squared in order to completely remove the round
               waste or scraps                           surface,

          -    barrels, vats, tubs and other products and     or
               parts thereof, of wood, including staves,
                                                              (b) is bark-free and the water content is less than 20%
               where there is documented evidence that
                                                              expressed as a percentage of dry matter;
               the wood has been produced or processed
               using heat treatment to reach a minimum        or
               temperature of 176 C0 for 20 minutes;
                                                             (c) is bark-free and has been disinfected by an
          -    wood packaging material, in the form of appropriate hot air or hot water treatment;
               packing cases, boxes, crates, drums and or
               similar packaging, pallets, box pallets and
               other load boards, pallet collars, dunnage, (d) if sawn, with or without residual bark attached, has
               whether or not actually used in the transport undergone kiln-drying to below 20% moisture content,
               of objects of all kinds except dunnage expressed as a percentage of dry matter, achieved
               supporting consignments of wood, which is through an appropriate time / temperature schedule.
               constructed of wood of the same type and There shall be evidence thereof by a mark "Kiln-dried"
               quality as the wood in the consignment and or "KD" or another internationally recognized mark put
               which meets the same phytosanitary on the wood or on the packaging in accordance with
               requirements of the Republic of North current usage,
               Macedonia as the wood in the
               consignment,

       but including wood that has not kept its natural
       round surface, originating in the USA

4.1.   Whether or not listed in the CN codes in List V part Official statement that:
       B, wood of Betula L, except in the form of:
                                                            (a) the bark and at least 2.5 cm of the outer sapwood
        - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood waste have been removed in a facility authorized and
          and scrap obtained in whole or in part from these supervised by the National Plant Protection
          trees,                                            Organization;
       - wood packaging material, in the form of packing or
         cases, boxes, crates, drums and similar
         packaging, pallets, box pallets and other load
         boards, pallet collars, dunnage, whether or not
         actually used in the transport of objects of all


                                          35
          kinds except dunnage supporting consignments (b) the wood has undergone ionizing radiation to
          of wood, which is constructed of wood of the achieve a minimum absorbed dose of 1 kGy
          same type and quality as the wood in the throughout the wood.
          consignment and which meets the same
          phytosanitary requirements of the Republic of
          North Macedonia as the wood in the
          consignment,
       but including wood that has not kept its natural
       round surface, furniture and other objects made
       from untreated wood, originating in Canada and the
       United States where Agrilus anxius Gory is known
       to occur.

4.2.   Whether or not listed in the CN codes in List V part Official statement that the wood originates in a country
       B, wood in the form of chips, particles, sawdust, known to be free of Agrilus anxius Gory.
       shavings, wood waste and scrap obtained in whole
       or in part from Betula L.

4.3.   Whether or not listed in CN codes in List V Part B, Official statement that the bark is free from wood.
       bark and objects made from bark of Betula L.,
       originating in Canada and the USA where Agrilus
       anxius is known to occur.

5.     Whether or not listed in the CN codes in List V part Official statement that the wood
       B, wood of Platanus L, except
                                                             a) originates in an area free from Ceratocystis platani
       - wood packaging material, in the form of packing (JM Walter) Engelbr. & TC Harr established by the
         cases, boxes, crates, drums and similar National Plant Protection Organization in the country
         packaging, pallets, box pallets and other load of origin in accordance with the relevant international
         boards, pallet collars, dunnage, whether or not standards for phytosanitary measures, as indicated on
         actually used in the transport of objects of all the certificates in the "Additional Declaration" section.
         kinds except dunnage supporting consignments
                                                            or
         of wood, which is constructed of wood of the
         same type and quality as the wood in the (b) has undergone kiln-drying to a moisture content of
         consignment and which meets the same less than 20%, expressed as the percentage of dry
         phytosanitary requirements of the Republic of matter achieved through an appropriate time /
         North Macedonia as the wood in the temperature schedule. There shall be evidence
         consignment,                                       thereof by a mark "Kiln-dried" or "KD" or another
                                                            internationally recognized mark put on the wood or on
       but including wood which has not kept its natural
                                                            the packaging in accordance with the current usage,
       round surface, and wood in the form of chips,
       particles, sawdust, shavings, wood waste and scrap
       obtained in whole or in part from Platanus L.,
       originating in Albania, Armenia , Switzerland,
       Turkey and the USA.

6.     Wood of Populus L., other than in the form of:        Official statement that the wood
       - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood waste (a) is bark-free,
         or scraps
                                                         or
       - wood packaging material, in the form of packing (b) has undergone kiln-drying to below 20% moisture
         cases, boxes, crates, drums and similar content, expressed as a percentage of dry matter,


                                          36
           packaging, pallets, box pallets and other load     achieved through an appropriate time / temperature
           boards, pallet collars, dunnage, whether or not    schedule. There shall be evidence thereof by a mark
           actually used in the transport of objects of all   "Kiln-dried" or "KD" or another internationally
           kinds except dunnage supporting consignments       recognized mark put on the wood or on the packaging
           of wood, which is constructed of wood of the       in accordance with the current usage,
           same type and quality as the wood in the
           consignment and which meets the same
           phytosanitary requirements of the Republic of
           North Macedonia as the wood in the
           consignment,
         but including wood that has not kept its natural
         round surface, originating in the countries of the
         American continent

7.1.1.   Whether or not listed among the CN codes in List V Official statement that the wood
         part B, wood, in the form of chips, particles,
                                                            (a) has been produced from debarked round wood
         sawdust, shavings, wood waste or scrap obtained
         in whole or in part from:                          or
             -   Acer saccharum Mersh, originating in the (b) has undergone kiln-drying to below 20% moisture
                 USA and Canada                           content, expressed as a percentage of dry matter,
                                                          achieved through an appropriate time / temperature
             -   Populus L., originating in the American schedule.
                 continent.
                                                          or
                                                              (c) has undergone an appropriate fumigation with
                                                              instructions approved in accordance with the
                                                              procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
                                                              indicating the active ingredient, the minimum wood
                                                              temperature, the rate (g / m 3 ) and the exposure time
                                                              expressed in hours (h), in the certificates in the
                                                              "additional declaration" section.
                                                              or
                                                              (d) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                                                              achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
                                                              duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                                                              profile of the wood (including the core); the latter shall
                                                              be indicated on the certificates in the "additional
                                                              declaration" section

7.2.     Whether or not listed in the CN codes in List V part Official statement that the wood
         B, wood in the form of chips, particles, sawdust,
                                                              (a) has undergone kiln-drying to below 20% moisture
         shavings, wood waste and scrap obtained in whole
                                                              content, expressed as a percentage of dry matter,
         or in part from Quercus L. originating in the USA
                                                              achieved through an appropriate time / temperature
                                                              schedule.
                                                              or
                                                              (b) has undergone an appropriate fumigation with
                                                              instructions approved in accordance with the


                                           37
                                                             procedure. There shall be evidence thereof by
                                                             indicating on the certificates referred to in the
                                                             "additional declaration" section of the active
                                                             ingredient, the minimum wood temperature, the rate (g
                                                             / m 3 ) and the exposure time expressed in hours (h);
                                                             or
                                                             (c) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                                                             achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
                                                             duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                                                             profile of the wood (including its core); the latter shall
                                                             be indicated on the certificates.

7.3.   Isolated bark of coniferous species (Coniferales), Official statement that the isolated bark:
       originating in non-European countries:
                                                          (a) has been subjected to an appropriate fumigation
                                                          with an approved fumigant. There shall be evidence
                                                          thereof by indicating on the certificates referred to in
                                                          the "additional declaration" section, of the active
                                                          ingredient, the minimum wood temperature, the rate (g
                                                          / m 3 ) and the exposure time expressed in hours (h);
                                                             or
                                                             (b) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                                                             achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
                                                             duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                                                             profile of the wood (including its core); the latter shall
                                                             be indicated on the certificates.
                                                             and an official statement that after the treatment the
                                                             bark has been transported until leaving the country
                                                             giving that statement outside the flight season of the
                                                             vector Monochamus, taking into account the safety
                                                             margin of four additional weeks at the beginning and
                                                             at the end of the expected flight season or with a
                                                             protective covering ensuring that infection with
                                                             Bursaphelenchus xylophilus (Steiner et Bührer) Nickle
                                                             et al. or its vector does not occur

7.4.   Whether or not listed in the TO List V part B, wood   Official statement that the wood
       of Amelanchier Medik., Aronia Medik., Cotoneaster
       Medik., Crataegus L., Cydonia Mill., Malus Mill.,(a) originates in an area free from Saperda candida
       Prunus L., Pyracantha M. Roem., Pyrus L.         Fabricius, established by the National Plant Protection
       andSorbus L., other than in the form of:         Organization in the country of origin, in accordance
                                                        with the relevant international standards for
           -   chips, particles and sawdust obtained in phytosanitary measures, as specified on the
               whole or in part from these plants,
                                                        certificates in the "additional declaration" section;
           -    wood packaging material, in the form of      or
               packing cases, boxes, crates, drums and
               similar packaging, pallets, box pallets and   (b) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
               other load boards, pallet collars, dunnage,   achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
               whether or not actually used in the           duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire



                                         38
                transport of objects of all kinds except       profile of the wood (including its core); the latter shall
                dunnage supporting consignments of             be indicated on the certificates.
                wood, which is constructed of wood of the
                                                               or
                same type and quality as the wood in the
                consignment and which meets the same           (c) has been subjected to appropriate ionizing
                phytosanitary requirements of the              radiation to achieve a minimum absorbed dose of 1
                Republic of North Macedonia as the wood        kGy throughout the wood, as indicated on the
                in the consignment,                            certicertificates. in the "additional declaration" section.
       but including that which has not kept its natural
       round surface, originating in the USA and Canada

7.5.   Whether or not listed in the TO List V part B, wood     Official statement that the wood
       in the form of chips, obtained in whole or in part of
       Amelanchier Medik., Aronia Medik., Cotoneaster          (a) originates in an area free from Saperda candida
       Medik., Crataegus L., Cydonia Mill., Malus Mill.,       Fabricius, established by the National Plant Protection
       Prunus L., Pyracantha M. Roem., Pyrus L.                Organization in the country of origin, in accordance
       andSorbus L., originally from Canada and USA.           with the relevant international standards for
                                                               phytosanitary measures, as specified on the
                                                               certificates referred to in the "additional declaration"
                                                               section;
                                                               or
                                                               (b) has been processed into pieces of not more than
                                                               2.5 cm thickness and width;
                                                               or
                                                               (c) has undergone adequate heat treatment to achieve
                                                               a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a period of at
                                                               least 30 minutes throughout the entire profile of the
                                                               chips, which is to be specified on the certificates.

7.6.   Whether or not listed in the CN codes in List V part Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to wood
       B, wood of Prunus L, except in the form of:          referred to in List IV Part A Section 1, points (7.4) and
           - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood (7.5), an official statement that the wood:
                waste and scrap obtained in whole or in (a) originates in an area free from Aromia bungii
                part from these plants,                       (Falderman), established by the National Plant
                                                              Protection Organization in the country of origin, in
           -    wood packaging material, in the form of
                                                              accordance with the relevant international standards
                packing cases, boxes, crates, drums and
                                                              for phytosanitary measures, as specified in the
                similar packaging, pallets, box pallets and
                                                              certificates in the "Additional declaration “ section,
                other load boards for loading, pallet
                collars, dunnage, whether or not used in or
                the transport of objects of all kinds, except
                dunnage supporting consignments of (b) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                wood, which is constructed of wood of the achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
                same type and quality as the wood in the duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                consignment, which meets the same profile of the woods, as specified on the certificates.
                phytosanitary requirements as the wood in or
                the consignment, but including wood
                which has not retained its natural round (c) has been subjected to appropriate ionizing
                surface, originating in China, Democratic radiation to achieve a minimum absorbed dose of 1


                                           39
                People's Republic of Korea, Mongolia, kGy throughout the wood, as indicated on the
                Japan, Republic of Korea and Vietnam. certificates.

7.7.   Whether or not listed in CN codes in List V part B,       Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
       wood in the form of chips, particles, sawdust,           wood referred to in List IV Part A Section 1, points
       shavings, wood waste and scrap obtained in whole         (7.4), (7.5) and (7.6.), an official statement that the
       or in part from Prunus L., originating in China,         wood:
       Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Mongolia,
       Japan, Republic of Korea and Vietnam.                    (a) originates in an area free from Aromia bungii
                                                                (Falderman), established by the National Plant
                                                                Protection Organization in the country of origin, in
                                                                accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                                for phytosanitary measures, as specified on the
                                                                certificates in the "Additional declaration “ section,
                                                                or
                                                                (b) has been processed into pieces of not more than
                                                                2.5 cm thickness and width;
                                                                or
                                                                (c) has undergone an appropriate heat treatment to
                                                                achieve a minimum temperature of 56 ° C for a
                                                                duration of at least 30 minutes throughout the entire
                                                                profile of the wood, as specified on the certificates.

8.1.   Plants of conifers (Coniferales), other than fruits Without prejudice to the prohibitions applicable to the
       and seeds, originating in non-European countries. plants listed in List lll part A point (1), where an official
                                                           statement is required that the plants were produced in
                                                           nurseries and that the place of production is free from
                                                           Pissodes spp. (non-European).

8.2.   Plants of conifers (Coniferales), other than fruits Without prejudice to the prohibitions applicable to the
       and seeds, over 3m in height, originating in non- plants listed in List lll part A point (1), and List IV part
       European countries.                                 A section 1 point (8.1), where appropriate, an official
                                                           statement that the plants were produced in nurseries
                                                           and that the place of production is free from Scolytidae
                                                           spp. (non-European).


9.     Plants of Pinus L., intended for plantingother than Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
       seeds.                                              listed in List lll part A point (1) and List lV part A section
                                                           1 points (8.1) and (8.2) official statement that no
                                                           symptoms of Scirrhia acicola (Dearn,) Siggers or
                                                           Scirrhia pini Funk and Parker were observed at the
                                                           place of production or its immediate vicinity since the
                                                           beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.

10.    Plants of Abies Mill., Larix Mill., Picea A. Dietr., without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
       Pinus L., Pseudotsuga Carr., Tsuga Carr., intended listed in List lll part A point (1) and List lV part A section
       for plantingother than seeds.                        1 points (8.1) and (8.2) and (9), an official statement
                                                            that no symptoms of Melampsora medusae Thumen
                                                            were observed at the place of production or its


                                            40
                                                                  immediate vicinity from the beginning of the last
                                                                  complete vegetation cycle.

11.01.   Plants of Quercus L., other than fruits and seeds, Without prejudice the provisions applicable to plants
         originating in the USA.                            listed in List lll part A point (5), an official statement that
                                                            the plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                            Ceratocystis fagacearum (Bretz) Hunt.


11.1.    Plants of Castanea Mill. and Quercus L., other than Without prejudice to the prohibitions applicable to
         fruits and seeds, originating in non-European plants listed in List lll part A points (4) and (5) and List
         countries.                                          lV part A section 1 point (11.01), an official statement
                                                             that no symptoms of Cronartium spp. (non-European)
                                                             were observed at the place of production or its
                                                             immediate vicinity from the beginning of the last
                                                             complete vegetation cycle.

11.2.    plants from Castanea Mill. and Quercus L., intended Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
         for plantingother than seeds.                       listed in List lll part A points (4) and (5) and List lV part
                                                             A section 1 point (11.1), an official statement that:
                                                                  (a) the plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                                  Cryphonectria parasitica (Murrill) Barr,
                                                                  or
                                                                  (b) no symptoms of Cryphonectria parasitica (Murrill)
                                                                  Barr have been observed at the place of production or
                                                                  in its immediate vicinity since the start of the last
                                                                  complete vegetation cycle.

11.3.    plants of Corylus L. intended for planting,other than Official statement that the plants have been grown in
         seeds, originating in Canada and the USA.             nurseries that:
                                                                  (a) originate in an area determined by the National
                                                                  Plant Protection Organization of the exporting country
                                                                  to be free from Anisogramma anomala (Peck) E.
                                                                  Muller, in accordance with the relevant international
                                                                  standards for phytosanitary measures and which is
                                                                  specified on the certificates in the " additional
                                                                  declaration " section,
                                                                  or
                                                                  (b) originate in a lace of production, established by the
                                                                  National Plant Protection Organization of the exporting
                                                                  country, where it has been determined to be free from
                                                                  Anisogramma anomala (Peck) E. Muller, based on
                                                                  official inspections carried out at the place of
                                                                  production or its immediate vicinity from the start of the
                                                                  last three complete vegetation cycles, in accordance
                                                                  with the relevant international standards for
                                                                  phytosanitary measures and which is stated on the
                                                                  certificates in the "additional declaration" section and


                                              41
                                                                  declared to be free from Anisogramma anomala
                                                                  (Peck) E. Muller.

11.4.     Plants of Fraxinus L., Juglans ailantifolia Carr,       Official statement that the plants:
          Juglans mandshurica Maxim., Ulmus davidiana
                                                                  Originate in an area recognized to be free from Agrilus
          Planch., Pterocarua rhoifolia Siebold & Zucc.,
                                                                  planipennis Fairmaire, determined by the National
          intended for planting, other than seeds and plants in
                                                                  Plant Protection Organization in accordance with the
          a tissue culture, originating in Canada, China,
                                                                  procedure. The name of the area shall be stated on
          Japan, Mongolia, Republic of Korea, Russia,
                                                                  the certificates.
          Taiwan and USA

11.4.1.   Plants of Juglans L. and Pterocarya Kunth, intended Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
          for planting, other than seeds, originating in the listed in List lV part A section 1, point (11.4), an official
          USA.                                                statement that the plants for planting:
                                                                  (a) have been grown in an area free from Geosmithia
                                                                  morbida Kolarík, Freeland, Utley & Tisserat and its
                                                                  vector Pityophthorus juglandis Blackman, established
                                                                  by the National Plant Protection Organization in
                                                                  accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                                  for phytosanitary measures, and which is indicated on
                                                                  the certificates in the "additional declaration" section,
                                                                  or
                                                                  (b) originate in a place of production, including its
                                                                  immediate vicinity of at least a 5 km radius, where
                                                                  neither symptoms of а Geosmithia morbida Kolarík,
                                                                  Freeland, Utley & Tissera and its vector Pityoph thorus
                                                                  juglandis Blackman, nor the presence of the vector
                                                                  have been observed during the official controls within
                                                                  the last two years prior to export; the plants for planting
                                                                  have been inspected immediately prior to export and
                                                                  handled and packaged in such a way as to prevent
                                                                  infestation after they leave the place of production,
                                                                  or
                                                                  (c) originate in a place of production with complete
                                                                  physical isolation, and the plants for planting have
                                                                  been inspected immediately prior to export and
                                                                  handled and packaged in such a way as to prevent
                                                                  contamination after leaving the place of production.

11.5      Plants of Betula L., other than fruits and seeds, but Official statement that the plants originate in a country
          including cut branches of Betula L. with or without known to be free of Agrilus anxius Gory.
          foliage.
12.       Plants of Platanus L., intended for planting,other Official statement that the plants:
          than seeds originating in Albania, Armenia,
          Switzerland, Turkey and USA.                       (a) originate in an area which the National Plant
                                                             Protection Organization of the country of origin has
                                                             determined to be free from Ceratocystis platani (JM
                                                             Walter) Engelbr. & TC Harr in accordance with the



                                              42
                                                                 relevant international standards for phytosanitary
                                                                 measures, as stated in the certificates in the
                                                                 "Additional declaration" section,
                                                                 or
                                                                 (b) have no symptoms of Ceratocystis platani (J.M.
                                                                 Walter) Engelbr. & TC Harr at the place of production
                                                                 or its immediate vicinity from the beginning of the last
                                                                 complete vegetation cycle.
13.1.   Plants of Populus L., intended for plantingother than Without prejudice to the prohibitions applicable to
        seeds, originating in third countries.                plants listed in List lll part A point (3), an official
                                                              statement that no symptoms of Melampsora medusae
                                                              Thumen have been observed at the place of
                                                              production or its immediate vicinity from the beginning
                                                              of the last complete vegetation cycle.

13.2.   Plants of Populus L. other than fruits and seeds, Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        originating in the countries of the American listed in List lll part A point (3) and List lV part A section
        continent.                                        1 point (13.1), an official statement that no symptoms
                                                          of Mycosphaerella populorum GEThompsonhave
                                                          been observed at the place of production or its
                                                          immediate vicinity from the beginning of the last
                                                          complete vegetation cycle.

14.     Plants of Ulmus L. intended for planting, other than Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        seeds, originating in North American countries.      listed in List lV part A section 1, point (11.4), an official
                                                             statement that no symptoms of Candidatus
                                                             Phytoplasma ulmi mycomplasmhave been observed
                                                             at the place of production or its immediate vicinity from
                                                             the beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.

14.1.   Рlants intended for planting, other than scions,         Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        cuttings, plants in tissue culture, pollen and seeds,    in List lll part A points (8) and (9) or List lV part A
        of Amelanchier Medik., Aronia Medik., Cotoneaster        section 1 points (17), (19.1), (19.2), (20), (22.1), (22.2),
        Medik., Crataegus L., Cydonia Mill., Malus Mill.,        (23.1) and (23.2), as appropriate, an official statement
        Prunus L., Pyracantha M. Roem., Pyrus L. и               that the plants:
        Sorbus L. originating in Canada and the USA
                                                                 (a) have been grown throughout their life in an area
                                                                 free from Saperda candida Fabricius, established by
                                                                 the National Plant Protection Organization in the
                                                                 country of origin, in accordance with the relevant
                                                                 international standards for phytosanitary measures
                                                                 mentioned in the certificates in the section "additional
                                                                 declaration ",
                                                                 or
                                                                 (b) have been grown for at least two years prior to
                                                                 export, or in the case of plants younger than two years,
                                                                 have been grown throughout their life, at a place of
                                                                 production determined to be free from Saperda




                                             43
                                                             candida Fabricius in accordance with the relevant
                                                             international standards for phytosanitary measures:
                                                             (i) which is registered and supervised by the National
                                                             Plant Protection Organization in the country of origin;
                                                             and
                                                             (ii) which during the year has been subjected to two
                                                             official controls for any symptoms of Saperda candida
                                                             Fabricius, carried out at appropriate times;
                                                             and
                                                             (iii) where the plants have been grown in a site:
                                                             - with full physical protection against the introduction of
                                                             Saperda candida Fabricius,
                                                             or
                                                             - with the application of appropriate preventive
                                                             treatments and with a buffer zone with a width of at
                                                             least 500 m where the absence of Saperda candida
                                                             Fabricius has been confirmed through official surveys
                                                             conducted annually at appropriate periods,
                                                             and
                                                             (iv) immediately prior to export, the plants have been
                                                             subjected to a detailed examination for the presence
                                                             of Saperda candida Fabricius, in particular in the plant
                                                             stems, including, where appropriate, random
                                                             sampling.

14.2.   Plants intended for planting, other than plants in   Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        tissue and seeds of Crataegus L., Cydonia Mill.,     plants in List lll part A points (8) and (9) or List lV part
        Malus Mill., Prunus L., Pyrus L. and Vaccinium L.    A section 1 points (14.1), (17), (19.1), (19.2), (20),
        originating in Canada, Mexico and the USA.           (22.1), (22.2), (23.1) and (23.2), an official statement
                                                             that the plants:


                                                             (a) have been grown throughout their life in an area
                                                             free from Grapholita packardi Zeller, established by the
                                                             National Organization for plant protection in the
                                                             country of origin, in accordance with the relevant
                                                             international standards for phytosanitary measures, as
                                                             specified in the certificates in the "additional
                                                             declaration ” section, provided that this freedom status
                                                             has been previously communicated in writing by the
                                                             National Plant Protection Organization of the third
                                                             country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                             Macedonia;
                                                             or



                                          44
                                                                 (b) have been grown throughout life, in a place of
                                                                 production established to be free from Grapholita
                                                                 packardi Zeller in accordance with the relevant
                                                                 international standards for phytosanitary measures:
                                                                 (i) which is registered and supervised by the National
                                                                 Plant Protection Organization in the country of origin;
                                                                 and
                                                                 (ii) which is the subject of annual inspections of any
                                                                 symptoms of Grapholita packardi Zeller carried out at
                                                                 appropriate times;
                                                                 and
                                                                 (iii) the plants have been grown in a site with the
                                                                 application of appropriate preventive treatments and
                                                                 where the absence of Grapholita packardi Zeller has
                                                                 been confirmed through official annual surveys at
                                                                 appropriate times;
                                                                 and
                                                                 (iv) immediately prior to export the plants were
                                                                 subjected to a detailed inspection for the presence of
                                                                 Grapholita packardi Zeller;
                                                                 or
                                                                 (c) have been grown in a site with complete physical
                                                                 protection against the introduction of Grapholita
                                                                 packardi Zeller.

16.1.   Fruits of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus The fruits shall be free from peduncles and leaves and
        Raf., and their hybrids, originating in third countries. the packaging shall bear an appropriate mark of origin.


16.2.   Fruits of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        Raf., Microcitrus Swingle, Naringi Adans., Swinglea fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.1), (16.3),
        Merr. and their hybrids, originating in third countries. (16.4), (16.5) and (16.6), an official statement that the
                                                                 fruits:
                                                                 (a) originate in a country recognized to be free from
                                                                 Xanthomonas citri pv. citri and Xanthomonas citri pv.
                                                                 aurantifolii, in accordance with the relevant
                                                                 international standards for phytosanitary measures,
                                                                 ensuring that the freedom status has been
                                                                 communicated in advance in writing by the National
                                                                 Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                                 concerned, to the Republic of North Macedonia,
                                                                 or
                                                                 (b) originate in an area recognized to be free from
                                                                 Xanthomonas citri pv. citri and Xanthomonas citri pv.


                                             45
     Aurantifolii, established by the National Plant
     Protection Organization in the country of origin in
     accordance with the relevant international standards
     for phytosanitary measures, referred to in the
     certificates, in the section "Additional declaration",
     ensuring that the freedom status hase been
     communicated in advance in writing by the National
     Plant Protection Organization of the third country
     concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia,
     or
     (c) originate at a place of production free from
     Xanthomonas citri pv. citri and Xanthomonas citri pv.
     aurantifolii, established by the National Plant
     Protection Organization in the country of origin, in
     accordance with the relevant international standards
     for phytosanitary measures, which is mentioned in the
     certificates in the section "additional declaration",
     or
     (d) the place of production and its immediate vicinity
     are subject to appropriate treatments and cultural
     practices against Xanthomonas citri pv. citri and
     Xanthomonas citri pv. aurantifolii,
     and
     the fruits have undergone treatment with sodium
     orthophenyl-henate or other effective treatment
     specified in the certificates, provided that the method
     of treatment has been communicated in advance in
     writing by the National Plant Protection Organization of
     the third country concerned to the Republic of North
     Macedonia,
     and
     official controls were carried out at appropriate time
     periods before export and confirmed that the fruits
     were free of symptoms of Xanthomonas citri pv. citri
     and Xanthomonas citri pv. aurantifolii,
     and
     traceability information shall be included in the
     certificates,
     or
     (e) official controls carried out at appropriate periods
     prior to export, have shown that fruits intended for
     industrial processing are free from symptoms of




46
                                                                Xanthomonas citri pv. citri and Xanthomonas citri pv.
                                                                aurantifolii,
                                                                and
                                                                the place of production and its immediate vicinity are
                                                                subject to appropriate treatments and cultural
                                                                practices against Xanthomonas citri pv. citri and
                                                                Xanthomonas citri pv. aurantifolii,
                                                                and
                                                                movement, storage and processing take place in
                                                                conditions approved in accordance with the procedure,
                                                                and
                                                                the fruits are transported in individual packages
                                                                bearing a label, which has a traceability code and an
                                                                indication that the fruits are intended for industrial
                                                                processing,
                                                                and
                                                                traceability information have been included in the
                                                                certificates,

16.3.   Fruits of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        Raf.and their hybrids, originating in third countries. fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.1), (162.),
                                                               (16.4) and (16.5) an official statement that the fruits:
                                                                (a) originate in a country recognized to be free from
                                                                Cercospora angolensis Carv.et Mendes in accordance
                                                                with the relevant international standards for
                                                                phytosanitary measures, provided that the freedom
                                                                status has been communicated in advance in writing
                                                                by the National Plant Protection Organization of the
                                                                third country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                                Macedonia,
                                                                or
                                                                (b) originate in an area recognized to be free from
                                                                Cercospora angolensis Carv.et Mendes, in
                                                                accordance with the procedure and indicated on the
                                                                certificates, in the section "Additional declaration",
                                                                provided that the freedom status has been
                                                                communicated in advance in writing by of the National
                                                                Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                                concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia,
                                                                or
                                                                (c) no symptoms of Cercospora angolensis Carv.et
                                                                Mendeshave observed at the place of production and
                                                                in its immediate vicinity since the beginning of the last



                                            47
                                                                vegetation cycle and none of the fruits harvested at the
                                                                place of production have shown symptoms of this pest
                                                                after appropriate official control.

16.4.   Fruits of Citrus L. Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus        Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        Raf,and their hybrids, except fruits of Citrus          fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.1), (16.2),
        aurantium L and Citrus latifolia Tanaka, originiating   (16.3), (16.5) and (16.6), an official statement that the
        in third countries.                                     fruits:
                                                                (a) originate in a country recognized to be free from
                                                                Phyllosticta citricarpa (McAlpine) Van der Aa in
                                                                accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                                for phytosanitary measures, provided that the freedom
                                                                status has been communicated in advance in writing
                                                                by the National Plant Protection Organization of the
                                                                third country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                                Macedonia,


                                                                or
                                                                (b) originate in a area recognized to be free from
                                                                Phyllosticta citricarpa (McAlpine) Van der Aa
                                                                established by the National Plant protection
                                                                organization of the country of origin in accordance with
                                                                the relevant international standards for phytosanitary
                                                                measures, which has been indicated on the certificates
                                                                in the "additional declaration" section provided that the
                                                                freedom status has been communicated in advance in
                                                                writing by the National Plant Protection Organization of
                                                                the third country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                                Macedonia,
                                                                or
                                                                (c) originate at a place of production free from
                                                                Phyllosticta citricarpa (McAlpine) Van der Aa
                                                                established by the National Plant Protection
                                                                Organization in the country of origin in accordance with
                                                                the relevant international standards for phytosanitary
                                                                measures, as specified in the certificates in section "
                                                                additional declaration ",
                                                                and
                                                                through official inspection of a representative sample,
                                                                defined in accordance with international standards, it
                                                                has been determined that the fruits have no symptoms
                                                                of Phyllosticta citricarpa (McAlpine) Van der Aa
                                                                or
                                                                d) originate in a site of production which has been
                                                                subjected to appropriate treatment and cultural



                                            48
     measures against Phyllosticta citricarpa (McAlpine)
     van der Aa,
     and
     Official site inspections have been carried out during
     the growing season since the beginning of the last
     vegetation cycle, and no symptoms of Phyllosticta
     citricarpa (McAlpine) van der Aa have been identified
     in the fruits,
     and
     the harvested fruits at that site of production were
     found to be free of symptoms of Phyllosticta citricarp
     (McAlpine) Van der Aa during the official inspection
     prior to export, of a representative sample, defined in
     accordance with international standards,
     and
     traceability information shall be included in the
     certificates,
     or
     (e) official inspections have been carried out during the
     appropriate periods priort to export and it was shown
     that the fruits intended for industrial processing have
     no symptoms of Phyllosticta citricarpa (McAlpine) Van
     der Aa, determined by taking a representative sample
     by the official phytosanitary inspection , in accordance
     with the procedures defined in the international
     standards,
     and
     a statement that the fruits originate in a site of
     production which has been subjectedd to an
     appropriate treatment against Phyllosticta citricarpa
     (McAlpine) Van der Aa carried out at the appropriate
     time, specified on the certificates in the "additional
     declaration" section
     and
     movement, storage and processing take place in
     conditions approved in accordance with the procedure,
     and
     the fruits are transported in separate packages bearing
     a label containing the traceability code and a mark that
     the fruits are intended for industrial processing,
     and



49
                                                              traceability information shall be included in the
                                                              certificates,

16.5.   Fruits of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        Raf., and their hybrids, Mangifera L. and Prunus L. fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.1), (16.2),
                                                            (16.3), (16.4) and (16.6), an official statement that the
                                                            fruits:
                                                              (a) originate in a country recognized to be free from
                                                              Tephritidae (non-European), the fruits of which are
                                                              known to be susceptible to this harmful organism, in
                                                              accordance with the relevant International Standards
                                                              for Phytosanitary Measures, provided that the
                                                              freeddom status has been communicated in advance
                                                              in writing by the National Plant Protection Organization
                                                              of the third country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                              Macedonia,
                                                              or
                                                              (b) the fruits originate in an area free from Tephritidae
                                                              (non-European), established by the National Plant
                                                              Protection Organization in the country of origin, whose
                                                              fruit is known to be susceptible to this harmful
                                                              organism, in accordance with the relevant international
                                                              standards for phytosanitary measures specified in the
                                                              certificates in the section "additional declaration",
                                                              provided that the freedom status has been
                                                              communicated in advance in writing by the National
                                                              Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                              concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia,
                                                              or
                                                              (c) during the official inspections carried out at least
                                                              once a month, during the three months before harvest,
                                                              at the place of production and its immediate vicinity,
                                                              from the beginning of the last complete vegetation
                                                              cycle, no symptoms of Tephritidae ( non - European)
                                                              have been observed ) whose fruits are known to be
                                                              susceptible, and none of the fruits harvested at the
                                                              place of production showed any signs of the relevant
                                                              organism during the appropriate official inspections
                                                              and
                                                              traceability information have been included on the
                                                              certificates,
                                                              or
                                                              (d) have been subjected to an effective treatment in
                                                              order to ensure the absence of Tephritidae (non-
                                                              European), the fruits of which are known to be
                                                              susceptible to this harmful organism. The treatment



                                           50
                                                                 data shall be indicated on the certificates, provided
                                                                 that the method of treatment has been communicated
                                                                 in advance in writing by the National Plant Protection
                                                                 Organization of the third country concerned to the
                                                                 Republic of North Macedonia.

16.6.   Fruits of Capsicum (L.), Citrus L., except Citrus        Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        limon (L.) Osbeck. and Citrus aurantiifolia (Christm.)   fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.1), (16.2),
        Swingle, Prunus persica (L.) Batsch and Punica           (16.3), (16.4), (16.5) and (36.3.), an official statement
        granatum L. originating from the countries of the        that the fruits:
        African continent, Cape Verde, St. Helena,
        Madagascar, Reunion, Mauritius and Israel                (a) originate in a country recognized to be free from
                                                                 Thaumatotibia leucotreta in accordance with the
                                                                 relevant international standards for phytosanitary
                                                                 measures, provided that the freedom status has been
                                                                 communicated in advance in writing by the National
                                                                 Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                                 concerned to Republic of North Macedonia.
                                                                 or
                                                                 (b) originate in an area free romf Thaumatotibia
                                                                 leucotreta (Meyrick) established by the National Plant
                                                                 Protection Organization in the country of origin, in
                                                                 accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                                 for phytosanitary measures, as indicated on the
                                                                 certificates in the "Additional Declaration" section
                                                                 provided that this freedom status has been
                                                                 communicated in advance in writing by the National
                                                                 Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                                 concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia;
                                                                 or
                                                                 (c) originate from a place of production free from
                                                                 Thaumatotibia leucotreta (Meyrick) established by the
                                                                 National Plant Protection Organization in the country
                                                                 of origin, in accordance with the relevant international
                                                                 standards for phytosanitary measures and traceability
                                                                 information are included in the certificates, while the
                                                                 official inspections have been carried out at the place
                                                                 of production at appropriate times during the growing
                                                                 season, including visual inspection of representative
                                                                 fruit samples, which were found to be free from
                                                                 Thaumatotibia leucotreta (Meyrick),
                                                                 or
                                                                 (d) have been subjected to an effective cold treatment
                                                                 to ensure the absence of Thaumatotibia leucotreta
                                                                 (Meyrick) or another effective treatment to ensure the
                                                                 absence of Thaumatotibia leucotreta (Meyrick). The
                                                                 data from the treatment shall be stated on the
                                                                 certificates, provided that the method of treatment


                                             51
                                     together with the documented evidence for its
                                     effectiveness has been communicated in advance in
                                     writing by the National Plant Protection Organization of
                                     the third country concerned to the Republic of North
                                     Macedonia.

16.7.   Fruits of Malus Mill.        Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
                                     fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.8), (16.9),
                                     (16.10), an official statement that the fruits:
                                     (a) originate in a country recognized to be free from
                                     Enarmonia prunivora Walsh, Grapholita inopinata
                                     Heinrich and Rhagoletis pomonella (Walsch) in
                                     accordance with the relevant international standards
                                     for phytosanitary measures. provided that the freedom
                                     status has been communicated in advance by the
                                     National Plant Protection Organization of the third
                                     country concerned to the Republic of North
                                     Macedonia,
                                     or
                                     (a) originate in an area free from Enarmonia prunivora
                                     Walsh, Grapholita inopinata Heinrich and Rhagoletis
                                     pomonella (Walsch) established by the National Plant
                                     Protection Organization, in accordance with the
                                     relevant international standards for phytosanitary
                                     measures, as mentioned on the certificates in the
                                     section "Additional declaration" provided that the
                                     freedom status has been communicated in advance by
                                     the National Plant Protection Organization of the third
                                     country concerned to the Republic of North
                                     Macedonia,

                                     or

                                     (c) originate in a place of production where official
                                     inspections and tests are carried out for the presence
                                     of Enarmonia prunivora Walsh Grapholita inopinata
                                     Heinrich and Rhagoletis pomonella (Walsch) at
                                     appropriate times during the growing season,
                                     including visual checks of a representative sample of
                                     fruits, which has shown to be free from the harmful
                                     organism,

                                     and

                                     traceability information shall be included in the
                                     certificates,

                                     or




                                52
                                                  (d) have been subjected to an effective treatment to
                                                  ensure the absence of Enarmonia prunivora Walsh,
                                                  Grapholita inopinata Heinrich and Rhagoletis
                                                  pomonella (Walsch), and the treatment data shall be
                                                  indicated on the certificate, provided the treatment
                                                  method has been communicated in advance in writing
                                                  by the National Plant Protection Organization of the
                                                  third country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                  Macedonia.

16.8.   Fruits of Malus Mill. and Pyrus L.        Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
                                                  fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.7), (16.9)
                                                  and(16.10), an official statement that the fruits:
                                                  (a) originate in a country recognized to be free from
                                                  Guignardia piricola (Nosa)Yamamoto in accordance
                                                  with the relevant international standards for
                                                  phytosanitary measures, provided that the freedom
                                                  status has been communicated in advance in writing
                                                  by the National Plant Protection Organization of the
                                                  third country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                  Macedonia,
                                                  or
                                                  (a) originate in an area free from Guignardia piricola
                                                  (Nosa) Yamamoto, established by the National Plant
                                                  Protection Organization in the country of origin, in
                                                  accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                  for phytosanitary measures, as specified in the
                                                  certificates in the "additional declaration ” section,
                                                  provided that this freedom status has been previously
                                                  communicated in writing by the National Plant
                                                  Protection Organization of the third country concerned
                                                  to the Republic of North Macedonia;
                                                  or
                                                  (c) originate in a place of production where official
                                                  controls and surveys are carried out for the presence
                                                  of Guignardia piricola (Nosa) Yamamoto at
                                                  appropriate times during the growing season,
                                                  including visual inspection of a representative sample
                                                  of fruits, shown that they are free from harmful
                                                  organism and traceability information is included in the
                                                  certificates,
                                                  or
                                                  (d) have been the subjected to an effective treatment
                                                  to ensure the absence of Guignardia piricola (Nosa)
                                                  Yamamoto, and treatment details shall be provided on
                                                  the certificates, provided that the method of treatment
                                                  has been communicated in advance in writing by the


                                             53
                                                              National Plant Protection Organization of the third
                                                              country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                              Macedonia.

16.9.    Fruits of Malus Mill. and Pyrus L.                   Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
                                                              fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.7), (16.8)
                                                              and(16.10), an official statement that the fruits:
                                                              (a) originate in a country recognized to be free from
                                                              Tachypterellus quadrigibbus Say in accordance with
                                                              the relevant international standards on phytosanitary
                                                              measures, provided that the freedom status has been
                                                              communicated in advance in writing by the National
                                                              Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                              concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia,
                                                              or
                                                              (b) originate in an area free from Tachypterellus
                                                              quadrigibbus Say established by the National Plant
                                                              Protection Organization in the country of origin, in
                                                              accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                              for phytosanitary measures, as indicated in the
                                                              certicertificates in the "additional declaration" section,
                                                              provided that the freedom status has been
                                                              communicated in advance in writing by the National
                                                              Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                              concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia,
                                                              or
                                                              (c) originate in a place of production where official
                                                              controls and surveys are carried out for the presence
                                                              of Tachypterellus quadrigibbus Say appropriate times
                                                              during the growing season, including visual inspection
                                                              of a representative sample of fruits, which ha shown
                                                              that they are free from the harmful organism and the
                                                              traceability information is included in the certificates,
                                                              or
                                                              (d) have been subjected to an effective treatment to
                                                              ensure the absence of Tachypterellus quadrigibbus
                                                              Say. The treatment data shall be indicated on the
                                                              certificates, provided that the method of treatment has
                                                              been communicated in advance in writing by the
                                                              National Plant Protection Organization of the third
                                                              country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                              Macedonia.
16.10.   Fruits of Malus Mill., Prunus L., Pyrus L. and Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
         Vaccinium L., originating from Canada, Mexico and fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.5), (16.6),
         USA.                                              (16.7), (16.8) and(16.09), an official statement that the
                                                           fruits:



                                              54
                                                              (a) originate in an area established by the National
                                                              Plant Protection Organization in the country of origin
                                                              to be free from Grapholita packardi Zeller, in
                                                              accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                              for phytosanitary measures, as specified in the
                                                              certificates in the "additional declaration ” section,
                                                              provided that this freedom status has been previously
                                                              communicated in writing by the National Plant
                                                              Protection Organization of the third country concerned
                                                              to the Republic of North Macedonia;
                                                              or
                                                              (b) originate in a place of production where official
                                                              controls and surveys are carried out for the presence
                                                              of Grapholita packardiZeller at appropriate times
                                                              during the growing season, including visual inspection
                                                              of a representative sample of fruits, which ha shown
                                                              that they are free from the harmful organism and the
                                                              traceability information is included in the certificates,
                                                              or
                                                              (c) have been subjected to an effective treatment to
                                                              ensure the absence of Grapholita packardi Zeller. The
                                                              treatment data shall be indicated on the certificates,
                                                              provided that the method of treatment has been
                                                              communicated in advance in writing by the National
                                                              Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                              concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia.

17.   Plants ofAmelanchier Med., Chaenomeles Lindl.,          Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
      Cotoneaster Ehrh., Crataegus L., Cydonia Mill.,         listed in List lll part A points (8), (9), (12) or t List lV part
      Eriobotrya Lindl., Malus Mill., Mespilus L., Photinia   A section 1 points (14.1) and (14.2)),as appropriate,
      davidiana (Dcne.) Cardot, Pyracantha Roem.,             an official statement that:
      Pyrus L. and Sorbus L., intended for planting, other
                                                              (a) the plants originate in countries recognized to be
      than seeds.
                                                              free from Erwinia amylovora (Burr.) Winsl. et al.
                                                              or
                                                              (b) the plants originate in areas free from harmful
                                                              organisms, as established in relation to of Erwinia
                                                              amylovora (Burr.) Winsl. et al. in accordance with the
                                                              relevant international standards for phytosanitary
                                                              measures,
                                                              or
                                                              (c) plants originating in an area of production which
                                                              has shown symptoms of Erwinia amylovora (Burr.)
                                                              Winsl. et al, have been removed from the area and its
                                                              immediate vicinity.




                                          55
18.     Plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus       Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds,   in List III Part A, point (16), as appropriate, an official
        and plants of             Araceae, Marantaceae,         statement that:
        Musaceae,Persea spp. and Strelitziaceae, rooted
                                                                (a) the plants originate in countries known to be free
        or with growing medium attached or associated.
                                                                from Radopholus citrophilus Huettel et al. and
                                                                Radopholus similis (Cobb) Thorne,
                                                                or
                                                                (b) representative samples of soil and roots from the
                                                                place of production have been subjected since the
                                                                beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle, to an
                                                                official nematological testing, at least for Radopholus
                                                                citrophilus Huettel et al. and Radopholus similis
                                                                (Cobb) Thorne and these tests have shown that they
                                                                are free from these harmful organisms.

18.1.   Plants of Aegle Corrêa, Aeglopsis Swingle,              Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        Afraegle Engl, Atalantia Corrêa, Balsamocitrus          in List IV, Part A, Section 1, points (18.2) and (18.3),
        Stapf, Burkillanthus Swingle, Calodendrum Thunb.,       an official statement that the plants originate in a
        Choisya Kunth, Clausena Burm.f., Limonia L.,            country free from Candidatus Liberibacter spp. the
        Microcitrus Swingle., Murraya J. Koenig ex L.,          causative agent of Huanglongbing in citrus fruits and
        Pamburus Swingle, Severinia Ten., Swinglea Merr.,       their greenery.
        Triphasia Lour. and Vepris Comm., other than
        fruits(but including seeds); and seeds of Citrus L.,
        Fortunella Swingleи Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids
        originating in third countries

18.2.   Plants from Casimiroa La Llave, Choisya Kunth Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        Clausena Burm. f., Murraya J.Koenig ex L., Vepris listed in List lV part A section 1 points (18.1) and
        Comm, Zanthoxylum L., other than fruits and seeds, (18.3), an official statement that:
        originating in third countries.
                                                           (a) the plants originate in a country where the
                                                           presence of Trioza erytreae Del Guercio has not been
                                                           established
                                                                or
                                                                (b) the plants originate in an area free from Trioza
                                                                erytreae Del Guercio, established by the National
                                                                Plant Protection Organization in the country of origin,
                                                                in accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                                for phytosanitary measures, as indicated on the
                                                                certificates in the "Additional Declaration" section.
                                                                or
                                                                (c) the plants have been grown in a place of production
                                                                that is registered and supervised by the National Plant
                                                                Protection Organization in the country of origin;
                                                                and




                                            56
                                                              where the plants are placed in a site that is completely
                                                              physically protected against the introduction of Trioza
                                                              erytreae Del Guercio,
                                                              and
                                                              where, during the last complete vegetation cycle,
                                                              before the plants were moved, two official controls
                                                              were carried out at an appropriate time period and no
                                                              symptoms of Trioza erytreae Del Guercio were
                                                              observed at the site or in its surrounding area within a
                                                              radius of at least 200 m

18.3.   Plants of Aegle Corrêa, Aeglopsis Swingle, Afraegle   Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        Engl., Amyris P. Browne, Atalantia Corrêa,            listed in List lV part A section 1 points (18.1) and
        Balsamocitrus Stapf, Choisya Kunth, Citropsis         (18.2), an official statement that:
        Swingle & Kellerman, Clausena Burm. f.,
        Eremocitrus Swingle, Esenbeckia Kunth.,               (a) the plants originate in a country where Diaphorina
                                                              citri Kuway is not known to occur
        Glycosmis Corrêa, Limonia L., Merrillia Swingle,
        Microcitrus Swingle, Murraya J. Koenig ex L.,         or
        Naringi Adans., Pamburus Swingle, Severinia Ten.,
        Swinglea Merr., Tetradium Lour., Toddalia Juss.,      (b) the plants originate in an area free from Diaphorina
        Triphasia Lour., Vepris Comm., Zanthoxylum L.,        citri K, established by the National Plant Protection
        other than fruits and seeds, originating in third     Organization in the country of origin, in accordance
        countries.                                            with the relevant international standards for
                                                              phytosanitary measures, as indicated on the
                                                              certificates in the "Additional Declaration" section.


18.4.   Plants of Microcitrus Swingle, Naringi Adans. and Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        Swinglea Merr., other than fruits and seeds, listed in List lV part A section 1 points (18.1) and
        originating in third countries.                   (18.2), an official statement that:
                                                              a) originate in a country recognized to be free of
                                                              Xanthomonas citri pv. citri and Xanthomonas citri
                                                              pv.aurantifolii in accordance with the relevant
                                                              international standards for phytosanitary measures,
                                                              provided that the freedom status has been
                                                              communicated in advance in writing by the National
                                                              Plant Protection Organization of the third country
                                                              concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia,
                                                              or
                                                              (b) originate in an area free from Xanthomonas citri pv.
                                                              citri и Xanthomonas citri pv. aurantifolii, established by
                                                              the National Plant Protection Organization in the
                                                              country of origin, in accordance with the relevant
                                                              international standards for phytosanitary measures, as
                                                              indicated on the certificates in the "additional
                                                              declaration" section provided that the freedom status
                                                              has been communicated in advance in writing by the
                                                              National Plant Protection Organization of the third



                                          57
                                                                country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                                Macedonia.

19.1.   Plants of Crataegus L. intended for planting, other without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        than seeds, originating in countries where in List III Part A, point (8), and List IV Part A section 1,
        Phyllosticta solitaria Ell. and Ev. is known to occur points (14.1), (14.2) and (17), an official statement that
                                                              no symptoms of Phyllosticta solitaria Ell. and Ev have
                                                              been observed in the plants at the place of production
                                                              from the beginning of the last complete vegetation
                                                              cycle.

19.2.   Plants of Cydonia Mill., Fragaria L., Malus Mill.,      Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to
        Prunus L., Pyrus L., Ribes L., Rubus L. intended for    plants, as appropriate, in List III Part A, point (9) and
        planting, other than seeds, originating in countries    List IV Part A section 1, points 14.1 and 14.2 and (17),
        where harmful organisms of that genus are known         an official statement that no symptoms of diseases
        to occur.                                               caused by the relevant harmful organisms have been
                                                                observed at the place of production since the
        The relevant harmful organisms are:
                                                                beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.
        on Fragaria L.:
           - Phytophtora fragariae Hickman, var.
                fragariae,
           - Arabis mosaic virus,
           - Raspberry ringspot virus
           - Strawberry crinkle virus,
           - Strawberry latent ringspot virus,
           - Strawberry mild yellow edge virus,
           - Tomato black ring virus,
           - Xanthomonas fragariae Kennedy et King;
        on Malus Mill .:
            - Phyllosticta solitaria Ell. and Ev .;

        on Prunus L .:
            - Apricot chlorotic leafroll mycoplasm,
            - Xanthomonas arboricola pv. pruni (Smith)
                Vauterin et al.
        on Prunus persica (L.) Batsch:
          -     Pseudomonas syringae pv. persicae
                (Prunier et al.) Young et al.;

        on Pyrus L .:
            - Phyllosticta solitaria Ell. and Ev .;

        on Rubus L .:
            -   Arabis mosaic virus,
            -   Raspberry ringspot virus,
            -   Strawberry latent ringspot virus,
            -   Tomato black ring virus ,
        for all types:
        non-European viruses and virus-like organisms.



                                            58
20.     Plants of Cydonia Mill. and Pyrus L. intended for Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to plants
        planting, other than seeds, originating in countries in List III, Part A, point (9) and List IV, Part A, section
        where Pear decline mycoplasm is known to occur. 1, points (15), (17) and (19.2), an official statement that
                                                             the plants at the place of production and its
                                                             immediatevicinity, which have shown symptoms
                                                             giving rise to suspicion of an infection with Pear
                                                             decline mycoplasm, have been destroyed within the
                                                             last three complete vegetation cycles.
21.1.   Plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        than seeds, originating in countries where the plants in List lII part A point 9 and List IV part A section
        relevant harmful organisms are known to occur      1 point (19.2), an official statement that:

        The relevant harmful organisms are:                     (a) plants other than those raised from seed have
                                                                been:
            - Strawberry latent 'C' virus
            - Strawberry vein banding virus                     either
            - Strawberry witches' broom mycoplasm
                                                                - officially certified under the certification scheme
                                                                according to which it is required for them to be derived
                                                                in direct line from material which has been grown in
                                                                appropriate conditions and subjected to official testing
                                                                for the relevant harmful organisms, using appropriate
                                                                indicators or equivalent methods, and within these
                                                                tests it was determined that plants are free from the
                                                                relevant harmful organisms,
                                                                or
                                                                - have been derived in directly from material that was
                                                                grown and maintained in appropriate conditions and
                                                                was subjected, during the last three vegetation cycles,
                                                                to an official testing of the relevant harmful organisms
                                                                using appropriate indicators or equivalent methods
                                                                and it was determined that the plants are free from the
                                                                relevant harmful organisms,


                                                                (b) no symptoms of disease caused by the relevant
                                                                harmful organisms at the site of production or in its
                                                                immediate vicinity have been observed since the
                                                                beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.

21.2.   Plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        than seeds, originating in countries where plants in List lII part A point 9 and List IV part A section
        Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie is known to occur 1 points (19.2) and (21.1), an official statement that:
                                                                (a) no symptoms of Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie
                                                                have been observed in plants at the site of production
                                                                since the beginning of the last complete vegetation
                                                                cycle;
                                                                or
                                                                (b) plants in tissue culture, have been derived from
                                                                plants in accordance with the procedure referred to in
                                                                part (a) of this point, or have been officially tested by


                                            59
                                                               appropriate nematological methods and were found to
                                                               be free from Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie.

21.3.   Plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        than seeds                                         plants in List III, Part A, point (9) and List IV, Part A,
                                                           Section 1, points (19.2), (21.1) and (21.2), an official
                                                           statement that the plants originate in an area which is
                                                           known to be free from Anthonomus signatus Say and
                                                           Anthonomus bisignifer (Schenkling).
22.1.   Plants of Malus Mill. intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        than seeds, originating in countries where the plants in List lll part A points (8) and (9) and List lV part
        relevant pests are known to occur on Malus Mill.   A section 1 points (14.1) and (14.2), (17), and (19.2)
                                                           as appropriate, an official statement that:
        The relevant harmful organisms are:
                                                           (a) the plants were:
             - Cherry rasp leaf virus (American),
             - Tomato ringspot virus,                      - either officially certified under the certification
                                                           scheme according to which it is required for them to be
                                                           derived in direct line from material which has been
                                                           grown in appropriate conditions and subjected to
                                                           official testing for the relevant harmful organisms,
                                                           using appropriate indicators or equivalent methods,
                                                           and within these tests it was determined that plants are
                                                           free from the relevant harmful organisms,
                                                               or
                                                               - have been derived in directly from material that was
                                                               grown and maintained in appropriate conditions and
                                                               was subjected, during the last three vegetation cycles,
                                                               to an official testing of the relevant harmful organisms
                                                               using appropriate indicators or equivalent methods
                                                               and it was determined that the plants are free from the
                                                               relevant harmful organisms,
                                                               (b) no symptoms of disease caused by the relevant
                                                               harmful organisms at the site of production or in its
                                                               immediate vicinity have been observed since the
                                                               beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.
22.2.   Plants of Malus Mill. intended for planting, other Notwithstanding the provisions applicable to plants
        than seeds, originating in countries where Apple listed in List III part A, points (8), and (9), and List IV
        proliferation mycoplasm is known to occur.         part (A) section 1, points (14.1), (14.2), (17), (19.2) and
                                                           (22.1) official statement that:
                                                               (a) plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                               Apple proliferation mycoplasm;
                                                               or
                                                               (b) (aa) the plants other than those raised from seed
                                                               have been:
                                                               - either officially certified under the certification
                                                               scheme requiring them to be derived in direct line from


                                           60
                                                              material which has been grown under appropriate
                                                              conditions and subjected to official testing for Apple
                                                              proliferation mycoplasm using appropriate indicators
                                                              or equivalent methods and within these tests, the
                                                              plants were found to be free of the relevant harmful
                                                              organism,
                                                              or
                                                              - derived in direct line from material that was grown
                                                              and maintained in appropriate conditions and was
                                                              subjected to, during the last six vegetation cycles, to
                                                              an official testing for Apple proliferation mycoplasm
                                                              using appropriate indicators or equivalent methods
                                                              and it was determined that the plants are free from the
                                                              relevant harmful organism,
                                                              (bb) no symptoms of diseases caused by Apple
                                                              proliferation mycoplasm have been observed at or
                                                              near the site of production since the beginning of the
                                                              last three full vegetation cycles.
23.1.   Plants of the following species of the genus Prunus   Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        L., intended for planting, other than seeds,          plants in List lll part A points (8) and (9) and List lV part
        originating in countries where Plum pox virusis       A section 1 points (14.1) and (14.2), (17), and (19.2)
        known to occur:                                       as appropriate, an official statement that:
        -   Prunus amygdalus Batsch,                          (a) plants other than those raised from seed have
        -   Prunus armeniaca L.,                              been:
        -   Prunus blireiana Andre,
                                                              - either officially certified under the certification
        -   Prunus brigantina Vill.,
                                                              scheme requiring them to be derived in direct line from
        -   Prunus cerasifera Ehrh.,
                                                              material which has been grown under appropriate
        -   Prunus cistena Hansen,
                                                              conditions and subjected to official testing for Plum
        -   Prunus curdica Fenzl and Fritsch.,
                                                              pox virus using appropriate indicators or equivalent
        -   Prunus domestica ssp. domestica L.,
                                                              methods and within these tests, the plants were found
        -   Prunus domestica ssp. insititia (L.) C.K.
                                                              to be free of the relevant harmful organism,
            Schneid.,
        -   Prunus domestica ssp. italica (Borkh.) Hegi.,     or
        -   Prunus glandulosa Thunb.,
        -   Prunus holosericea Batal.,                        - derived in direct line from material that was grown
        -   Prunus hortulana Bailey,                          and maintained in appropriate conditions and was
        -   Prunus japonica Thunb.,                           subjected to, during the last three vegetation cycles, to
        -   Prunus mandshurica (Maxim.) Koehne,               an official testing for Plum pox virus using appropriate
        -   Prunus maritima Marsh.,                           indicators or equivalent methods and it was
        -   Prunus mume Sieb and Zucc.,                       determined that the plants are free from the relevant
        -   Prunus nigra Ait.,                                harmful organism,
        -   Prunus persica (L.)Batsch,                        (bb) no symptoms of diseases caused by Plum pox
        -   Prunus salicina L.,                               virus have been observed at or near the site of
        -   Prunus sibirica L.,                               production since the beginning of the last three full
        -   Prunus simonii Carr.,                             vegetation cycles.
        -   Prunus spinosa L.,
        -   Prunus tomentosa Thunb.,
        -   Prunus triloba Lindl.,


                                          61
        - other species of Prunus L. susceptible to the plum (c) plants that showed symptoms of disease caused
        pox virus.                                           by other viruses or virus-like pathogens at the site of
                                                             production were destroyed.

23.2.   plants of Prunus L. intended for planting             Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
                                                              plants in List lll part A points (8) and (9) and List lV part
        (a) originating in countries where the relevant
                                                              A section 1 points (19.2) and (23.1) an official
        harmful organisms are known to occur on Prunus L.
                                                              statement that:
        (b) other than seeds, originating in countries where
        the relevant harmful organisms are known to occur
                                                              (a) the plants were:
        (c) other than seeds, originating in non-European
        countries where the relevant harmful organisms are - either officially certified under the certification
        known to occur                                        scheme according to which it is required for them to be
                                                              derived in direct line from material which has been
        The relevant harmful organisms are:
                                                              grown in appropriate conditions and subjected to
             - for the case under (a):                        official testing for the relevant harmful organisms,
                      - Tomato ringspot virus ,               using appropriate indicators or equivalent methods,
             - or the case under (b):                         and within these tests it was determined that plants are
                      - Cherry         rasp     leaf    virus free from the relevant harmful organisms,
                          (American),                         or
                      - Peach mosaic virus (American),
                      - Peach phony rickettsia                - have been derived in direct line from material that
                      - Peach rosette mycoplasm               was grown and maintained in appropriate conditions
                      - Peach yellows mycoplasm               and was subjected, during the last three complete
                      - Plum        line     pattern    virus vegetation cycles, to an official testing for the relevant
                          (American),                         harmful organisms using appropriate indicators or
                      - Peach X-disease mycoplasm             equivalent methods and it was determined that the
             - or the case under (c):                         plants are free from the relevant harmful organisms,
                      - Little cherry pathogen
                                                              (b) no symptoms of disease caused by the relevant
                                                              harmful organisms at the site of production or in its
                                                              immediate vicinity have been observed since the
                                                              beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.

24.     plants of Rubus L. intended for planting                 Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
                                                                 plants in List lV part A section 1 point (19.2):
        (a) originating in countries where the relevant
        harmful organisms are known to occur on Rubus L. (a) the plants are free of aphids, including their eggs
        (b) other than seeds, originating in countries where (b) an official statement that:
        the relevant harmful organisms are known to occur
                                                             (aa) the plants have been:
        The relevant harmful organisms are:
                                                             - either officially certified under the certification
        - in the case under (a):                             scheme according to which it is required for them to be
                                                             derived in direct line from material which has been
              - Tomato ringspot virus ,                      grown in appropriate conditions and subjected to
              - Black raspberry latent virus
                                                             official testing for the relevant harmful organisms,
              - Cherry leafroll virus
                                                             using appropriate indicators or equivalent methods,
              - Prunus necrotic ringspot virus
                                                             and within these tests it was determined that plants are
        - in the case under (b):                             free from the relevant harmful organisms,

            -    Raspberry leaf curl virus (American)


                                             62
            -   Cherry rasp leaf virus (American)
                                                            or
                                                            - have been derived in direct line from material that
                                                            was grown and maintained in appropriate conditions
                                                            and was subjected to, during the last three complete
                                                            vegetation cycles, to an official testing for the relevant
                                                            harmful organisms using appropriate indicators or
                                                            equivalent methods and it was determined that the
                                                            plants are free from the relevant harmful organisms,
                                                            (bb) no symptoms of diseases caused by the relevant
                                                            harmful organisms at the site of production or in its
                                                            immediate vicinity have been observed since the
                                                            beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.

25.1.   Tubers from Solanum tuberosum L., originating in Without prejudice to the prohibitions applicable to the
        countries where Synchytrium endobioticum tubers in List III, Part A, points (15), (16) and (17), an
        (Schilbersky) Percival is known to occur         official statement that:
                                                            (a) the tubers originate in areas known to be free from
                                                            Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilbersky) Percival (all
                                                            races, other than race 1, the common European race)
                                                            and show no symptoms of Synchytrium endobioticum
                                                            (Schilbersky) at the place of production or in its
                                                            immediate vicinity from the beginning of the adequate
                                                            period;
                                                            or
                                                            (b) the provisions in the country of origin recognized
                                                            as equivalent to the Community provisions for the
                                                            control of Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilbersky)
                                                            Percival have been fulfilled.

25.2.   Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L.                      Without prejudice to the provisions given in List lll part
                                                            A points (15), (16) and (17) and List lV part A section
                                                            1 point (25.1) an official statement that:
                                                            (a) the tubers originate in countries recognized as free
                                                            from Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus
                                                            (Spieckermann and Kotthoff) Davis et al .;
                                                            or
                                                            (b) the provisions in the country of origin recognized
                                                            as equivalent to Community provisions on combating
                                                            Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus
                                                            (Spieckermann and Kotthoff) Davis et al have been
                                                            fulfilled

25.3.   tubers of Solanum tuberosum L., other than early Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        potatoes, originating in countries where Potato tubers in List III Part A, points (15), (16) and (17) and
        spindle tuberviroid is known to occur.           List IV Part A section 1, points (25.1) and (25.2),



                                          63
                                                           suppresion in the ability to germination.

25.4.   Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L, intended for Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        planting.                                   tubers in List III Part A, points (15), (16) and (17) and
                                                    List IV Part A section 1, points (25.1), (25.2) and
                                                    (25.3), official statement that the tubers originate in an
                                                    area known to be free of Globodera rostochiensis
                                                    (Wollenweber) Behrens and Globodera pallida (Stone)
                                                    Behrens.
                                                           and
                                                           (aa) or the tubers originate in areas where Ralstonia
                                                           solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al is known not to
                                                           occur
                                                           or
                                                           (bb) in areas where Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith)
                                                           Yabuuchi et al, is known to occur, the tubers shall
                                                           originate at a place of prouction which is free, or
                                                           considere to be free of
                                                           Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al., as a
                                                           result of carrying out an appropriate procedure for the
                                                           eradication of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith)
                                                           Yabuuchi et al.,
                                                           and
                                                           (cc) or the tubers originate in areas where
                                                           Meloidogyne chitwoodi Golden et al. (all populations)
                                                           and Meloidogyne fallax Karssen are known not to
                                                           occur
                                                           or
                                                           (gg) in areas wherer Meloidogyne chitwoodi Golden et
                                                           al. (all populations) and Meloidogyne fallax Karssen
                                                           are known to occur
                                                           - or the tubers originate at a place of production free
                                                           from Meloidogyne chitwoodi Golden et al. (all
                                                           populations), and Meloidogyne fallax Karssen, based
                                                           on annual surveillance by visual inspection of host
                                                           plants at appropriate times and by visual inspection
                                                           both externally and internally by cutting tubers after
                                                           harvest, from locally grown plants of production
                                                           or
                                                           - the tubers after harvest have been randomly sampled
                                                           and either checked for symptoms (using an
                                                           appropriate symptom-inducing method), or tested in a
                                                           laboratory, and a visual inspection is performed both
                                                           externally and internally by cutting the tubers at


                                         64
                                                               appropriate times and in all cases at the time of closing
                                                               the packages or containers before marketing, no
                                                               symptoms of Meloidogyne chitwoodi Golden et al. (all
                                                               populations) and Meloidogyne fallax Karssen have
                                                               been observed

25.4.1.   Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L, other than those Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
          intended for planting                           tubers in List III part A, point (17) and List IV part A
                                                          section 1, point (25.1), (25.2) and (25.3), an official
                                                          statement that the tubers originate in an area where
                                                          Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al.
                                                          isknown not to occur

25.4.2.   Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L.                       Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
                                                               tubers in List III Part A, points (15), (16) and (17) and
                                                               List IV Part A section 1, points (25.1), (25.2), (25.3), (
                                                               25.4) and (25.4.1), an official statement that:
                                                               (a) the tubers originate in a country where
                                                               Scrobipalpopsis solanivora Povolny is known not to
                                                               occur; or
                                                               (b) the tubers originate in an area free of
                                                               Scrobipalpopsis solanivora Povolny, established by
                                                               the National Plant Protection Organization in
                                                               accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                               for phytosanitary measures.

25.5.     Plants of Solanaceae intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
          than seeds, originating in countries where Potato tubers in List III Part A, points (15), (16) and (17) and
          stolbur mycoplasmis known to occur.               List IV Part A section 1, points (25.1), (25.2), (25.3)
                                                            and 25.4), official statement that no symptoms of
                                                            Potato stolbur mycoplasm have been observed in
                                                            plants at the place of production since the beginning
                                                            of the last complete vegetation cycle.




25.6.     Plants of Solanaceae, intended for planting, other   without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
          than tubers of Solanum tuberosum L. and other than   plants in List III Part A, points (16) an (18), and List IV
          seeds of Solanum lycopersicum L., originating in     Part A section 1, point (25.5), an official statement that
          countries where Potato spindle tuber viroid is       no symptoms of Potato spindle tuber viroid have been
          known to occur                                       observed in plants at the place of production from the
                                                               beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.

25.7.     Plants of Capsicum annuum L., Solanum                Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
          lycopersicum L., Musa L., Nicotiana L. and Solanum   plants in List lll part A points 16 and (18) and List lV
          melongena L., intended for planting other than       part A section 1 points (25.5) and (25.6), an official
          seeds, originating in countries where Ralstonia      statement that:
          solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al. is known to
                                                               (a) plants originate in areas free of Ralstonia
          occur
                                                               solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al.,



                                            65
                                                              or
                                                              (b) no symptoms of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith)
                                                              Yabuuchi et al. have been observed in plants at the
                                                              place of production from the beginning of the last
                                                              complete vegetation cycle.

25.7.1.   Plants of Solanum lycopersicum L. and Solanum Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
          melongena L., other than fruits and seeds.    plants in List lII part A point 18 and List IV part A
                                                        section 1 points (25.5), (25.6), (25.7), (28.1) and
                                                        (45.3), an official statement that the plants:
                                                              (a) originate in a country recognized as free from
                                                              Keiferia lycopersicella (Wals ingham) in accordance
                                                              with the relevant international standards for
                                                              phytosanitary measures;
                                                              or
                                                              (b) originate in an area free from Keiferia lycopersicella
                                                              (Walsingham), establishe by the National Plant
                                                              Protection Organization in the country of origin in
                                                              accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                              for phytosanitary measures, and it is indicated on the
                                                              certificates in the "additional declaration" section

25.7.2.   Fruits of Solanum lycopersicum L. and Solanum Official statement that the fruits:
          melongena L.
                                                        (a) originate in a country recognized as free from
                                                        Keiferia lycopersicella (Wals ingham) in accordance
                                                        with the relevant international standards for
                                                        phytosanitary measures;
                                                              or
                                                              (b) originate in an area free from Keiferia lycopersicella
                                                              (Walsingham), established by the National Plant
                                                              Protection Organization in the country of origin in
                                                              accordance with the relevant international standards
                                                              for phytosanitary measures, which is indicated on the
                                                              certificates in the "additional declaration" section
                                                              or
                                                              (c) originate at a place of production, free from Keiferia
                                                              lycopersicella (Walsingham), established by the
                                                              National Plant Protection Organization of the country
                                                              of origin on the basis of official inspections and surveys
                                                              carried out in the last three months prior to export,
                                                              which is indicated on the certificates in the section
                                                              "additional declaration".

25.7.3.   Fruits of Capsicum annuum L., Solanum Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
          aethiopicum L., Solanum lycopersicum L. and fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.6.), (25.7.1.),
          Solanum melongena L.                        (25.7.2.), (25.7.4.), (36.2) and (36.3.), an official



                                            66
     statement that the fruits:
     (a) originate in a country recognized as free from
     Neoleucinodes elegantalis (Guenée) in accordance
     with the relevant international standards for
     phytosanitary measures, provided that the freedom
     status has been communicated in advance in writing
     by the National Plant Protection Organization of the
     third country concerned to the Republic of North
     Macedonia,
     or
     (a) originate in a country recognized as free from
     Neoleucinodes elegantalis (Guenée) established by
     the National Plant Protection Organization in
     accordance with the relevant international standards
     for phytosanitary measures as indicated on the
     certificates in the "additional declaration" section,
     provided that the freedom status has been
     communicated in advance in writing by the National
     Plant Protection Organization of the third country
     concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia,
     or
     (c) originate at a place of production free from
     Neoleucinodes elegantalis (Guenée) established by
     the National Plant Protection Organization in the
     country of origin in accordance with the relevant
              International standards for phytosanitary
     measures and official inspections have been carried
     out at appropriate periods during the growing season,
     including testing of representative fruit samples which
     have been shown to be free from Neoleucinodes
     elegantalis (Guenée),
     and
     traceability information shall be included in the
     certificates,
     or
     (d) originate in an insect-proof site of production and
     free from Neoleucinodes elegantalis (Guenée),
     established by the National Plant Protection
     Organization of the country of origin on the basis of
     official inspections and research carried out during the
     three months prior to export,
     and
     traceability information have been included in the
     certificates,



67
25.7.4   Fruits of Solanaceae originating in Australia, the Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
         American countries and New Zealand.                fruits in List lV part A section 1 points (16.6.), (25.7.1.),
                                                            (25.7.2.), (25.7.4.), (36.2) and (36.3.), an official
                                                            statement that the fruits:
                                                                 (a) originate in a country free from Bactericera
                                                                 cockerelli (Sulc) established by the National Plant
                                                                 Protection Organization in the country of origin in
                                                                 accordance with the relevant International Standards
                                                                 for Phytosanitary Measures, provided that this
                                                                 freedom status has been communicated in advance in
                                                                 writing by The National Plant Protection Organization
                                                                 of the third country concerned to the Republic of North
                                                                 Macedonia
                                                                 or
                                                                 (a) originate in an area free from Bactericera cockerelli
                                                                 (Sulc) established by the National Plant Protection
                                                                 Organization in the country of origin in accordance
                                                                 with the relevant International Standards for
                                                                 Phytosanitary Measures, which has been mentioned
                                                                 in the phytosanitary certificates in the "additional
                                                                 declaration" section provided that this freedom status
                                                                 has been communicated in advance in writing by The
                                                                 National Plant Protection Organization of the third
                                                                 country concerned to the Republic of North Macedonia
                                                                 or
                                                                 (c) originate at a place of production where official
                                                                 inspections and surveillance have been carried out to
                                                                 establish the presence of Bactericera cockerelli (Sulc.)
                                                                 including its immediate vicinity during the last three
                                                                 months prior to export and have been subjected to
                                                                 effective treatments to ensure freedom from the
                                                                 harmful organism and representative samples of the
                                                                 fruits prior to export have been tested
                                                                 and
                                                                 traceability information shall be included in the
                                                                 phytosanitary certificates,
                                                                 or
                                                                 (d) originate from an insect-proof site of production
                                                                 established by the National Plant Protection
                                                                 Organization in the country of origin as free from
                                                                 Bactericera cockerelli (Sulc.), on the basis of official
                                                                 inspections and surveillance carried out during the
                                                                 three months prior to export,
                                                                 and



                                             68
                                                                 traceability information shall be included in the
                                                                 phytosanitary certificates,

26.     plants of Humulus lupulus L., intended for planting, Official statement that no symptoms of Verti cillium
        other than seeds                                     alboatrum Reinke and Bertield and Verticillum dahliae
                                                             Klebahn have been observed on hops at the place of
                                                             production from the beginning of the last complete
                                                             vegetation cycle.

27.1    plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul, Dianthus Official statement that:
        L., Pelargonium l'Hérit. ex Ait. , intended for
                                                        (aa) the plants originate in an area free from
        planting, other than seeds
                                                        Helicoverpa armigera (Hübner) and Spodoptera
                                                        littoralis (Boisd.), established by the National Plant
                                                        Protection Organization of the country of origin in
                                                        accordance with the relevant International Standards
                                                        for Phytosanitary Measures;
                                                                 or
                                                                 (a) no signs of Helicoverpa armigera (Hübner), or
                                                                 Spodoptera littoralis (Boisd.) have been observed at
                                                                 the site of production since the beginning of the last
                                                                 complete vegetation cycle;
                                                                 or
                                                                 (b) the plants have undergone appropriate treatment
                                                                 to protect them from the organisms mentioned.

27.2.   Plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul., Dianthus Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
        L. and Pelargonium l'Hérit. ex Ait., other than seeds plants in List lV part A section 1 point (27.1), an official
                                                              statement that:
                                                                 (аа) the plants originate in an area free from
                                                                 Spodoptera eridania (Cramer), Spodoptera frugiperda
                                                                 Смит и Spodoptera litura (Fabricius), established by
                                                                 the National Plant Protection Organization of the
                                                                 country of origin in accordance with the relevant
                                                                 International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures;
                                                                 or
                                                                 (a) no signs of Spodoptera eridiana Cramer,
                                                                 Spodoptera frugiperda Smithor Spodoptera litura
                                                                 (Fabricius) have been observed at the site of
                                                                 production since the beginning of the last complete
                                                                 vegetation cycle,
                                                                 or
                                                                 (b) the plants have undergone appropriate treatment
                                                                 to protect them from the organisms mentioned.




                                             69
28     plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul. intended Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
       for planting, other than seeds                  plants in List lV part A section 1 points (27.1) and
                                                       (27.1), an official statement that:
                                                           (a) the plants are substrate, but not more than the third
                                                           generation derived from material which, during the
                                                           virological testing, has been found to be free from
                                                           Chrysanthemum stunt viroid or are directly derived
                                                           from material of which a representative sample of at
                                                           least 10% has been found to be free from
                                                           Chrysanthemum stund viroid during an official
                                                           inspection carried out at the time of flowering
                                                           (b) plants or cuttings:
                                                           - come from premises that have officially been
                                                           inspected at least once a month, during the three
                                                           months prior to dispatch and where no symptoms of
                                                           Puccinia horiana Hennings were observed during that
                                                           period, and no signs of Puccinia horiana Hennings
                                                           were observed in the immediate vicinity during the
                                                           three months prior to export,
                                                           or
                                                           - have undergone appropriate treatment against
                                                           Puccinia horiana Hennings;
                                                           (c) in the case of unrooted cuttings, no symptoms
                                                                    of Didymella ligulicola were observed (Baker,
                                                           Dimock and Davis) v. Arx were observed either on
                                                           cuttings or on the plants from which the cuttings were
                                                           derived, or, in the case of rooted cuttings, no
                                                           symptoms of Didymella ligulicola ((Baker, Dimock and
                                                           Davis) v. Arx were observed on either the cuttings or
                                                           the rootstock.
28.1   plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul. and Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
       Solanum lycopersicum L., intended for planting, plants in List III Part A, point (18) and List IV Part A
       other than seeds                                section I, points (25.5), (25.6), (25.7), (27.1), (27.2)
                                                       and (28) ), an official statement that:
                                                           (a) the plants have been throughout life in country free
                                                           from Chrysanthemum stem necrosis virus;
                                                           or
                                                           (b) the plants have been grown throughout their life in
                                                           an area established to be free from Chrysanthemum
                                                           stem necrosis virus by the National Plant Protection
                                                           Organization of the exporting country in accordance
                                                           with the relevant International Standards for
                                                           Phytosanitary measures;
                                                           or



                                        70
                                                              (c) the plants have been grown throughout their life at
                                                              a place of production, which is found to be free from
                                                              Chrysanthemum stem necrosis virus and which has
                                                              been confirmed by official inspections and, where
                                                              appropriate, testing.

29.   plants of Dianthus L. intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
      than seeds                                         plants in List lV part A section 1 points (27.1) and
                                                         (27.2), an official statement that:
                                                              - the plants have been derived in direct line from
                                                                mother plants which have been found to be free
                                                                from Erwinia chrysanthemipv. dianthicola
                                                                (Hellmers) Dickey, Pseudomonas caryophylli
                                                                (Burkholder) Starr and Burkholder and
                                                                Phialophora cinerescens (Wollenw.) Van Beyma
                                                                through officially approved tests, conducted at
                                                                least once in the previous two years,
                                                              - - no symptoms on plants have been observed
                                                                caused by the above mentioned harmful
                                                                organisms
30.   bulbs of Tulipa L. and Narcissus L., other than those   Official statement that no symptoms of Ditylenchus
      for which there is evidence by their packaging, or by   dipsaci (Kühn) Filipjev have been observed on the
      other means, that they are intended for sale to final   plants since the beginning of the last complete
      consumers not involved in the professional              vegetation cycle
      production of cut flowers.


31.   Plants of Pelargonium L'Herit. ex Ait., intended for Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
      planting, other than seeds, originating in countries plants in List lV part A section 1 points (27.1) and
      where Tomato ringspot virus is known to occur:       (27.2) , an official statement that the plants:
      (a) where Xiphinema americanum Cobb sensu lato (a) are derived directly from places of production
      (non - European populations) or other Tomato known to be free from Tomato ringspot virus;
      ringspot virus vectors are not known to occur;
                                                     or
                                                              (b) are of no more than fourth generation stock derived
                                                              from mother plants found to be free of Tomato ringspot
                                                              virus according to an officially approved virological
                                                              testing system
                                                              Official statement that the plants:
      (b) where Xiphinema americanum Cobb sensu lato
                                                       (a) are derived directly from places of production
      (non - European populations) or other vectors of
                                                       known to be free from Tomato ringspot virus in the soil
      Tomato ringspot virus are known to occur.
                                                       or plants;
                                                              or
                                                              (b) are of no more than second generation stock
                                                              derived from mother plants found to be free of Tomato
                                                              ringspot virus according to an officially approved



                                          71
                                                              virological testing system
32.1   Plants of herbaceous species intened for planting, Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
       other than:                                        plants in List IV Part A Section 1, points (27.1), (27.2),
                                                          (28) and (29), where appropriate, an official statement
       - bulbs,                                           that the plants have been grown in nurseries and:
       - corms,                                           (a) originate in an area established by the National
       - plants of the family Gramineae,                  Plant Protection Organization of the exporting country,
                                                          to be free from Liriomyza sativae (Blanchard) and
       - rhizomes,                                        Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch) in accordance with
                                                          the relevant International Standards for Phytosanitary
       - seeds                                            measures, which is indicated on the certificates in the
       - tubers                                           section "additional declaration",

       originating in third countries where Liriomyza sativae or
       (Blanchard) and Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch) (b) originate in a place of production established by the
       are known to occur.                                    National Plant Protection Organization in the exporting
                                                              country to be free from Liriomyza sativae (Blanchard)
                                                              and Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch) in accordance
                                                              with the relevant International Standards for
                                                              phytosanitary measures, which has been indicated on
                                                              the certificates in the section "additional declaration",
                                                              confirmed by official inspections conducted at least
                                                              once a month during the three months prior to export,
                                                              or
                                                              (c) immediately prior to export were subjected to an
                                                              adequate treatment against Liriomyza sativae
                                                              (Blanchard) and Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch),
                                                              were officially inspected and it was determined that
                                                              they are free from Liriomyza sativae (Blanchard) and
                                                              Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch). Details of the
                                                              treatment shall be indicated on the phytosanitary
                                                              certificates.
                                                              or
                                                              (d) originate from plant material (explant) free from
                                                              Liriomyza sativae (Blanchard) and Amauromyza
                                                              maculosa (Malloch); grown in vitro in sterile medium
                                                              under sterile conditions that exclude the possibility of
                                                              infection with Liriomyza sativae (Blanchard) and
                                                              Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch); and are shipped in
                                                              transparent containers under sterile conditions.
32.2   Cut flowers from Dendranthema (DC) Des. Moul., Official statement that the cut flowers and leafy
       Dianthus L., Gypsophila L. Solidago L., and leafy vegetables:
       vegetables from Apium graveolens L. and Ocimum
                                                         - originate in a country free from Liriomyza sativae
       L.
                                                         (Blanchard)and Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch),
                                                              or
                                                              - immediately prior to their export were officially
                                                              inspected and found to be free from Liriomyza sativae
                                                              (Blanchard)and Amauromyza maculosa (Malloch).



                                           72
32.3   Plants of herbaceous species intened for planting, Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
       other than:                                        plants in List lV part A section 1 points (27.1) ,(27.2)
                                                          (28), (29) and (32.1) an official statement that:
       - bulbs,
                                                          (a) the plants originate in an area known to be free
       - corms,
                                                          from Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard) and
       - plants of the family Gramineae,                  Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess),

       - rhizomes,                                            or

       - seeds                                                (b) no symptoms of Liriomyza huidobrensis
                                                              (Blanchard)and Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess) have been
       - tubers                                               found at the place of production, during the official
       Originating in third countries.                        inspections carried out at least once a month during
                                                              the three months prior to harvest;
                                                              or
                                                              (c) immediately prior to export, the plants were
                                                              officially inspected and were found to be free from
                                                              Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard)and Liriomyza
                                                              trifolii (Burgess)and were subjected to an adequate
                                                              treatment against Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard)
                                                              and Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess).
                                                              or
                                                              (d) plants originate from plant material (explant) which
                                                              is free from Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard) and
                                                              Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess); grown in vitro in a sterile
                                                              medium under sterile conditions that excludes the
                                                              possibility of infection with Liriomyza huidobrensis
                                                              (Blanchard) and Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess); and are
                                                              shipped in transparent containers under sterile
                                                              conditions.
33.    plants with roots, planted or intended for planting, Official statement that:
       grown in the open air
                                                            (a) the site of production is known to be free from
                                                            Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus
                                                            (Spieckermann and Kotthoff) Davis et al. and
                                                            Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilbersky) Percival,
                                                              and
                                                              (b) the plants originate from a field known to be free
                                                              from Globodera pallida (Stone) Behrens and
                                                              Globodera rostochiensis (Wollenweber) Behrens.

34.    Growing medium, attached or associated with the Official statement that:
       plants, intended to maintain plant vitality, with the
                                                             (a) the growing medium, at the time of planting of those
       exception of sterile medium of in vitro plants,
                                                             plants:
       originating in non-European countries.




                                          73
                                                               (i) was free of soil and organic matter and had not
                                                              previously been used for growing plants or for any
                                                              agricultural purposes;
                                                              or
                                                              (ii) was composed entirely of peat or fiber of Cocos
                                                              nucifera L. and had not previously been used for
                                                              growing plants or for any agricultural purposes;
                                                              or
                                                              (iii) has undergone an effective treatment to ensure
                                                              freedom from harmful organisms, and the treatment
                                                              details shall        be indicated on the phytosanitary
                                                              certificates in the "additional declaration" section.
                                                              and
                                                              in all the abovementioned cases, it was kept and
                                                              maintained under appropriate conditions to preserve
                                                              the freedom from harmful organisms
                                                              and
                                                              (b) since planting:
                                                              (i) appropriate measures have been taken to ensure
                                                              that no harmful organisms are present in the growing
                                                              medium, including at least:
                                                              - physical isolation of the growing medium from soil
                                                              and other possible sources of pollution,
                                                              - hygienic measures,
                                                              - use of water free from harmful organisms,
                                                              or
                                                              (ii) two weeks prior to export, the soil was completely
                                                              removed from the growing medium by washing, using
                                                              water free from harmful organisms. Re-planting can be
                                                              done in a growing medium that meets the
                                                              requirements set out in point (a). Appropriate
                                                              conditions shall be maintained to keep the absence of
                                                              harmful organisms, as set out in point (b).

34.1.   Bulbs, corms, rhizomes and tubers, intended for       Without prejudice to the requirements of the provisions
        planting, except tubers of Solanum tuberosum,         applicable to List IV Part A Section 1 point (30), an
        originating in third countries other than EU Member   official statement that the consignment or lot does not
        States, as well as Serbia, Albania, Montenegro,       contain more than 1% of the net weight of soil and
        Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova and
                                                              growing medium
        Great Britain Switzerland, Turkey, Egypt, Ukraine.
34.2.   Tubers of Solanum tuberosum, originating in third Without prejudice to the requirements with the
        countries other than EU Member States, as well as provisions applicable to List III Part A, points (15), (16)
        Serbia, Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and and (17) and List IV, Part A, Section 1, points (25.1.),


                                           74
        Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Great Britain, an (25.2.), (25.3.) , (25.4.1.) And (25.4.2.), an official
        Switzerland, Turkey, Egypt, Ukraine.            statement that the consignment or lot does not contain
                                                        more than 1% of the net weight of soil and growing
                                                        medium.


34.3    Root and tubercle vegetables from third countries,      Without prejudice to the requirements of the provisions
        other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,         applicable to List III Part A points (15), (16) and (17),
        Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina,            an official statement that the consignment or lot does
        Kosovo, Moldova, Great Britain and Switzerland,         not contain more than 1% by weight of soil and
        Turkey, Egypt, Ukraine
                                                                growing medium

34.4.   Machinery and vehicles operated for agricultural or     Without prejudice to the requirements of the provisions
        forestry purposes, imported from third countries        applicable to List III, Part A, point (19), an official
        other than EU member states, as well as Serbia,         statement that the machinery or vehicles have been
        Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina,            cleaned and free romf soil and plant debris.
        Kosovo, Moldova, Great Britain and Switzerland,
        Turkey, Ukraine.

35.1.   plants of Beta vulgaris L. intended for planting, other Official statement that no symptoms of Beet curly top
        than seeds                                              virus (non - European isolates) have been observed at
                                                                the site of production since the beginning of the last
                                                                complete vegetation cycle.

35.2.   Plants of Beta vulgaris L. intended for planting, Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
        other than seeds, originating in countries where the plants in List lV part A section 1 point (35.1), an official
        Beet curly top virus is known to occur.              statement that:
                                                                (a) the beet leaf curl virus is not known to occur in the
                                                                area of production;
                                                                and
                                                                (b) no symptoms of Beet leaf curl virus have been
                                                                observed at or near the site of production since the
                                                                beginning of the last full vegetation cycles.

36.1    Plants intended for planting, other than:               Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
                                                                plants in List IV Part A Section 1, points (27.1), (27.2),
        - bulbs,
                                                                (28) and (29), (31), (32.1) and (32.3), an official
        - corms,                                                statement that plants were grown in nurseries and:
        - rhizomes,                                             (a) originate in an area which the National Plant
        - seeds.                                                Protection Organization of the exporting country has
                                                                determined to be free from Thrips palmi (Karny), in
        - tubers                                                accordance with the relevant International Standards
        originating in third countries.                         for Phytosanitary Measures, and this is stated in the
                                                                certificates in the section "additional declaration ",
                                                                or
                                                                (b) originate at a place of production which the
                                                                National Plant Protection Organization of the exporting
                                                                country has determined to be free from Thrips



                                            75
                                                            palmiKarny in accordance with the relevant
                                                            international standards for phytosanitary measures,
                                                            and this is stated in the phytosanitary certificates in the
                                                            "additional declaration" section, and has been
                                                            declared free from Thrips palmi Karny during the
                                                            official inspections carried out at least once a month
                                                            during the three months prior to export,
                                                            (c) immediately prior to export, have undergone
                                                            appropriate treatment against Thrips palmi Karny and
                                                            have been officially inspected and found to be free
                                                            from Thrips palmi Karny. The details of the treatment
                                                            shall be stated on the phytosanitary certificates,
                                                            or
                                                            (d) originate from plant material (explant) free from
                                                            Thrips palmi Karny; grown in vitro in a sterile medium
                                                            and under sterile conditions which excludes the
                                                            possibility of infection with Thrips palmi Karny; and are
                                                            shipped in transparent containers under sterile
                                                            conditions.

36.2   Cut flowers from Orchidaceae and fruits from Official statement that the cut flowers and fruits:
       Momordica L. and Solanum melongena L.,
                                                    - originate in a country free from Thrips palmi Karny
       originating in non-European countries.
                                                    or
                                                            - immedtiately prior to their export, were officially
                                                            inspected and found to be free from Thrips palmi
                                                            Karny.

36.3   Fruits of Capsicum L. originating in Belize, Costa   Official statement that the fruits:
       Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala,
       Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama,        (a) originate in an area free from Anthonomus eugenii
       Puerto Rico, USA and French Polynesia where          Cano established by the National Plant Protection
       Anthonomus eugeniiCano is known to occur             Organization in the country of origin, in accordance
                                                            with the relevant International Standards for
                                                            Phytosanitary Measures, and this is indicated in the
                                                            Phytosanitary Certificates in the "Additional
                                                            Declaration" section


                                                            or
                                                            (b) originate at a place of production established by the
                                                            National Plant Protection Organization of the exporting
                                                            country as free from Anthonomus eugenii Cano, in
                                                            accordance with the relevant International Standards
                                                            for Phytosanitary Measures, and this indicated in the
                                                            phytosanitary certificates in the "additional
                                                            declaration” section, during the official inspections
                                                            carried out at least once a month during the two



                                        76
                                                              months prior to export, at the place of production and
                                                              its immediate vicinity.

37.    plants of Palmae L., intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the prohibitions applicable to the
       than seeds, originating in non-European countries plants in List lII part A point (13), an official statement
                                                         that:
                                                              (a) the plants originate in an area free from Palm lethal
                                                              mycoplasm and Cadang-Cadang viroid, and no
                                                              symptoms have been observed at the site of
                                                              production or in its immediate vicinity since the
                                                              beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle;
                                                              or
                                                              (b) no symptoms of Palm lethal mycoplasm and
                                                              Cadang-Cadang viroid have been observed in plants
                                                              since the beginning of the last complete vegetation
                                                              cycle, and plants which have shown symptoms at the
                                                              site of productiongiving rise to the suspicion of the
                                                              presence of harmful organisms have been removed
                                                              from that place and the plants have undergone
                                                              appropriate treatment to rid them of Myndus crudus
                                                              Van Duzee,
                                                              (c) In the case of plants in tissue culture, the plants
                                                              were derived from plants which fulfilled the conditions
                                                              laid down in (a) or (b).
37.1   plants of Palmae, intended for planting, with a stem   Without prejudice to the prohibitions applicable to the
       diameter of over 5 cm at the base and belonging to     plants in List lII part A point 13 and the requirements
       the following genera: Brahea Mart., Butia Becc.,       given in List IV part A section 1 point (37), an official
       Chamaerops L., Jubaea Kunth, Livistona R. Br.,         statement that the plants:
       Phoenix L., Sabal Adans., Syagrus Mart.,
                                                              (a) have been grown throughout their lifet in a country
       Trachycarpus H. Wendl., Trithrinax Mart.,
                                                              where Paysandisia archon (Burmeister) is not known
       Washingtonia Raf.
                                                              to occur, or
                                                              (b) have been grown during their life in an area free
                                                              from Paysandisia archon (Burmeister), established by
                                                              the National Plant Protection Organization in
                                                              accordance with the relevant International Standards
                                                              for Phytosanitary Measures; or
                                                              (c) have been grown, for a period of at least two years
                                                              prior to export, at a place of production:
                                                              - which is registered and supervised by the National
                                                              Plant Protection Organization in the country of origin;
                                                              - where the plants were placed in a site with complete
                                                              physical protection against the introduction of
                                                              Paysandisia archon (Burmeister) or with the
                                                              application of appropriate preventive treatments, and




                                          77
                                                               - where during three official inspections, carried out
                                                               annually at the appropriate time, including just prior to
                                                               export, no signs of Paysandisia archon (Burmeister)
                                                               have been observed.
38.2.   Plants of Fuchsia L. intended for planting, other than Official statement that no symptoms of Aculops
        seeds, originating in the USA or Brazil.               fuchsiae Keifer have been observed at the site of
                                                               production and that immediately prior to their export,
                                                               the plants were inspected and found to be free from
                                                               Aculops fuchsiae Keifer.

39.     Trees and shrubs intended for planting, other than     Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        seeds and plants in tissue culture, originating in     plants in List III Part A, points (1), (2), (3), (8), (9), (10),
        third countries other than European countries and      (11), (12), ( 13) and List IV Part A section 1, points
        Gibraltar, Turkey, Cyprus, Syria, Lebanon, Israel,     (8.1), (8.2), (9), (10), (11.1), (11.2), (12), (13.1), (13.2),
        Palestine, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco .   (14) , (15), (17), (18), (19.1), (19.2), (20), (22.1), (22.2),
                                                               (23.1), (23.2), (24), (25.5), ( 25.6), (26), (27.1), (27.2),
                                                               (28), (29), (32.1), (32.2), (33), (34), (36.1), (36.2), (37)
                                                               , (38.1) and (38.2), an official statement that the plants:
                                                               - are clean (ie free from plant debris) and free from
                                                               flowers and fruits,
                                                               - were grown in nurseries,
                                                               - have been inspected at appropriate times and prior
                                                               to export have been found to be free from symptoms
                                                               of harmful bacteria, viruses and virus-like organisms,
                                                               and have either been found to be free from signs or
                                                               symptoms of harmful nematodes, insects, mites and
                                                               fungi, or have been subjected to appropriate treatment
                                                               for the destruction of such organisms.

40.     Deciduous trees and shrubs intended for planting,      Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        other than seeds and plants in tissue culture,         plants in List III, Part A, points (2), (3), (8), (9), (11),
        originating in all countries other than European       (12) and List IV, Part A, section 1, items ( 11.1), (11.2),
        countries and Gibraltar, Turkey, Cyprus, Syria,        (11.3), (12), (13.1), (13.2), (14), (17), (18), (19.1),
        Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia,
                                                               (19.2), (20), (22.1) , (22.2), (23.1), (23.2), (24), (33),
        Algeria, Morocco .
                                                               (36.1), (38.1), (38.2), (39) and (45.1) where
                                                               appropriate, an official statement that the plants are
                                                               dormant and have no leaves
41.     Annual and biennial plants, other than Gramineae       Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
        (Poaceae), intended for planting, other than seeds,    plants in List lII part A point 14 and List IV part A
        originating in all countries other than European       section 1 points (25.5), (25.6), (32.1), (32.2), (32.3),
        countries and Gibraltar, Turkey, Cyprus, Syria,        (33), (34), (35.1) and (35.2), an official statement that
        Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia,     the plants:
        Algeria, Morocco.
                                                               - were grown in nurseries,
                                                               - are free from plant debris, flowers and fruits,
                                                               - were inspected at the appropriate time and prior to
                                                               export and,



                                           78
                                                                - were found to be free from symptoms of harmful
                                                                bacteria, viruses and virus like organisms, and
                                                                - or have been found to be free from signs or
                                                                symptoms of harmful nematodes, insects, mites and
                                                                fungi, or have been subjected to an appropriate
                                                                treatment to destroy such organisms. at the
                                                                appropriate time and prior to export.
42.   Plants of the family Gramineae (Poaceae), of              Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
      ornamental perennial grasses of the subfamilies           plants in List lV part A section 1 points (33) and (34) ,
      Bambusoideae, Panicoideae and of the genera               an official statement that the plants:
      Buchloe, Bouteloua Lag., Calamagrostis,
                                                                - were grown in nurseries,
      Cortaderia Stapf., Glyceria R. Br., Hakonechloa
      Mak. ex Honda, Hystrix, Molinia, Phalaris L.,             and
      Shibataea, Spartina Schreb., Stipa L. и Uniola L.
      intended for planting other than seeds, originating in    - are free from plant debris, flowers and fruits,
      all countries except European countries and               and
      Gibraltar, Turkey, Cyprus, Syria, Lebanon, Israel,
      Palestine, Egypt, Lybia, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco        were inspected prior to export, and
                                                                - were found to be free from symptoms of harmful
                                                                bacteria, viruses and virus like organisms,
                                                                and
                                                                - or have been found to be free from signs or
                                                                symptoms of harmful nematodes, insects, mites and
                                                                fungi, or have been subjected to an appropriate
                                                                treatment to destroy such organisms.


43.   Naturally or artificially dwarfed plants intended for Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
      planting, other than seeds, originating in non- plants in List III Part A, points (1), (2), (3), (8), (9), (10),
      European countries.                                   (11), (12), ( 13) and List IV Part A section 1, points
                                                            (8.1), (8.2), (9), (10), (11.1), (11.2), (12), (13.1), (13.2),
                                                            (14) , (15), (17), (18), (19.1), (19.2), (20), (22.1), (22.2),
                                                            (23.1), (23.2), (24), (25.5), ( 25.6), (26), (27.1), (27.2),
                                                            (28), (29), (32.1), (32.2), (33), (34), (36.1), (36.2), (37),
                                                            (38.2), (39), (40) and (42), where appropriate, an
                                                            official statement that:
                                                                (a) plants, including those collected from natural
                                                                habitats, have been grown, maintained and adapted
                                                                for at least two consecutive years prior to distribution
                                                                in officially registered nurseries, which are subject to
                                                                an official supervision
                                                                (b) the nursery plants referred to in point (a) shall:
                                                                (aa) during the period referred to in point (a):
                                                                - were placed in pots, which are put on shelves at least
                                                                50 cm above the ground,



                                           79
     - have been subjected to appropriate treatments in
     order to ensure freedom from non-European rusts: the
     active substance, concentration and date of
     application of these treatments should be stated on the
     phytosanitary certificate in the section "disinsection
     and / or disinfection".
     - have been officially inspected at least six times a year
     at appropriate intervals for the presence of relevant
     harmful organisms. Also, these inspections should be
     carried out on the plants in the immediate vicinity of
     the nurseries referred to in point (a), shall be carried
     out at least by visual inspection of each row in the field
     or nursery and by visual inspection of all parts of the
     plant above the growing medium, using a random
     sample of at least 300 plants from a given genus,
     where the number of plants of that genus is not more
     than 3,000 plants, or 10% of the plants, if there are
     more than 3,000 plants of that genus;
     - were found to be free from relevant harmful
     organisms during the inspections, as stated in the
     previous indent. Infested plants have been removed. If
     necessary, the remaining plants will be treated and
     additionally retained for an appropriate period of time
     and inspected to ensure that they are free of the
     relevant harmful organisms,
      - were planted either in unused artificial growing
     medium or in a natural growing medium which has
     been treated with fumigation or by appropriate heat
     treatment and has been free from any harmful
     organisms,
     - have been stored in conditions that guarantee that
     the growing medium has been maintained free from
     harmful organisms and within two weeks prior to
     distribution have been:
     - shaken and washed with clean water to remove the
     original growing medium and kept bare rooted, or,
     - shaken and washed with clean water to remove the
     original growing medium and transplanted into a
     growing medium which satisfies the conditions laid
     down in (aa) fifth indent,
     or
     - subjected to appropriate treatments to ensure that
     the growing medium is free from harmful organisms,
     the active substance, concentration and date of
     application of these treatments should be stated on the




80
                                                             phytosanitary certificate in the section "disinsection
                                                             and / or disinfection".
                                                             (bb) shall be packed in sealed containers that have
                                                             been officially sealed and bear the registration number
                                                             of the registered nursery: this number shall also be
                                                             indicated in the "Additional Declaration" section of the
                                                             Phytosanitary        Certificate,    through      which
                                                             consignments can be identified.

44.    Herbaceous perennial plants intended for planting,    Without prejudice to the provisions applicable to the
       other than seeds, from the families Caryophyllaceae   plants in List lV part A section 1 points (32.1). (32.2),
       (освен Dianthus L.), Compositae (освен                (32.3), (33), and (34)), an official statement that the
       Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul.), Cruciferae,            plants:
       Leguminosae and Rosaceae (except Fragaria L.),
       originating from all countries except European        - have been grown in nurseries, and
       countries and Gibraltar, Turkey, Cyprus, Syria,
       Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia,    - are free from plant debris, flowers and fruits, and
       Algeria, Morocco.
                                                             - were inspected at the appropriate time and prior to
                                                             export and,
                                                             - were found to be free from symptoms of harmful
                                                             bacteria, viruses and virus like organisms,
                                                             and
                                                             - or have been found to be free from signs or
                                                             symptoms of harmful nematodes, insects, mites and
                                                             fungi, or have been subjected to an appropriate
                                                             treatment to destroy such organisms.

45.1   Plants of herbaceous species and plants of Ficus L.   Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
       and Hibiscus L., intended for planting, other than    plants in List lV part A section 1 points (27.1) ,(27.2)
       bulbs, rhizomes, seeds and tubers, originating in     (28), (29), (32.1), (32.3) and (36.1) an official
       non-European countries.                               statement that the plants:
                                                             (a) originate in an area established by the National
                                                             Plant Protection Organization of the exporting country
                                                             as free from Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non-European
                                                             populations) in accordance with the relevant
                                                             International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures,
                                                             and this is stated in the phytosanitary certificates
                                                             under the section "additional declaration",
                                                             or
                                                             (b) originate at a place of production, established by
                                                             the National Plant Protection Organization of the
                                                             exporting country, to be free from Bemisia tabaci
                                                             Genn. (non - European populations) in accordance
                                                             with the relevant International Standards for
                                                             Phytosanitary Measures, and this is stated in the
                                                             phytosanitary certificates in the "Additional
                                                             Declaration" section, through official inspections
                                                             carried out at least once every three weeks during the


                                         81
                                                               nine weeks prior to export.
                                                               or
                                                               (c) in cases where Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non -
                                                               European populations) have been found at the place
                                                               of production, are held or produced at this place of
                                                               production and subjected to appropriate treatment to
                                                               ensure that they are free from Bemisia tabaci Genn.
                                                               (non - European populations) and subsequently this
                                                               place of production shall have been found to be free
                                                               from Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non-European
                                                               populations) as a result of the implementation of
                                                               appropriate procedures intended for the eradication of
                                                               Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non-European populations) and
                                                               ny official inspections, carried out weekly during the
                                                               nine weeks prior to export and in monitoring
                                                               procedures during the said period. Details of the
                                                               treatment shall be indicated on the phytosanitary
                                                               certificates.
                                                               or
                                                               (d) originate from plant material (explant) which is free
                                                               from Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non - European
                                                               populations); have been grown in vitro in a sterile
                                                               medium under sterile conditions that exclude the
                                                               possibility of infestation with Bemisia tabaci Genn.
                                                               (non-European populations); and are shipped in
                                                               transparent containers under sterile conditions.

45.2.   Cut flowers from Aster spp., Eryngium L.,              Official statement that the cut flowers and leafy
        Gypsophila L., Hypericum L., Lisianthus L., Rosa L.,   vegetables:
        Solidago L., Trachelium L., and leafy vegetables
        from Ocimum L., originating in non - European          - originate in a country free from Bemisia tabaci Genn.
                                                               (non-European populations),
        countries.
                                                               or
                                                               - immediately prior to their export, were officially
                                                               inspected and found to be free from Bemisia tabaci
                                                               Genn. (non-European populations).

45.3.   Plants of Solanum lycopersicum L. intended for         Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
        planting, other than seeds, originating in countries   plants in List lll part A point (18) and List lV part A
        where Tomato yellow leaf curl virus is known to        section 1 points (25.5), (25.6) and (25.7) where
        occur                                                  necessary>\:
        a) where Bemisia tabaci Genn. does not occur
                                                               an official statement that no symptoms of Tomato
        (b) where Bemisia tabaci Genn. is known to occur       yellow leaf curl virus were observed on the plants
                                                               Official statement that:
                                                                no symptoms of Tomato yellow leaf curl virus were
                                                               observed on the plants



                                           82
                                                            and
                                                                 (aa) the plants originate in areas known to be free
                                                                 from Bemisia tabaci Genn., or
                                                                 (bb) the place of manufacture has been determined
                                                                 to be free from Bemisia tabaci Genn. by official
                                                                 inspections conducted at least once a month,
                                                                 during the three months prior to export.
                                                            or
                                                            (b) no symptoms of Tomato yellow leaf curl virus have
                                                            been observed on the plants at the place of production
                                                            and the place of production was subject to appropriate
                                                            treatment and monitoring regimen to ensure that it was
                                                            free from Bemisia tabaci Genn.

46   Plants intended for planting, other than seeds, bulbs, Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
     tubers and rhizomes, originating in countries where plants in List III Part A, point (18) and List IV Part A
     the relevant harmful organisms are known to occur. section 1, points (25.5), (25.6), (32.1), (32.2), (32.3),
     The relevant harmful organisms are:                    (35.1 ), (35.2), (44), (45.1), (45.2) and (45.3) as
                                                            appropriate.
     — Bean golden mosaic virus,
                                                            Official statement that no symptoms of relevant
     — Cowpea mild mottle virus,                            harmful organisms on plants were observed during
     — Lettuce infectious yellow virus,                     their complete vegetation cycle
     — Pepper mild tigré virus,                             An official statement that no symptoms of the relevant
                                                            harmful organisms have been observed on the plants
     — Squash leaf curl virus,
                                                            during an adequate period,
     - other viruses transmitted by
                                                            and
        Bemisia tabaci Genn.
                                                       (a) plants originate in areas known to be free from
     (a) where Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non - European Bemisia tabaci Genn. And other vectors of relevant
     populations) or other vectors of relevant harmful harmful organisms;
     organisms are not known to occur,
                                                       or
     (b) where Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non - European
     populations) or other vectors of relevant harmful (b) during official inspections carried out at appropriate
     organisms are known to occur,                     times, it has been established that the place of
                                                       production is free from Bemisia tabaci Genn. and other
                                                       vectors of the relevant harmful organisms
                                                            or
                                                            (c) the plants have undergone appropriate treatment
                                                            to eradicate Bemisia tabaci Genn;
                                                            or
                                                            (d) plants originate from plant material (explant) which
                                                            is free from Bemisia tabaci Genn. (non-European
                                                            populations) and which showed no symptoms of the
                                                            relevant harmful organisms; have been grown in vitro
                                                            in a sterile medium under sterile conditions which


                                        83
                                               excludes the possibility of infestation with Bemisia
                                               tabaci Genn. (non-European populations); and are
                                               shipped in transparent containers under sterile
                                               conditions.
47.    Seeds of Helianthus annuus L.           Official statement that:
                                               (a) The seeds originate in areas known to be free from
                                               Plasmopara halstedii (Farlow) Berl. and de Toni;
                                               or
                                               (b) seeds other than those produced from varieties
                                               resistant to all breeds of Plasmopara halstedii (Farlow)
                                               Berl. and de Toni present in the field of production,
                                               were subjected to appropriate treatment against
                                               Plasmopara halstedii (Farlow) Berl. and de Toni.

48.    Seeds of Solanum lycopersicum L.        Official statement that the seeds have been obtained
                                               by an appropriate acid extraction method or an
                                               equivalent method
                                               and
                                               (a) or the seeds originate in areas where Clavibacter
                                               michiganensis ssp. michiganensis (Smith) Davis et al.,
                                               Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria (Doidge) Dye
                                               and Potato spindle tuber viroid are not known to occur;
                                               or
                                               (b) no symptoms of diseases caused by these harmful
                                               organisms have been observed on the plants at the
                                               place of production during their complete vegetation
                                               cycle;
                                               or
                                               (c) the seeds have been subjected to official testing, at
                                               least for these harmful organisms, on a representative
                                               sample and using appropriate methods, and it has
                                               been determined by these tests that they are free from
                                               those harmful organisms.

49.1   Seeds of Medicago sativa L.             Official statement that:
                                               (a) no symptoms of Ditylenchus dipsaci (Kühn) Filipjev
                                               have been observed at the site of production from the
                                               beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle and
                                               that Ditylenchus dipsaci (Kühn) Filipjev was not
                                               detected during laboratory tests on a representative
                                               sample;
                                               or
                                               (b) fumigation has been applied prior to export



                                          84
                                                             or
                                                             (c) the seed undergoes appropriate physical treatment
                                                             against Ditylenchus dipsaci (Kühn) Filipjev and is
                                                             found to be free of this harmful organism after
                                                             laboratory tests on a representative sample.

49.2   Seeds of Medicago sativa L., originating in countries Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to the
       where Clavibacter michiganensis ssp. insidiosus plants in List lV part A section 1 point (49.1), an official
       Davis et al. is known to occur                        statement that:
                                                             (a) Clavibacter michiganensis ssp. Insidiosus Davis et
                                                             al. has not been known to occur on the farm or in its
                                                             immediate vicinity since the beginning of the last 10
                                                             years;
                                                             (b) or
                                                             - The crop has varieties that are recognized as highly
                                                             resistant to Clavibacter michiganensis ssp. insidiosus
                                                             Davis et al.,
                                                             or
                                                             - its fourth complete vegetation cycle from sowing had
                                                             not started, when the seeds were collected and there
                                                             was no more than one consecutive harvest of seeds
                                                             from the crop,
                                                             or
                                                             - the content of inert matter determined in accordance
                                                             with the rules applicable to the certification of seeds for
                                                             trade in the Republic of North Macedonia, does not
                                                             exceed 0.1% by weight;
                                                             (c) no symptoms of Clavibacter michiganensis
                                                             sspinsidiosus Davis et al. have been observed at the
                                                             place of production, or on any crop of Medicago sativa
                                                             L in the immediate vicinity. during the last complete
                                                             vegetation cycle or, where appropriate, the last two
                                                             vegetation cycles;
                                                             (d) the crop has been grown on land on which no
                                                             previous Medicago sativa L. crop has been present
                                                             during the last three years prior to sowing.

50.    Seeds of Oryza sativa L.                              Official statement that:
                                                             (a) the seed was officially tested by appropriate
                                                             nematological tests and found to be free fom
                                                             Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie;
                                                             or




                                          85
                                                           (b) the seeds have been subjected to an appropriate
                                                           hot water treatment or other appropriate treatment
                                                           against Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie

51    Seeds of Phaseolus L.                                Official statement that:
                                                           (a) the seed originates in areas known to be free from
                                                           Xanthomonas campestris pv.phaseoli (Smith) Dye;
                                                           or
                                                           (b) a representative sample of the seed has been
                                                           tested and found to be free from Xanthomonas
                                                           campestris pv. phaseoli (Smith) Dye.
52.   seeds of Zea mays                                    Official statement that:
                                                           (a) the seeds originate in areas free from Erwinia
                                                           stewartii (Smith) Dye;
                                                           or
                                                           (b) a representative sample of the seeds has been
                                                           tested and found to be free from Erwinia stewartii
                                                           (Smith) Dye in these tests.
53.   Seeds of the genera Triticum, Secale and        X Official statement that the seeds originate in an area
      Triticosecale from Afghanistan, India, Iran, Iraq, free from Tilletia indica Mitra. The name of the area
      Mexico, Nepal, Pakistan, South Africa and the USA shall be stated on the phytosanitary certificate.
      where Tilletia indica Mitra is known to occur


54.   Grains of the genus Triticum, Secale X Triticosecale Official statement that:
      from Afghanistan, India, Iran, Iraq, Mexico, Nepal,
      Pakistan, South Africa and the USA where Tilletia either
      indica Mitra is known to occur.
                                                           (a) the grains originate in an area free from Tilletia
                                                           indica Mitra. The name of the area should be stated on
                                                           the phytosanitary certificate in the section "place of
                                                           origin"
                                                           or
                                                           (b) no symptoms of Tilletia indica Mitra have been
                                                           observed on the plants at the place of production
                                                           during the last complete vegetation cycle and by
                                                           testing representative samples of the grains, taken
                                                           both at harvest time and before dispatch, and were
                                                           found to be free from Tilletia indica Mitra ;. The above
                                                           mentioned should be stated on the phytosanitary
                                                           certificate, in the section "product name" as "tested
                                                           and free from Tilletia indica Mitra".

55.   plants of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds Official statement that:
      originating in European countries
                                                      (a) the plants originate and have been grown at a
                                                      production site in a country where the presence of



                                        86
     Scaphoideus titanus | Grapevine flavescence dorée
     MLO has not been established
     or
     (b) the plants originate and have been grown at a place
     of production in an area free from Scaphoideus titanus
     | Grapevine flavescence dorée MLO, determined by
     the National Plant Protection Organization (NPPO) in
     accordance with the relevant International Standards
     for Phytosanitary Measures;
     or
      (c) the plants originate and have been grown at a
     place of production where:
     (aa) no symptoms of Scaphoideus titanusGrapevine
     flavescence dorée MLO have been observed on
     mother plants from the beginning of the last two
     vegetation cycles;
     or
     (bb)
     (i) no symptoms of Scaphoideus titanusGrapevine
     flavescence dorée MLO have been observed on plants
     at the place of production:
     or
     (ii) the plants have been subjected to hot water
     treatment of at least 50 ° C for 45 minutes in order to
     eliminate the presence of Scaphoideus titanus |
     Grapevine flavescence dorée MLO.




87
                                                     LIST IV
                                                     Part A
Special phytosanitary requirements that must be met as a condition for import or movement of plants,
plant products and other objects and items on the entire territory of the Republic of North Macedonia
                                                    Section 2
     Plants, plant products and other objects and items originating in the Republic of North Macedonia


            Plants, plant products and other objects and Special phytosanitary requirements
            items

2.          Wood of Platanus L., including wood that has not Official statement that the wood
            kept its natural round surface.
                                                             (a) originates in areas free from Ceratocystis platani
                                                             Walter
                                                                or
                                                                (b) There shall be evidence thereof by a mark "Kiln-
                                                                Dried", or "KD" or other internationally recognized
                                                                mark put on the wood or on its packaging in
                                                                accordance with the current commercial use, having
                                                                undergone kiln-drying to below 20% of moisture,
                                                                expressed as a percentage of dry matter, at the time
                                                                of production, achieved through an appropriate time /
                                                                temperature schedule.

2.1         Whether or not they are listed in the CN codes of Official statement that the wood
            List V Part A, wood of JuglansL, and
                                                                 (a) originates in an area known to be free from:
            PterocaryaKunth, other than in the form of:
                                                                 Geosmithia morbida Kolarík, Freeland, Utley &
                 - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood Tisserat and its vector Pityophthorus juglandis
                     waste and scrap obtained in whole or in Blackman, established by a competent authority in
                     part from these plants,                     accordance with the relevant International Standards
                 - wood packaging material, in the form of for Phytosanitary Measures,
                     packing cases, boxes,, crates, drums and
                                                                 or
                     similar packaging, pallets, box pallets and
                     other load boards, pallet collars, (b) has undergone adequate heat treatment to
                     dunnage, whether or not used in the achieve a temperature of at least 56 ° C for at least
                     transport of objects of all types except 40 continuous minutes throughout the entire profile of
                     dunnage supporting consignments of the wood. There shall be evidence thereof by a mark
                     wood, made of wood of the same type "HT" put on the wood or on the packaging in
                     and quality as the wood in the accordance with the current usage.
                     consignment and which meets the same
                     phytosanitary requirements of the
                     Republic of North Macedonia as the wood or
                     in the consignment,
                                                                 (c) has been squared to completely remove the
            but including wood that has not kept its natural natural rounded surface.
            round surface.




                                               88
2.2   Whether or not listed in the CN codes of List V Part Official statement that the wood or the isolated bark:
      A, isolated bark and wood of JuglansL, and
                                                           (a) originates in an area free from Geosmithia
      PterocaryaKunth, in the form of:
                                                           morbida Kolarík, Freeland, Utley & Tisserat and its
          - chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood vector           Pityophthorus     juglandis     Blackman,
               waste and scrap obtained in whole or in established by a competent authority in accordance
               part from these plants,                     with relevant international standards for
                                                           phytosanitary measures
                                                             or
                                                             (b) has undergone adequate heat treatment to
                                                             achieve a temperature of at least 56 ° C for at least
                                                             40 continuous minutes throughout the entire profile of
                                                             the wood. There shall be evidence thereof by a mark
                                                             "HT" put on the wood or on the packaging in
                                                             accordance with the current usage.

2.3   Wood packaging material, in the form of packing        Wood packaging material:
      cases, boxes, crates, drums and similar packings,
                                                             (a) shall originate in an area free from Geosmithia
      pallets, box pallets and other load boards, pallet
                                                             morbida Kolarík, Freeland, Utley & Tisserat and its
      collars, dunnage used in the transport of objects of
                                                             vector     Pityophthorus     juglandis    Blackman,
      all types except raw wood of 6 mm thickness or
                                                             established by a competent authority in accordance
      less, processed wood produced by glue, heat and
                                                             with the relevant international standards for
      pressure, or a combination thereof, and dunnage
                                                             phytosanitary measures
      supporting consignments of wood, which is
      constructed of wood of the same type and quality       or
      as the wood in the consignment and which meets
      the same phytosanitary requirements of Republic        (b) is made of debarked wood as referred to in Annex
      of North Macedonia, as well as the wood in the         I to FAO International Phytosanitary Standard No. 15
      consignment                                            on Guidelines for the Regulation of wood packaging
                                                             material in International Trade
                                                             was subjected to one of the approved treatments
                                                             listed in Annex I of the International Standard, and
                                                             - was marked with a mark, as stated in Annex II of
                                                             that phytosanitary standard, for which it is stated that
                                                             the wood packaging material was subjected to an
                                                             approved phytosanitary standard in accordance with
                                                             this standard.

4.    Plants of Pinus L. intended for planting, other than Official statement that no symptoms of Scrirrhia pini
      seeds                                                Funk and Parker have been observed at the place of
                                                           production or in its immediate vicinity since the start
                                                           of the last complete vegetation cycle.

5.    Plants from Abies Mill., Larix Mill., Picea A. Dietr., Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
      Pinus L., Pseudotsuga Carr. and Tsuga Carr., the plants in List lV part A section 2 point (4), an
      intended for planting, other than seeds                official statement that no symptoms of Melampsora
                                                             medusae Thumen have been observed at the place
                                                             of production or its immediate vicinity from the
                                                             beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.




                                          89
6.    plants of Populus L. intended for planting, other Official statement that no symptoms of Melampsora
      than seeds                                        medusae Thümen have been observed at the place
                                                        of production or in its immediate vicinity since the
                                                        start of the last complete vegetation cycle.
7.    Plants from Castanea Mill. And Quercus L., Official statement that:
      intended for planting, other than seeds.
                                                 (a) the plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                 Cryphonectria parasitica (Murrill) Barr,
                                                         or
                                                         (b) no symptoms of Cryphonectria parasitica (Murrill)
                                                         Barr have been observed at the place of production
                                                         or in its immediate vicinity since the start of the last
                                                         complete vegetation cycle.

7.1   Plants of Juglans L. and Pterocarya Kunth, Official statement that the plants for planting:
      intended for planting, other than seeds
                                                 (a) have been grown, throughout their life cycle or
                                                 since their introduction into the Republic of North
                                                 Macedonia, at a place of production free from
                                                 Geosmithia morbida Kolarík, Freeland, Utley &
                                                 Tisserat and its vector Pityophthorus juglandis
                                                 Blackman, as determined by a competent authority in
                                                 accordance with the relevant International Standards
                                                 for Phytosanitary Measures,
                                                         or
                                                         (b) originate at a place of production, including its
                                                         immediate vicinity of a 5 km radius, where no
                                                         symptoms of Geosmithia morbida Kolarík, Freeland,
                                                         Utley & Tisserat and its vector Pityophthorus
                                                         juglandis Blackman have been observed, and during
                                                         the official phytosanitary inspections, in the two years
                                                         prior to relocation, the plants for planting were visually
                                                         inspected before being relocated and packaged in
                                                         such a way as to prevent infestation after leaving the
                                                         production site;
                                                         or
                                                         (c) originate in a place of production with complete
                                                         physical isolation, and the plants for planting have
                                                         been visually inspected prior to movement and
                                                         packaged in such a way as to prevent infestation after
                                                         leaving the place of production.
8.    plants of Platanus L. intended for planting, other Official statement that:
      than seeds
                                                         (a) the plants originate in an area known to be free
                                                         from Ceratocystis platani Walter,
                                                         or



                                        90
                                                              (b) no symptoms of Ceratocystis platani Walter have
                                                              been observed at the place of production or its
                                                              immediate vicinity since the beginning of the last
                                                              complete vegetation cycle.
8.1   plants of Ulmus L. intended for planting, other than Official statement that no symptoms of Candidatus
      seeds                                                Phytoplasma ulmi have been observed at the place
                                                           of production or in its immediate vicinity since the
                                                           beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.
9.    Plants of Amelanchier Med., Chaenomeles Lindl.,         Official statement that:
      Cotoneaster Ehrh., Crataegus L., Cydonia Mill.,
                                                              (a) plants originate in areas recognized as free from
      Eriobotrya Lindl., Malus Mill., Mespilus L., Photinia
      davidiana (Dcne.) Cardot, Pyracantha Roem.,             Erwinia amylovora (Burr.) Winsl. et al .;
      Pyrus L. and Sorbus L., intended for planting, other    or
      than seeds
                                                              (b) that the plants showing symptoms of Erwinia
                                                              amylovora (Burr.) Winsl. et al. have been isolated and
                                                              removed from the production area or its immediate
                                                              vicinity.

10.   plants of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Official statement that:
      Raf., and their hybrids, other than fruits and seeds
                                                           (a) the plants originate in areas free from
                                                           Spiroplasma citri Saglio et al., Phoma tracheiphila
                                                           (Petri), Kanchaveli and Gikashvili, and Citrus tristeza
                                                           virus (European strains);
                                                              or
                                                              (б) the plants have been derived from a certification
                                                              scheme requiring them to be obtained directly from a
                                                              material which has been kept under appropriare
                                                              conditions and was subjected to an official individual
                                                              testing for at least Citrus tristeza virus (European
                                                              strains), using appropriate tests or approved methods
                                                              in accordance with the procedure, and have been
                                                              grown permanently in an insect-proof glasshouse or
                                                              in an isolated place, where no symtpoms
                                                              ofSpiroplasma citri Saglio et al., Phoma tracheiphila
                                                              (Pandri) Kanchaveli and Gikashvili, Citrus tristeza
                                                              virus (European strains), have been observed
                                                              or
                                                              (c) the plants:
                                                              - have been derived from a certification scheme
                                                              requiring them to be derived directly from material
                                                              kept under appropriate conditions and subjected to
                                                              official individual testing for at least Citrus tristeza
                                                              virus (European strains), using appropriate tests or
                                                              similar methods, approved in accordance with the
                                                              procedure and through these tests it was established
                                                              that they were free from Citrus tristeza


                                           91
                                                           virus(European strains), and certified to be free from
                                                           at least Citrus tristeza virus (European strains) by
                                                           official individual testing carried out according to the
                                                           methods mentioned in this indent,
                                                           and
                                                           - have been inspected and no symptoms of
                                                           Spiroplasma citri Saglio et al., Phoma tracheiphila
                                                           (Pandri) Kanchaveli et Gikashvili, and Citrus tristeza
                                                           virus (European strains), have been observed from
                                                           the beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.

10.1   Plants of Citrus L., Choisya Kunth, Fortunella      Official statement that the plants:
       Swingle, Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids and
       Casimiroa La Llave, Clausena Burm f., Murraya J.    (a) originate in an area free from Trioza erytreae Del
                                                           Guercio, established by the National Plant Protection
       Koenig ex L., Vepris Comm., Zanthoxylum L., other
       than fruits and seeds                               Organization in the country of origin, in accordance
                                                           with the relevant international standards for
                                                           phytosanitary measures
                                                           or
                                                           b) have been grown in a place of production
                                                           registered and supervised by the competent
                                                           authorities of the country of origin;
                                                           and
                                                           where the plants are placed in a site with complete
                                                           physical protection against the introduction of Trioza
                                                           erytreae Del Guercio,
                                                           and
                                                           where, during the last complete vegetation cycle,
                                                           before the plants were moved, two official controls
                                                           were carried out at an appropriate time period and no
                                                           symptoms of Trioza erytreae Del Guercio were
                                                           observed at the site or in its surrounding area within
                                                           a radius of at least 200 m

11.    Plants of Araceae, Marantaceae, Musaceae, Official statement that:
       Persea spp. and Strelitziaceae, rooted or with
                                                      (a) no infestation with Radopholus similis (Cobb)
       growing medium attached or associated
                                                      Thorne has been observed at the place of production
                                                      since the beginning of the last complete vegetation
                                                      cycle;
                                                           or
                                                           (b) the soil and roots of suspicious plants were
                                                           subjected to official nemathological tests since the
                                                           beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle for at
                                                           least Radopholus similis (Cobb) Thorne, and these
                                                           tests have shown that they are free of this harmful



                                         92
                                                         organism.

12.   Plants of Fragaria L., Prunus L. and Rubus L., Official statement that:
      intended for planting, other than seeds.
                                                     (a) the plants originate in areas known to be free of
                                                     the relevant harmful organisms;
                                                         or
                                                         (b) no symptoms of diseases caused by the relevant
                                                         harmful organisms have been observed at the site of
                                                         production or in its immediate vicinity since the
                                                         beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.
                                                         The relevant harmful organisms are:
                                                         for Fragaria L .:
                                                               -   Phytophthora fragariae Hickman
                                                                   var. Fragariae,
                                                               -   Arabis mosaic virus,
                                                               -   Raspberry ringspot virus,
                                                               -   Strawberry crinkle virus,
                                                               -   Strawberry latent ringspot virus,
                                                               -   Strawberry mild yellow edge virus,
                                                               -   Tomato black ring virus ,
                                                               -   Xanthomonas fragariae Kennedy and King,

                                                         on Prunus L .:
                                                               -   Apricot chlorotic mycoplas leafroll,
                                                               -   Xanthomonas arboricola pv. pruni (Smith),
                                                                   Vauterin et all.,

                                                          on Prunus persica (L.) Batsch:
                                                             - Pseudomonas syringae pv.                persicae
                                                                 (Prunier et al.) Young et al.,

                                                          on Rubus L .:
                                                               - Arabis mosaic virus,
                                                               - Raspberry ringspot virus,
                                                               - Strawberry latent ringspot virus,
                                                               - Tomato black ring virus.
13.   Plants of Cydonia Mill. and Pyrus L., intended for Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
      planting, other than seeds                         the plants in List lV part A section 2 point (9), an
                                                         official statement that:
                                                         (a) the plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                         Pear decline mycoplasma,
                                                          or
                                                         (b) plants at the place of production or in its
                                                         immediate vicinity which have shown symptoms of
                                                         suspected infection with Pear decline mycoplasm
                                                         have been removed from that place within the last


                                        93
                                                          three complete vegetation cycles.

14.   Plants of Fragaria L. intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
      than seeds                                         the plants in List lV part A section 2 point (12), an
                                                         official statement that:
                                                          (a) the plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                          Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie;
                                                          or
                                                          (б) no symptoms of infestation with Aphelenchoides
                                                          besseyi Christie have been observed in plants at the
                                                          place of production since the beginning of the last
                                                          complete vegetation cycle;
                                                          or
                                                          (b) plants in tissue culture, have been derived from
                                                          plants that have been officially tested by appropriate
                                                          nematological methods and were found to be free
                                                          from Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie.

15.   plants of Malus Mill. intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
      than seeds                                         the plants in List lV part A section 2 point (9), an
                                                         official statement that:
                                                          (a) plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                          Apple proliferation mycoplasm;
                                                          or
                                                          (b) (aa) the plants other than those raised from seed
                                                          have been:
                                                               - either officially certified under a certification
                                                               scheme requiring them to be derived in direct line
                                                               from material which has been maintained under
                                                               appropriate conditions and has been subjected
                                                               to an official testing for at least Apple proliferation
                                                               mycoplasm using appropriate tests or similar
                                                               methods and have been found to be free from
                                                               those harmful organisms,
                                                          or
                                                               - derived in direct line from material that was
                                                               maintained under appropriate conditions and
                                                               was subjected to, during the last six vegetation
                                                               cycles, to an official testing for Apple proliferation
                                                               mycoplasm using appropriate indicators or
                                                               similar methods and it was determined that the
                                                               plants are free from the relevant harmful
                                                               organism,
                                                          (bb) no symptoms of diseases caused by Apple



                                        94
                                                            proliferation mycoplasm have been observed on
                                                            plants at the place of production or on the susceptible
                                                            plants in its immediate vicinity since the beginning of
                                                            the last three full vegetation cycles.
16.   plants of the following species of Prunus L. Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
      intended for planting, other than seeds           the plants in List lV part A section 2 point (12), an
                                                        official statement that:
           - Prunus amygdalus Batsch,
           - Prunus armeniaca L.,                       (a) the plants originate in areas known to be free from
           - Prunus blireiana Andre,                    Plum pox virus;
           - Prunus brigantina Vill.,
                                                        or
           - Prunus cerasifera Ehrh.,
           - Prunus cistena Hansen,                     (b)
           - Prunus curdica Fenzl and Fritsch.,
           - Prunus domestica ssp. domestica L                 (aa) plants other than those grown from seeds
           - Prunus domestica ssp. insititia (L.)C.K.          were:
               Schneid,                                       - either officially certified under a certification
           - Prunus domestica (Borkh.) Hegi.,ssp.             scheme requiring them to be derived in direct line
               italica                                        from material which has been maintained under
           - Prunus glandulosa Thunb.,                        appropriate conditions and has been subjected
           - Prunus holosericea Batal.,                       to an official testing for at least Plum pox virus
           - Prunus hortulana Bailey,                         using appropriate indicators or equivalent
           - Prunus japonica Thunb.,                          methods and in these tests, have been found to
           - Prunus mandshurica Koehne,(Maxim.)               be free from that harmful organism,
           - Prunus maritima Marsh.,
           - Prunus mume Sieb. and Zucc.,               or
           - Prunus nigra Ait.,
                                                              - derived in direct line from material that was
           - Prunus persica (L.) Batsch,
                                                              maintained under appropriate conditions and
           - Prunus salicina L.,
                                                              was subjected to, during the last three vegetation
           - Prunus sibirica L.,
                                                              cycles, to an official testing at least for Plum pox
           - Prunus simonii Carr.,
                                                              virus using appropriate indicators or equivalent
           - Prunus spinosa L.,
                                                              methods and it was determined in these tests,
           - Prunus tomentosa Thunb.,
                                                              that the plants are free from the relevant harmful
           - Prunus triloba Lindl. and other species of
                                                              organism,
               Prunus L. susceptible to Plum pox virus.
                                                                (bb) no symptoms of diseases caused by Plum
                                                                pox virus have been observed at the place of
                                                                production or on the susceptible plants in its
                                                                immediate vicinity since the beginning of the
                                                                last three full vegetation cycles.
                                                                 (cc) plants which have shown symptoms of
                                                                 disease caused by other viruses or virus-like
                                                                 organisms at the place of production, have been
                                                                 removed and destroyed.

17.   plants of Vitis L., other than fruits and seeds       Official statement that no symptoms of Grapevine
                                                            Flavescence dorée MLO and Xylophilus ampelinus
                                                            (Panagopoulos) Willems et alhave been observed on
                                                            the mother-stock plants at the place of production
                                                            from the beginning of the last two complete



                                           95
                                                    vegetation cycles.

18.1.   Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L, intended for Official statement that:
        planting.
                                                    (a) the conditions for control of Synchytrium
                                                    endobioticum (Schilbersky) Percival are met;
                                                    and
                                                    (b) either the tubers originate in an area known to be
                                                    free from Clavibacter michiganensis ssp.
                                                    sepedonicus (Spieckermann and Kotthoff) Davis et
                                                    al. or that the conditions for the control of Clavibacter
                                                    michiganensis ssp. sepedonicus (Spieckermann
                                                    Kotthoff) Davis et al. have been met
                                                    and
                                                    c)
                                                        (aa) or, the tubers originate in areas where
                                                    Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al is
                                                    known not to occur.;
                                                    or
                                                        (bb) in areas where Ralstonia solanacearum
                                                    (Smith) Yabuuchi et al is known to occur, the tubers
                                                    should originate from a place of production, known to
                                                    be free from Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith)
                                                    Yabuuchi et al, or considered to be free as a result of
                                                    appropriate eradication measures for Ralstonia
                                                    solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al;
                                                    and
                                                    (d) or, the tubers originate in areas where
                                                    Meloidogyne chitwoodi Golden et al. (all populations)
                                                    and Meloidogyne fallax Karssen, are known not to
                                                    occur or in areas where Meloidogyne chitwoodi
                                                    Golden et al. (all populations) and Meloidogyne fallax
                                                    Karssen are known to occur:
                                                    - or the tubers originate at a place of production
                                                    known to be free from Meloidogyne chitwoodi Golden
                                                    et al. (all populations), and Meloidogyne fallax
                                                    Karssen, based on annual surveillance of host crops
                                                    by visual inspection of host plants at appropriate
                                                    times and by visual inspection both externally and by
                                                    cutting tubers after harvest, from potato crops grown
                                                    at the place of production
                                                    - the tubers after harvest have been randomly
                                                    sampled and either checked for symptoms (using an
                                                    appropriate symptom-inducing method), or tested in
                                                    a laboratory, and a visual inspection has been


                                     96
                                                                performed both externally and by cutting the tubers,
                                                                at appropriate times and in all cases at the time of
                                                                closing of the packages or containers before
                                                                marketing, and no symptoms of Meloidogyne
                                                                chitwoodi Golden et al. (all populations) and
                                                                Meloidogyne fallax Karssen have been observed
18.1.1   Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L., intended for           Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
         planting, other than those grown in accordance         tubers of Solanum tuberosum L., intended for
         with the Order for special supervision to determine    planting, in List IV, Part A, Section II ipoint (18.1), an
         the presence of cystolic nematodes Globodera           official statement that the conditions to combat
         pallida (Stone) Behrens and Globodera                  Globodera pallida (Stone) Behrens and Globodera
         rostochiensis (Wollenweber) Behrens in potatoes        rostochiensis (Wollenweber) Behrens have been met
         and the host plants determining their distribution,
         the measures to be taken in case of their
         occurrence, as well as the procedures for
         laboratory analysis (*) (Official Gazette of RM
         62/2017).

18.2.    Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L., intended for Without prejudice to the specal requirements
         planting, other than tubers of those varieties applicable to the tubers in List lV part A section 2
         officially accepted and listed in the general catalog point (18.1), an official statement that the tubers:
         of varieties of agricultural plant species.
                                                               - belong to advanced selections and such a
                                                               statement is indicated on the document
                                                               accompanying the tubers,
                                                                - have been grown on the territory of the Republic of
                                                                North Macedonia;
                                                                and
                                                                - have been derived in direct line from material that
                                                                has been maintained under appropriate conditions
                                                                and has been subjected to official testing by
                                                                appropriate methods in quarantine conditions, where
                                                                it has been determined that it is free from harmful
                                                                organisms.

18.3.    Plants of Solanum L forming stolons or tubers and      (a) The plants have been grown in quarantine
         its hybrids, intended for planting, other than those   conditions and found to be free from any harmful
         tubers of Solanum tuberosum L. listed in List IV       organisms during these tests;
         Part A section 2, points (18.1), or (18.2) and those
                                                                (b) tests in quarantine conditions refered to section
         obtained from tissue culture and stored in gene
                                                                (a):
         banks or genetic stock collections, and other than
         seeds of Solanum tuberosum L.specified in                    (aa) have been carried out under the supervision
         (18.3.1).                                                    of the National Plant Protection Organization
                                                                      executed by experts from that organization or
                                                                      any other authorized body;
                                                                      (bb) carried out in facilities with appropriate plant
                                                                      maintenance equipment with indicator plants in a




                                             97
         manner which eliminates any way of spread of
         harmful organisms;
         (cc) performed on each unit of material:
       - by visual examination at regular intervals, during
       the entire period of at least one vegetation cycle,
       taking into account the type of material and the
       stage of its development during the testing
       program, for symptoms caused by any harmful
       organism,
       - by testing, in accordance with appropriate
       methods,
       - in the case of potatoes in any form, at least for
     — Andean potato latent virus,
     — Arracacha virus B. oca strain,
     — Potato black ringspot virus,
     — Potato spindle tuber viroid,
     — Potato virus T,
     — Andean potato mottle virus,
     - Common potato viruses A, M, S, V, X and Y
     (including Yo, Yn and Yc) and
      Potato leaf roll virus,
     — Clavibacter michiganensis ssp. sepedonicus
     (Spieckermann and Kotthoff) Davis et al.,
     — Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al;
     - in the case of seeds of Solanum tuberosum L other
     than those specified i point (18.3.1) at least for the
     viruses and viroid listed above;
         (d) by appropriate testing on any other symptoms
         identified during the visual examination in order
         to identify the harmful organisms causing such
         symptoms;
     (c) any material which, through the tests referred to
     in section (b) of this point, has been found to be
     contaminated with the harmful organisms listed in
     section (b), has been immediately destroyed or
     subjected to procedures by which those harmful
     organisms have been removed; (and)
     (d) any organization or research body possessing
     such material must notify the competent authority of
     the country of origin.


98
18.3.1   Seeds of Solanum tuberosum L., other than those Official statement that:
         specified in (18.4).
                                                         Seeds have been derived from plants which meet the
                                                         requirements specified in points (18.1), (18.1.1),
                                                         (18.2) and (18.3),
                                                              and
                                                              (a) the seeds originate in areas free from Synchytrium
                                                              endobioticum (Schilbersky) Percival, Clavibacter
                                                              michiganensis ssp. sepedonicus (Spieckermann and
                                                              Kotthoff) Davis et al., Ralstonia solanacearum
                                                              (Smith) Yabuuchi et al. and Potato spindle tuber
                                                              viroid;
                                                              or
                                                              (b) the seeds meet all of the following requirements:
                                                              (i) have been grown in a site where no symptoms of
                                                              disease caused by the harmful organisms specified
                                                              in section (a) have been observed since the
                                                              beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle;
                                                              (ii) have been grown at a site where all of the
                                                              following measures have been met:
                                                              (1) separation of the site of prodcution of Solanaceae
                                                              plants and other host plants of Potato spindle tuber
                                                              viroid;
                                                              (2) prevention of contact with personnel and objects,
                                                              such as tools, machinery, vehicles, vessels and
                                                              packaging material, from other sites where
                                                              Solanaceae plants and other host plants of Potato
                                                              spindle tuber viroid,are produced, or appropriate
                                                              hygiene measures for staff or items from other sites
                                                              where Solanaceae plants and other host plants of
                                                              Potato spindle tuber viroidare grown, in order to
                                                              prevent infection,
                                                              (3) only if irrigation water is used which is free from
                                                              the harmful organisms specified in this point.

18.4.    Plants of Solanum L that form stolons or tubers, Any organization or research body possessing such
         and their hybrids intended for planting that have material should inform the national plant protection
         been stored in gene banks or genetic stock authority in its country.
         collections


18.5.    tubers of Solanum tuberosum L., other than those There shall be evidence by stating the registration
         specified in List IV Part A section 2, points (18.1), number on the packaging, or, in the case of unpacked
         (18.1.1), (18.2), (18.3) or (18.4).                   potatoes transported in bulk, on the means of



                                            99
                                                                transport it shall be indicated that the potatoes have
                                                                been grown by an officially registered producer, or
                                                                that they originate from an officially registered
                                                                collective storage, or distribution center located in the
                                                                production area, stating that the tubers are free from
                                                                Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al. and
                                                                that
                                                                (a) the conditions for preventing the occurrence and
                                                                spread of Synchytrium endobioticum (Schilbersky)
                                                                Percival have been met;
                                                                and
                                                                (b) as necessary, the conditions for preventing the
                                                                occurrence and spread of Clavibacter michiganensis
                                                                ssp. sepedonicus (Spieckermann and Kotthoff) Davis
                                                                et. al, have been met
                                                                (c) the conditions for preventing the occurrence and
                                                                spread of Globodera rostochiensis (Wollenweber)
                                                                Behrens and Globodera pallida (Stone) Behrens
                                                                have been met.
18.6.    Plants of Solanaceae, intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
         than seeds and other plants specified in List IV Part the plants specified in List lV part A section 2 points
         A Section 2, points (18.4) or (18.5).                 (18.1) ,(18.2) (18.3)
                                                                an official statement that:
                                                                (a) plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                                PotatPotato stolbur mycoplasm;
                                                                or
                                                                (б) no symptoms of infestation with Potato stolbur
                                                                mycoplasm have been observed in plants at the place
                                                                of production since the beginning of the last complete
                                                                vegetation cycle;

18.6.1   Plants with roots, intended for planting, from         Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
         Capsicum spp., Solanum lycopersicum L. and             plants specified in List IV Part A Section 2, point
         Solanum melongena L., except those planted in          (18.6), an official statement that the conditions for
         accordance with the Order for special surveillance     preventing the occurrence and spread of Globodera
         to determine the presence of cyst nematodes            pallida (Stone) Behrens and Globodera rostochiensis
         Globodera pallida (Stone) Behrens and Globodera        ( Wollenweber) Behrens have been met.
         rostochiensis (Wollenweber) Behrens in potatoes
         and their host plants, determination of their
         distribution, measures to be taken in the event of
         their occurrence, and laboratory analysis
         procedures (*) (Official Journal of the RM 62/2017).

18.7.    Plants of Capsicum annuum L., Lycopersicum Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
         lycopersicum (L.) Karsten ex Farw., Musa L., the plants specified in List lV part A section 2 point
         Nicotiana L., Solanum melongena L., intended for


                                            100
        planting, other than seeds.                            (18.6), depending on the case, an official statement
                                                               that:
                                                               (a) the plants originate in areas known to be free rom
                                                               Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith) Yabuuchi et al;
                                                               or
                                                               b) no symptoms of Ralstonia solanacearum (Smith)
                                                               Yabuuchi et alhave been observed on plants at the
                                                               place of production from the beginning of the last
                                                               complete vegetation cycle.

19.     plants of Humulus lupulus L., intended for planting, Official statement that no symptoms of Verticillium
        other than seeds                                     alboatrum Reinke and Berthold or Verticillum dahliae
                                                             Klebahn have been observed on hops at the place of
                                                             production from the beginning of the last complete
                                                             vegetation cycle.
19.1.   plants of Palmae, intended for planting, with a stem   Official statement that the plants:
        diameter of over 5 cm at the base and belonging to
                                                               (a) have been grown throughout their life in an area
        the following genera: Brahea Mart., Butia Becc.,
                                                               free from Paysandisia archon (Burmeister),
        Chamaerops L., Jubaea Kunth, Livistona R. Br.,
                                                               established by the National Plant Protection
        Phoenix L.,Sabal Adans., Syagrus Mart.,
                                                               Organization in accordance with the relevant
        Trachycarpus H. Wendl., Trithrinax Mart.,
                                                               International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures;
        Washingtonia Raf.
                                                               or
                                                               (b) have, during a period of at least two years prior to
                                                               movement, been grown at a place of production:
                                                               - Registered and supervised by the competent
                                                               authority in the country of origin, and
                                                               - were kept in a place with complete physical
                                                               protection against the introduction of Paysandisia
                                                               archon (Burmeister) or in a place where appropriate
                                                               preventive treatments have been applied, and
                                                               - where during three official inspections, carried out
                                                               annually at the appropriate time, no signs of
                                                               Paysandisia archon (Burmeister) have been
                                                               observed.

20.     Plants of Dendranthema (DC) Des Mpoul., Official statement that the plants:
        Dianthus L., and Pelargonium L l'Herit, ex Ait.,
                                                         (a) the plants originate in an area free from
        intended for planting, other than seeds.
                                                         Helicoverpa armigera (Hübner) and Spodoptera
                                                         littoralis (Boisd.), established by the National Plant
                                                         Protection Organization in accordance with the
                                                         relevant International Standards for Phytosanitary
                                                         Measures;
                                                               or




                                           101
                                                            (b) no signs of Helicoverpa armigera (Hübner), or
                                                            Spodoptera littoralis (Boisd.) have been observed at
                                                            the place of production since the beginning of the last
                                                            complete vegetation cycle;
                                                            or
                                                            (c) have undergone appropriate treatment tp protect
                                                            them against such organisms.

21.1.   plants of Dendranthema (DC.) Des Moul. intended Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
        for planting, other than seeds                  the plants specified in List lV part A section 2 point
                                                        (20), an official statement that:
                                                            (a) the plants are no more than third generation stock
                                                            derived from material which has been found be free
                                                            from Chrysanthemum stunt viroid, or, directly derived
                                                            from material of a representative sample of at least
                                                            10% which has been found to be free from
                                                            Chrysanthemum stunt viroid during anofficial
                                                            inspection conducted at the time of flowering,
                                                            (b) the plants or cuttings have come from places:
                                                            - which have been officially inspected at least monthly
                                                            during the three months prior to storage and during
                                                            that period no symptoms of infestation with Puccinia
                                                            horiana Hennings have been observed, and in the
                                                            immediate vicinity, of which no symptoms of Puccinia
                                                            horiana Hennings have been observed during the
                                                            three months before marketing,
                                                            or
                                                            - the consignments have been subjected to
                                                            appropriate treatment against Puccinia horiana
                                                            Hennings;
                                                            (c) in the case of unrooted cuttings, no symptoms of
                                                            Didymella ligulicola (Baker, Dimock and Davis) v. Arx
                                                            have been observed either on the cuttings or on the
                                                            plants from which the cuttings were obtained, or, in
                                                            the case of rooted cuttings, no symptoms of
                                                            Didymella ligulicola (Baker, Dimock and Davis) v. Arx
                                                            have been observed either on the cuttings or on the
                                                            rooting bed.

21.2.   plants of Dianthus L. intended for planting, other Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
        than seeds                                         the plants in List lV part A section 2 point (20), an
                                                           official statement that:
                                                            - the plants have been derived in direct line from
                                                            mother plants which have been found to be free from
                                                            Erwinia chrysanthemipv. dianthicola (Hellmers)
                                                            Dickey, Pseudomonas caryophylli (Burkholder) Starr



                                          102
                                                             and Burkholder and Phialophora cinerescens
                                                             (Wollenw.) Van Beyma through officially approved
                                                             tests, conducted at least once in the previous two
                                                             years,
                                                             - no symptoms on plants have been observed caused
                                                             by the above mentioned harmful organisms

22.   bulbs of Tulipa L. and Narcissus L., other than        Official statement that no symptoms of Ditylenchus
      those for which there is evidence by their             dipsaci (Kühn) Filipjev have been observed on the
      packaging, or by other means, that they are            plants since the beginning of the last complete
      intended for sale to final consumers not involved in   vegetation cycle
      the professional production of cut flowers.
23.   Plants of herbaceous species intened for planting, Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
      other than:                                        the plants specified in List lV part A section 2 points
                                                         (20) ,(21.1) or (21.2) an official statement that:
      - bulbs,
                                                         (a) plants originate in an area recognized as free from
      - corms,
                                                         Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard) and Liriomyza
      - plants of the family Gramineae,                  trifolii (Burgess),

      - rhizomes,                                            or

      - seeds.                                               (b) or at the place of production no signs of Liriomyza
                                                             huidobrensis (Blanchard) and Liriomyza trifolii
      - tubers                                               (Burgess have been found, confirmed through official
                                                             inspections carried out at least once a month during
                                                             the three months before harvest
                                                             or
                                                             (c) immediately prior to marketing, the plants were
                                                             officially checked and it was confirmed that they are
                                                             free from Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard) and
                                                             Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess), as well as that theywere
                                                             subjected to an adequate treatment against
                                                             Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard) and Liriomyza
                                                             trifolii (Burgess).
                                                             (d) plants are derived from plant material free from
                                                             Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard) and Liriomyza
                                                             trifolii (Burgess), grown in vitro, in a sterile medium
                                                             and under sterile conditions preventing an infestation
                                                             with Liriomyza huidobrensis (Blanchard) and
                                                             Liriomyza trifolii (Burgess); and transported in
                                                             transparent containers under sterile conditions.

24.   plants with roots, planted or intended for planting, There must be evidence that Clavibacter
      grown in the open air                                michiganensis spp. sepedonicus (Spieckermann and
                                                           Kotthoff) Davis at.al.,and Synchytrium endobioticum
                                                           (Schilbersky) Percival do not occur at the place of
                                                           production




                                         103
24.1    Plants with roots, intended for planting and grown     Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
        in the open air from Allium porrum L., Asparagus       plants specified in List IV Part A Section 2, point (24),
        officinalis L., Beta vulgaris L., Brassica spp. and    an evidence is needed that the conditions for
        Fragaria L.                                            compating Globodera pallida (Stone) Behrens and
                                                               Globodera rostochiensis ( Wollenweber) Behrens
        and
                                                               have been met.
        bulbs, tubers and rhizomes, grown in the open air
        from Allium ascalonicum L., Allium cepa L., Dahlia
        spp., Gladiolus Tourn. ex L., Hyacinthus spp., Iris
        spp., Lilium spp., Narcissus L. and Tulipa L.,
        excluding those plants, bulbs, tubers and rhizomes
        that are planted in accordance with
        the Order for special supervision to determine the
        presence of cyst nematodes Globodera pallida
        (Stone) Behrens and Globodera rostochiensis
        (Wollenweber) Behrens in potatoes and the host
        plants determining their distribution, the measures
        to be taken in case of their occurrence, as well as
        the procedures for laboratory analysis (*) (Official
        Gazette of RM 62/2017).

25.     plants of Beta vulgaris L. intended for planting, Official statement that:
        other than seeds
                                                          (a) Plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                          Beet leaf curl virus
                                                               or
                                                               (b) it is not known that the Beet leaf curl virus occurs
                                                               at the place of production and no symptoms of
                                                               infestation have been observed at the place of
                                                               production or in its immediate vicinity since the
                                                               beginning of the last complete vegetation cycle.

26.     Seeds of Helianthus annuus L.                          Official statement that:
                                                               (a) The seeds originate in areas known to be free
                                                               from Plasmopara halstedii (Farlow) Berl. and de Toni;
                                                               or
                                                               (b) the seeds have undergone appropriate treatment
                                                               against Plasmopara halstedii (Farlow) Berl. and de
                                                               Toni, with the exception of those seeds which were
                                                               obtained from varieties resistant to all breeds of
                                                               Plasmopara halstedii (Farlow) Berl. and de Toni,
                                                               which are present in the field of production.

26.1.   Plants of Solanum lycopersicum (L.) Karsten ex Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
        Farw, intended for planting, other than seeds. the plants specified in List lV part A section 2 points
                                                       (18.6) and (23), an official statement that:




                                           104
                                                        (a) the plants originate in areas known to be free of
                                                        Tomato yellow leaf curl virus
                                                        or
                                                        (b) no symptoms of Tomato yellow leaf curl virus were
                                                        observed on the plant;
                                                        and
                                                        (aa) plants originate in areas known to be free from
                                                        Bemisia tabaci Genn.
                                                        or
                                                        (bb) the place of production was determined to be
                                                        free from Bemisia tabaci Genn as a result of an
                                                        official inspection carried out at least once a month
                                                        during the three months prior to export;
                                                        or
                                                        (c) no symptoms of Tomato yellow curl virus were
                                                        observed at the place of production, which was
                                                        subjected to an appropriate treatment and monitoring
                                                        to ensure that the place of production is free from
                                                        Bemisia tabaci Genn.

27.     Seeds of Solanum lycopersicum (L.) Karsten ex An official statement that the seed was obtained by
        Farw.                                         an appropriate acid extraction method or similar
                                                      method approved in accordance with the procedure,
                                                        and
                                                        (a) either the seed originates in areas where
                                                        Clavibacter michiganensis ssp michiganensis (Smith)
                                                        Davis et.      Alor Xantomonas campestris pv
                                                        vesicatorica (Doidge) Dye are not known to occur;
                                                        or
                                                        (b) no symptoms of diseases caused by these
                                                        harmful organisms have been observed on the plants
                                                        at the place of production during last complete
                                                        vegetation cycle;
                                                        or
                                                        (c) the seed was subjected to an official examination,
                                                        at least for these harmful organisms, using a
                                                        representative sample and appropriate methods to
                                                        determine that they are free from these harmful
                                                        organisms.

28.1.   Seeds of Medicago sativa L.                     Official statement that:
                                                        (a) no symptoms of Ditylenchus dipsaci (Kühn)
                                                        Filipjev have been observed at the place of
                                                        production since the beginning of the last complete


                                       105
                                            vegetation cycle And that Ditylenchus dipsaci (Kühn)
                                            Filipjev was not detected through the laboratory tests
                                            on a representative sample;
                                            or
                                            (b) that the fumigation has taken place before the
                                            placing on the market.

28.2.   Seeds of Medicago sativa L.         Without prejudice to the requirements applicable to
                                            the plants in List lV part A section 2 point (28.1), an
                                            official statement that:
                                            (a) the seed originates in areas known to be free from
                                            Clavibacter michiganensis spp.insidiosus Davis et
                                            al.;
                                            or
                                            (b) Clavibacter michiganensis ssp. Insidiosus Davis
                                            et al is not known to have occured on the farm, or in
                                            its immediate vicinity, since the beginning of the last
                                            10 years;
                                            and
                                            - the culture belongs to the varieties recognized as
                                            highly resistant to Clavibacter michiganensis ssp.
                                            Insidiosus Davis et al.,
                                            or
                                            - at the time the seed was harvested, its fourth
                                            complete vegetation cycle from sowing had not yet
                                            begun and there had not been more than one
                                            preceding seed harvest from that crop before,
                                            or
                                            - the content of inert matter determined in accordance
                                            with the rules applicable to the certification of seeds
                                            for marketing in the Republic of North Macedonia,
                                            does not exceed 0.1% by weight;
                                            - no symptoms of Clavibacter michiganensis
                                            sspinsidiosus Davis et al. have been observed at the
                                            place of production, or on any crop of Medicago
                                            sativa L in the immediate vicinity. during the last
                                            complete vegetation cycle or, where appropriate, the
                                            last two vegetation cycles;
                                            - the crop has been grown on land where,no previous
                                            Medicago sativa L. crop was grown during the last
                                            three years prior sowing.
29.     seeds of Phaseolus L                Official statement that:



                                      106
                                                         (a) the seed originates in areas known to be free from
                                                         Xanthomonas campestris pv. phaseoli (Smith) Dye;
                                                         or
                                                         (b) a representative sample of the seed was tested
                                                         and the results showed that the seed was free from
                                                         Xanthomonas campestris pv. phaseoli (Smith) Dye.

30.1.   Fruits of Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus The packaging must bear an appropriate mark of
        Raf.,and their hybrids.                           origin.
31.     Machinery and vehicles used in agriculture and The machinery and vehicles shall:
        forestry.
                                                       a) move from an area free from Ceratocystis platani
                                                       (J.M. Walter) Engelbr. & TC Harr., established by a
                                                       competent authority, in accordance with the relevant
                                                       international standards for phytosanitary measures,
                                                         or
                                                         (b) be cleaned, free of soil and plant debris, prior to
                                                         movement from an area infeste with Ceratocystis
                                                         platani (JM Walter).




                                        107
                                                                                                        Annex 5
                                                      LIST V
  Plants, plant products and other objects and items that should be subject to plant health inspection if
they are moved inside the Republic of North Macedonia or are introduced on the territory of the Republic
                                           of North Macedonia
                                                      Part A
 Plants, plant products and other objects and items originating in the Republic of North Macedonia that
   should be subject to plant health inspection at the place of production if they are moved inside its
                                                territory
                                                     Section 1
  Plants, plant products and other objects and items that are potential carriers of harmful organisms of
importance for the entire territory of the Republic of North Macedonia and which should be accompanied
                           by a plant passport if they are moved on its territory


1. All plants for planting other than seeds


2. Plants other than fruits and seeds of the genera Choisya Kunth, Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus
   Raf., and their hybrids Casimiroa La Llave, Clausena Burm. f., Murraya J. Koenig ex L., Vepris Comm.,
   Zanthoxylum L. and Vitis L.


3. Fruits of the genera Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle and Poncirus Raf., And their hybrids, with leaves and stalks


4. Wood, which:


         (a) is considered a plant product within the meaning of Article 3 of the Plant Health Law; and


         (b) obtained in whole or in part from Juglans L., Platanus L., and Pterocarya L., including wood which
         has not kept its natural round surface; and


         (c) is allocated to an appropriate tariff code and corresponds to one of the following descriptions:




 Tariff Code                Description

 4401 12 00                 non-coniferous fuel wood, in logs, in billets, in twigs, in faggots or in similar forms;

 4401 22 00                 non-coniferous wood, in chips or particles

 4401 40 90                 wood waste and scrap, not agglomerated




                                               108
 ex 4403 12 00               non-coniferous wood in the rough, not stripped of the bark or sapwood or roughly squared
                             treated with paint, stains, creosote or other substances
 ex 4403 99 00               non-coniferous wood in the rough, with or without bark or sapwood, or roughly squared, other
                             than that treated with paint, stains, creosote or other substances, which is non-coniferous
                             (other than tropical wood, oak (Quercus spp.). , beech (Fagus spp.), birch (Betula spp.),
                             poplar and aspen (Populus spp.) or eucalyptus (Eucalyptus spp.)
 ex 4404 20 00               non-coniferous split poles, piles, pickets and stakes, pointed but not sawn lengthwise

 ex 4407 99                  non-coniferous wood (other than tropical wood, oak (Quercus spp), beech (Fagus spp.),
                             maple /(Acer spp.), cherry (Prunus spp.), ash (Fraxinus spp.), birch (Betula spp.) or poplar
                             and aspen (Populus spp.) sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, including planed,
                             sanded or end-jointed of a thickness of more than 6 mm




5. Seeds from:


    -   Oryza sativa L.


6. Seeds from:

    -   Allium cepa L.,
    -   Allium porrum L.,
    -   Capsicum annuum L.,
    -   Phaseolus coccineus L.,
    -   Phaseolus vulgaris L.,
    -   Pisum sativum L.,
    -   Solanum lycopersicum L.,
    -   Vicia faba L.


7. Seeds of Solanum tuberosum L.


8. Seeds from:

    -   Medicago sativa L.


9. Seeds from:

    -   Brassica napus L.,
    -   Brassica rapa L.,
    -   Glycine max (L.) Merrill,
    -   Helianthus annuus L.,
    -   Linum usitatissimum L.,
    -   Sinapis alba L.


10. Seeds from:


                                                109
    -    Allium L.,
    -    Capsicum annuum L.,
    -    Helianthus annuus L.,
    -    Prunus avium L.,
    -    Prunus armeniaca L.,
    -    Prunus cerasus L.,
    -    Prunus domestica L.,
    -    Prunus dulcis (Mill.) DA Webb,
    -    Prunus persica (L.) Batsch,
    -    Prunus salicina Lindley.


11. Seeds from:



    -    Prunus avium L.,
    -    Prunus armeniaca L.,
    -    Prunus cerasus L.,
    -    Prunus domestica L.,
    -    Prunus dulcis (Mill.) DA Webb,
    -    Prunus persica (L.) Batsch,
    -    Prunus salicina Lindley.
12. Plants intended for planting, other than seeds, which require a monitoring code in the plant passport to the end
user
    -    Citrus,
    -    Coffea,
    -    Lavandula dentata L.,
    -    Nerium oleander L.,
    -    Olea europea L.,
    -    Polygala myrtifolia L.,
    -    Prunus dulcis (Mill.) D.A.Webb,
    -    Solanum tuberosum L.




                                               110
                                                  LIST V
  Plants, plant products and other objects and items that should be subject to plant health inspection if
they are moved inside the Republic of North Macedonia or are introduced on the territory of the Republic
                                           of North Macedonia


                                                  Part B
 Plants, plant products and other objects and items not originating in the Republic of North Macedonia
  that should be subject to plant health inspection in the country of origin or the exporting country if
                            introduced in the Republic of North Macedonia


                                                 Section 1


  Plants, plant products and other objects and items that are potential carriers of harmful organisms of
importance for the entire territory of the Republic of North Macedonia and which should be accompanied
    by a phytosanitary certificate when introduced to the territory of the Republic of North Macedonia


                                             Subsection B 1

  Plants, plant products and other objects and items, as well as third countries of origin and exporting
country, for whose import on the territory of the Republic of North Macedonia a phytosanitary certificate
    is required in accordance with Article 24 of the Law on Plant Health and for which phytosanitary
                                         examination is needed




 Plants, plant products and other   Tariff code (TC) and designation Country of origin or exporting
 objects      for    which      a   (ex - individual goods of the country to issue a phytosanitary
 phytosanitary certificate is       group, not the whole tariff code - certificate
 issued                             TC)


 1. various
 Machinery and vehicles used in Machines for soil preparation and Third countries
 agriculture and forestry       cultivation in the agriculture,
                                horticulture or forestry; lawn or
                                sport-ground rollers, already used

                                    - ploughs:
                                    ex 8432 10 00

                                    - Harrows, scarifiers, cultivators,
                                    weeders and hoes:
                                    ex 8432 21 00
                                    ex 8432 29 10
                                    ex 8432 29 30


                                           111
ex 8432 29 50
ex 8432 29 90

-    Seeders,        planters    and
transplanters:
ex 8432 31 00
ex 8432 39 11
ex 8432 39 19
ex 8432 39 90

- Manure spreaders and distributors
of mineral and chemical fertilizers:
ex 8432 41 00
ex 8432 42 00

- Other machinery:
ex 8432 80 00

- parts:
ex 8432 90 00

Harvesting or threshing machines,
including straw or fodder balers;
grass or hay mowers; machines for
cleaning, sorting or grading eggs,
fruit or other agricultural products,
other than machinery of heading
8437 - already used.

Straw and fodder balers, including
pick-up balers:
ex 8433 40 00

Combines for collecting agricultural
products by separating the grains
from the plant;
ex 8433 51 00

Potato harvesting and collecting
machines
ex 8433 53 10
ex 8433 53 30
ex 8433 53 90

Other machinery for agriculture,
horticulture, forestry, poultry-
keeping or beekeeping, including
germination plants equipped with
mechanical or thermal equipment;
poultry incubators and brooders -
already used:

Forestry machinery:
ex 8436 80 10



       112
                                    Tractors (other than tractors of
                                    heading 8709) - already used:

                                    Road tractors for semi-trailers
                                    ex 8701 20 90

                                    Vehicles, other than rail or tramway
                                    vehicles, and parts thereof and
                                    accessories:

                                    Agriculture tractors and forestry
                                    tractors, wheeled:
                                    ex 8701 91 10
                                    ex 8701 92 10
                                    ex 8701 93 10
                                    ex 8701 94 10
                                    ex 8701 95 10

Growing medium attached to or NA                                            Third countries.
associated with plants, intended to
sustain the plant vitality

grain of the genera Triticum L.,    Wheat and meslin, other than seeds     Afghanistan, India, Iran, Iraq,
Secale L. and xTriticosecale Wittm. for sowing:                            Mexico, Nepal, Pakistan, South
ex A. Camus                          1001 19 00                            Africa and USA.
                                     1001 99 00

                                    Rye, other than seeds for sowing:
                                     1002 90 00

                                    Triticale, other than seeds for
                                    sowing:
                                    ex 1008 60 00
 2. General categories
 Plants for planting other than Bulbs, tubers, tuberous roots,             Third countries
 seeds                          roots, crowns, cuttings and
                                rhizomes, for planting, in growth or
                                in flower; chicory plants and roots
                                other than roots of heading 1212:
                                     0601 10 10
                                     0601 10 20
                                     0601 10 30
                                     0601 10 40
                                     0601 10 90
                                     0601 20 10
                                     0601 20 30
                                     0601 20 90
                                    Other live plants (including their
                                    roots), cuttings, and slips other
                                    than mushroom spawn
                                     0602 10 90
                                     0602 20 20
                                     0602 20 80
                                     0602 30 00
                                     0602 40 00


                                           113
0602 90 20
0602 90 30
0602 90 41
0602 90 45
0602 90 46
0602 90 47
0602 90 48
0602 90 50
0602 90 70
0602 90 91
0602 90 99

Onions, shallots, garlic, leeks and
other alliaceous vegetables, fresh,
for planting:
ex 0703 10 11
ex 0703 10 90
ex 0703 20 00

Cabbage, cauliflower, kohlrabi,
kale and similar edible vegetables
of the Brassicaceae family, fresh,
planted in a growing substrate:
ex 0704 10 00
ex 0704 90 10
ex 0704 90 90

Lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and
chicory (Cichorium spp.), fresh,
planted in a growing substrate:
ex 0705 11 00
ex 0705 19 00
ex 0705 21 00
ex 0705 29 00

Celery, other than celeriac, planted
in a growing substrate:
ex 0709 40 00

Salad vegetables other than
lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and
chicory (Cichorium spp.) planted
in a growing substrate:
ex 0709 99 10


Other vegetables, planted in
a growing substrate.
ex 0709 99 90


Ginger, saffron, turmeric and
other spices, for planting or
planted in a growing substrate:
ex 0910 11 00
ex 0910 20 10
ex 0910 30 00


      114
                                ex 0910 99 31
                                ex 0910 99 33




                               plants for planting of Vitis L., other   Third countries or originating in
                               than fruits and seeds                    EU member states, Albania,
                               Ex CN code                               Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
                                                                        Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia,
                                                                        Great Britain and Switzerland.
                               Plants for planting, other than          Third countries or originating in
                               seeds, in vitro material and             EU member states, Albania,
                               naturally or artificially dwarfed        Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo,
                                                                        Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia,
                               woody plants for planting, of Acacia     Great Britain and Switzerland.
                               Mill., Acer L., Albizia Durazz.,         Ex CN code
                               Alnus Mill., Annona L., Bauhinia L.,
                               Berberis L., Betula L., Caesalpinia
                               L., Cassia L., Castanea Mill.,
                               Cornus L., Corylus L., Crataegus
                               L., Diospyros L., Fagus L., Ficus
                               carica L., Fraxinus L., Hamamelis
                               L., Jasminum L., Juglans L.,
                               Ligustrum L., Lonicera L., Malus
                               Mill., Nerium L., Persea Mill.,
                               Populus L., Prunus L., Quercus L.,
                               Robinia L., Salix L., Sorbus L.,
                               Taxus L., Tilia L., Ulmus L., and
                               plants of Ullucus tuberosus Loz.,
                               Ex CN code

Root and tubercle vegetables   Carrots, turnips, salad beetroot         Third countries
                               (white beet), salsify, celeriac,
                               radishes and similar edible root
                               vegetables, fresh or chilled:
                                0706 10 00
                                0706 90 10
                                0706 90 30
                                0706 90 90

                               Other root or tubercle vegetables,
                               fresh or chilled;
                                ex 0709 99 90

                               Manioc,         arrowoot,      salep,
                               Jerusalem artichokes, sweet
                               potatoes and similar roots and
                               tubers, high in starch or inulin,
                               fresh, chilled, not frozen, nor dried,
                               not sliced or in the form of pellets
                                ex 0714 10 00
                                ex 0714 20 10
                                ex 0714 20 90
                                ex 0714 30 00
                                ex 0714 40 00


                                      115
                                       ex 0714 50 00
                                       ex 0714 90 20
                                       ex 0714 90 90


                                      Ginger, saffron, turmeric, and other
                                      spices in the form of root or
                                      tubercle parts of plants, fresh or
                                      chilled, other than dried:
                                       ex 0910 11 00
                                       ex 0910 30 00
                                       ex 0910 99 91

                                      Sugar beet, not ground, fresh and
                                      chilled:
                                      ex 1212 91 80


                                      Chicory roots, fresh and chilled:
                                      ex 1212 94 00


                                      Other root or tubercle vegetables,
                                      fresh and chilled;
                                      ex 1212 99 95


                                   Swedes, mangolds, fodder roots,
                                   hay, alfalfa (alfalfa), clover,
                                   sainfoin, fodder kale, lupine,
                                   ryegrass and similar fodder
                                   products, not in the form of pellets,
                                   fresh or chilled, other than dried:
                                   ex 1214 90 10
                                   ex 1214 90 90
Plants of Cryptocoryne sp. Other live plants (including their                 Third countries
Hygrophila sp. and Vallisneria sp. roots), cuttings and slips other than
                                   spawn

                                        Foliage, branches and other parts
                                        of a tomato
                                        or eggplant plants, without flowers
                                        or flower buds, suitable for
                                        bouquets or for decorative
                                        purposes, fresh:
                                        ex 0604 20 90
 3. Parts of plants other than fruit and seeds of:
Solanum lycopersicum L. and Foliage, branches and other parts                 Third countries
Solanum melongena L.        of tomato or eggplant plants,
                            without flowers or flower buds,
                            suitable for bouquets or decorative
                            purposes, fresh
                            ex 0604 20 90




                                              116
                                 Tomato or eggplant vegetable
                                 products not elsewhere specified
                                 or included, fresh:
                                 ex 1404 90 00
Zea mays L.                      Other vegetables, fresh or chilled Third countries
                                 Sweet corn
                                 ex 0709 99 60

                                 Corn, other:
                                 1005 90 00

                                Vegetable products of maize (Zea
                                mays), not elsewhere specified or
                                included, fresh:
                                ex 1404 90 00
Convolvulus L., Ipomoea L., Cut flowers and flower buds of a                America, Australia, New Zealand
Micromeria Benth and Solanaceae kind suitable for bouquets or for
Juss.                           ornamental purposes, fresh
                                ex 0603 19 70

                                 Foliage, branches and other parts
                                 of plants, without flowers or flower
                                 buds, suitable for bouquets or
                                 ornamental purposes, fresh
                                 ex 0604 20 90

                                 Vegetable products not elsewhere
                                 specified or included, fresh:
                                 ex 1404 90 00

Leafy vegetables of Apium Other vegetables, fresh or chilled               Third countries
graveolens L ,. Eryngium L, 0709 40 00
Limnophila L. and Ocimum L. ex 0709 99 10
                            ex 0709 99 90

                                 Plants and parts of plants
                                 (including seeds
                                 and fruit), of a kind used primarily
                                 in perfumery, pharmaceuticals or
                                 for insecticidal, fungicidal or similar
                                 purposes, fresh, not cut, crushed or
                                 powdered:
                                 ex 1211 90 86

                                 Vegetable products not elsewhere
                                 specified or included, fresh:
                                 ex 1404 90 00

Leaves of Manihot esculenta Leaves of Cassava (Manihot Third countries
Crantz                      esculenta), fresh or chilled;
                            ex 0709 99 90

                                 Vegetable products of cassava
                                 (Manihot esculenta), not elsewhere
                                 specified or included, fresh:


                                         117
                                      ex 1404 90 00
Conifers (Pinales)                    Foliage, branches and other parts Third countries
                                      of conifers (Pinales), without
                                      flowers or flower buds, suitable for
                                      bouquets or for ornamental
                                      purposes, fresh:
                                      ex 0604 20 20
                                      ex 0604 20 40
Castanea Mill., Dendranthema          Cut flowers and flower buds of a Third countries
(DC.)Des Moul., Dianthus L.,          kind suitable for bouquets or for
Gypsophila L., Pelargonium l'Herit.   ornamental purposes, fresh
ex Ait, Phoenix spp., Populus L.,
Quercus L., Solidago L                0603 12 00
                                      0603 14 00
                                      ex 0603 19 70
Acer saccharum Marsh                  Foliage, branches and other parts Canada and the United States
                                      of plants, of sugar maple (Acer
                                      saccharum), without flowers or
                                      flower buds, suitable for bouquets
                                      or ornamental purposes, fresh:
                                        ex 0604 20 90
                                       Vegetable products of plants of
                                       sugar maple
                                       (Acer saccharum), not elsewhere
                                       specified or included, fresh:
                                       ex 1404 90 00
Prunus L.                              Cut flowers and flower buds from       Third countries (non-European)
                                       Prunus spp. suitable for bouquets      other than: EU Member States, as
                                       or for ornamental purposes, fresh:     well as Albania, Andorra,
                                       ex 0603 19 70                          Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
                                                                              Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canary
                                       Foliage, branches and other parts      Islands, Faroe Islands, Georgia,
                                       of plants, of (Prunus), spp. without   Iceland, Liechtenstein, Moldova,
                                       flowers or flower buds, suitable for   Monaco, Montenegro, Norway,
                                       bouquets         or      ornamental    Russia (only the following parts:
                                       purposes, fresh:                       Central      Federal      District,
                                       ex 0604 20 90                          Northwestern Federal District,
                                                                              Southern Federal District, North-
                                       Vegetable products of plants of        Caucasian Federal District and
                                       Prunus spp. not elsewhere              Volga Federal District), San
                                       specified or included, fresh:          Marino, Serbia, Great Britain,
                                       ex 1404 90 00                          Turkey, Switzerland and
                                                                              Ukraine


Betula L                               Foliage, branches and other parts      Third countries
                                       of plants of birch(Betula), spp.
                                       without flowers or flower buds,
                                       suitable for bouquets or
                                       ornamental purposes, fresh:
                                       ex 0604 20 90
                                       Vegetable products of plants of
                                       birch Betula spp. not elsewhere
                                       specified or included, fresh:
                                       ex 1404 90 00
Fraxinus L., Juglans L., Pterocarya    Foliage, branches and other parts      Canada, China, Democratic
Kunthand Ulmus davidiana Planch.       of plants, without flowers or          People's Republic of Korea,
                                       flower buds, suitable for bouquets     Japan, Mongolia, Republic of
                                       or ornamental purposes, fresh:


                                             118
                                          ex 0604 20 90                         Korea, Russia, Taiwan and United
                                                                                States
                                          Vegetable      products      not
                                          elsewhere specified or included,
                                          fresh:
                                          ex 1404 90 00
Amyris P. Browne, Casimiroa La Llave,     Cut flowers and flower buds      Third countries
Citropsis Swingle & Kellerman,            suitable for bouquets or for
Eremocitrus Swingle, Esenbeckia           ornamental purposes, fresh:
Kunth., Glycosmis Corrêa, Merrillia       ex 0603 19 70
Swingle, Naringi Adans., Tetradium
Lour., Toddalia Juss. and Zanthoxylum     Foliage, branches and other parts
L.                                        of plants, without flowers or
                                          flower buds, suitable for bouquets
                                          or ornamental purposes, fresh:
                                          ex 0604 20 90
                                          Vegetable     products       not
                                          elsewhere specified or included,
                                          fresh:
                                          ex 1404 90 00
Acer macrophyllum Pursh, Acer Cut flowers and flower buds                       USA
pseudoplatanus L., Adiantum aleuticum suitable for bouquets or for
(Rupr.) Paris, Adiantum jordanii C. ornamental purposes, fresh:
Muell., Aesculus californica (Spach) ex 0603 19 70
Nutt., Aesculus hippocastanum L.,
Arbutus menziesii Pursch., Arbutus Foliage, branches and other parts
unedo L., Arctostaphylos spp. Adans, of plants, without flowers or
Calluna vulgaris (L.) Hull, Camellia spp. flower buds, suitable for bouquets
L.; Castanea sativa Mill., Fagus sylvatica or ornamental purposes, fresh:
L., Frangula californica (Eschsch.)Gray, ex 0604 20 90
Frangula purshiana (DC.) Cooper,
Fraxinus excelsior L., Griselinia littoralis Vegetable materials primarily
(Raoul), Hamamelis virginiana L., used for plaiting (eg bamboos,
Heteromeles arbutifolia (Lindley) M. rattans, reeds, rushes, osier,
Roemer, Kalmia latifolia L., Laurus
nobilis L., Leucothoe spp. D.Don, raffia, cleaned, bleached or dyed
Lithocarpus densiflorus (Hook. & Arn.) cereal straw and linden bark),
Rehd., Lonicera hispidula (Lindl.) Dougl. fresh:
ex Torr.&Gray, Magnolia spp. L., ex 1401 90 00
Michelia doltsopa Buch.-Ham. ex DC,
Nothofagus obliqua (Mirbel) Blume,
Osmanthus heterophyllus (G. Don) P. S. Vegetable products not elsewhere
Green, Parrotia persica (DC) C.A. Meyer, specified or included, fresh:
Photinia x fraseri Dress, Pieris spp. D. ex 1404 90 00
Don, Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirbel)
Franco, Quercus spp. L., Rhododendron
spp. L., other than Rhododendron simsii
Planch., Rosa gymnocarpa Nutt., Salix
caprea L., Sequoia sempervirens (Lamb.
ex D. Don) Endl., Syringa vulgaris L.,
Taxus spp. L., Trientalis latifolia (Hook),
Umbellularia californica (Hook. &
Arn.) Nutt., Vaccinium ovatum Pursh
and Viburnum spp. L
 4. Parts of plants, other than fruit, but including seeds of:
Aegle Corrêa, Aeglopsis Swingle,         Cut flowers and flower buds            Third countries
Afraegle Engl., Atalantia Corrêa,        suitable for bouquets or for
Balsamocitrus Stapf, Burkillanthus       ornamental purposes, fresh:
Swingle, Calodendrum Thunb., Choisya     ex 0603 19 70
Kunth, Clausena Burm. f., Limonia L.,
Microcitrus Swingle, Murraya J. Koenig   Foliage, branches and other parts
ex L., Pamburus Swingle, Severinia       of plants, without flowers or flower


                                                119
Ten., Swinglea Merr., Triphasia Lour and   buds, suitable for bouquets or
Vepris Comm.                               ornamental purposes, fresh:
                                           ex 0604 20 90

                                           Other vegetables, fresh or chilled
                                           ex 0709 99 90

                                           Seeds, fruits and spores of a kind
                                           used for sowing
                                            - Seeds of herbaceous plants that
                                            are grown primarily for their
                                            flowers:
                                            ex 1209 30 00
                                            - Vegetable seeds:
                                            ex 1209 91 80
                                            Other
                                            ex 1209 99 91
                                            ex 1209 99 99

                                            Plants and parts of plants
                                            (including seeds and fruits), of a
                                            kind used primarily in perfumery,
                                            in pharmacy or for insecticidal,
                                            fungicidal or similar purposes,
                                            fresh, uncut, crushed or
                                            powdered:
                                            ex 1211 90 86

                                            Vegetable materials primarily
                                            used for plaiting (eg bamboos,
                                            rattans, reeds, rushes, osier,
                                            raffia, cleaned, bleached or dyed
                                            cereal straw and linden bark),
                                            fresh:
                                            ex 1401 90 00

                                            Vegetable products not elsewhere
                                            specified or included, fresh:
                                            ex 1404 90 00

 5. Fruits
Citrus L., Fortunella Swingle, Poncirus Tomatoes, fresh or chilled:              Third countries
Raf., Microcitrus Swingle, Naringi 0702 00 00
Adans., Swinglea Merr. and their hybrids,
Momordica L. and Solanaceae Juss          Other      vegetables,        from
                                          Solanaceae, fresh or chilled;
                                          0709 30 00
                                          0709 60 10
                                          0709 60 91
                                          0709 60 95
                                          0709 60 99
                                          ex 0709 99 90


                                                    120
                                     Citrus fruits, fresh or chilled:
                                     0805 10 22
                                     0805 10 24
                                     0805 10 28
                                     ex 0805 10 80
                                     ex 0805 21 10
                                     ex 0805 21 90
                                     ex 0805 22 00
                                     ex 0805 29 00
                                     ex 0805 40 00

                                     ex 0805 50 10
                                     ex 0805 50 90
                                     ex 0805 90 00
                                           Other fruits, fresh or chilled:
                                           ex 0810 90 75
Actinidia Lindl., Annona L., Carica Avocado, fresh or chilled:             Third countries
papaya L., Cydonia Mill., Diospyros L., ex 0804 40 00
Fragaria L., Malus L., Mangifera L.,
Passiflora L., Persea americana Mill.,
Prunus L., Psidium L., Pyrus L., Ribes L., Guava, mango and mangosteen,
Rubus L., Syzygium Gaertn., Vaccinium fresh or chilled;
L., and Vitis L                            ex 0804 50 00

                                     Grapes, fresh or chilled:
                                     0806 10 10
                                     0806 10 90

                                     Melon (including watermelon) and
                                     papaya, fresh or chilled:
                                     -Papaya
                                     0807 20 00

                                     Apple, pear and quince, fresh or
                                     chilled
                                     0808 10 10
                                     0808 10 80
                                     0808 30 10
                                     0808 30 90
                                     0808 40 00

                                     Apricots, cherries, sour cherries,
                                     peaches (including nectarines),
                                     plums and sloes, fresh or chilled:
                                     0809 10 00
                                     0809 21 00
                                     0809 29 00
                                     0809 30 10
                                     0809 30 90
                                     0809 40 05
                                     0809 40 90

                                     Strawberries, fresh or chilled:
                                     0810 10 00



                                             121
                                      Raspberries,        blackberries,
                                      mulberries and loganberries, fresh
                                      or chilled:
                                      0810 20 10
                                      ex 0810 20 90
                                      Black, white or red currants and
                                      gooseberries, fresh or chilled:
                                      0810 30 10
                                      0810 30 30
                                      0810 30 90
                                      Cranberries, blueberries and other
                                      fruits of the genus Vaccinium, fresh
                                      or chilled:
                                      0810 40 10
                                      0810 40 30
                                      0810 40 50
                                      0810 40 90
                                      Kiwi, fresh or chilled:
                                      0810 50 00
                                      Japanese apple, fresh or chilled:
                                      0810 70 00
                                      Other, fresh or chilled:
                                      ex 0810 90 20
                                      ex 0810 90 75
Punica granatum L.                    Pomegranate, fresh or chilled:         Countries of the African continent,
                                      ex 0810 90 75                          the Green Islands, St. Helena,
                                                                             Madagascar,       La      Reunion,
                                                                             Mauritius and Israel
 6. Cut flowers from:
Orchidaceae                        Orchids, fresh                            Third countries
                                   0603 13 00
Aster spp., Eryngium L., Hypericum Cut flowers and flower buds               Third countries (non-European)
L., Lisianthus L., Rosa L. and suitable for bouquets or for                  other than: EU Member States, as
Trachelium L.                      ornamental purposes, fresh:               well as Albania, Andorra,
                                                                             Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
                                   0603 11 00                                Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canary
                                   ex 0603 19 70                             Islands, Faroe Islands, Georgia,
                                                                             Iceland, Liechtenstein, Moldova,
                                                                             Monaco, Montenegro, Norway,
                                                                             Russia (only the following parts:
                                                                             Central      Federal      District,
                                                                             Northwestern Federal District,
                                                                             Southern Federal District, North-
                                                                             Caucasian Federal District and
                                                                             Volga Federal District), San
                                                                             Marino, Serbia, Great Britain ,
                                                                             Turkey, Switzerland and Ukraine
 7. Tubers of the following species:
Solanum tuberosum L.                  Potatoes, fresh or chilled, other      Third countries
                                      than seeds:
                                      ex 0701 90 10
                                      ex 0701 90 50
                                      ex 0701 90 90
 8. Seeds of the following species:




                                              122
Brassicaceae, Poaceae,Trifolium Seeds of wheat and meslin:            Argentina, Australia, Bolivia,
spp.                            1001 11 00                            Brazil, Chile, New Zealand and
                                1001 91 10                            Uruguay
                                1001 91 20
                                1001 91 90

                                 Seeds of Rye:
                                 1002 10 00

                                 Seeds of barley:
                                 1003 10 00

                                 Seeds of Oats:
                                 1004 10 00

                                 Seeds of corn
                                 1005 10 13
                                 1005 10 15
                                 1005 10 18
                                 1005 10 90

                                 Seeds of rice:
                                 1006 10 10

                                 Seeds of sorghum:
                                 1007 10 10
                                 1007 90 00

                                 Seeds of millet:
                                 1008 21 00

                                 Canary seeds for sowing:
                                 ex 1008 30 00

                                 Fonio seeds (Digitaria spp.) for
                                 sowing:
                                 ex 1008 40 00

                                 Seeds of triticale:
                                 ex 1008 60 00

                                 Seeds of other cereals for sowing:
                                 ex 1008 90 00

                                 Seeds of oilseed rape for sowing:
                                 1205 10 10
                                 ex 1205 90 00


                                 Mustard seeds for sowing:
                                 1207 50 10


                                 Clover seeds (Trifolium spp.) For
                                 sowing:


                                        123
                                    1209 22 10
                                    1209 22 80

                                    Fescue seeds for sowing
                                    1209 23 11
                                    1209 23 15
                                    1209 23 80


                                    Kentucky blue grass seeds (Poa
                                    pratensis L.) for sowing:
                                    1209 24 00

                                    Ryegrass        seeds     (Lolium
                                    multiflorum Lam., Lolium perenne
                                    L.) for sowing:
                                    1209 25 10
                                    1205 25 90


                                    Timothy grass seeds (folk: cat tail);
                                    of the genus Poa (Poa palustris L.,
                                    Poa trivialis L.); seeds of coxfoot
                                    grass (Dactylis glomerata L.) and
                                    bent grass (Agrostis), for sowing:
                                    ex 1209 29 45

                                    Seeds of other grasses for sowing:
                                    ex 1209 29 80

                                    Seeds of ornamental grasses for
                                    sowing:
                                    ex 1209 30 00

                                    Seeds of other species            of
                                    Brassicaceae for sowing:
                                    ex 1209 91 80

Genus Triticum L., Secale L. and    Seeds of wheat and meslin:              Afghanistan, India, Iran, Iraq,
xTriticosecale Wittm. ex A. Camus   1001 11 00                              Mexico, Nepal, Pakistan, South
                                    1001 91 10                              Africa and USA.
                                    1001 91 20
                                    1001 91 90

                                    Seeds of Rye:
                                    1002 10 00

                                      Seeds of triticale:
                                      ex 1008 60 00
Citrus L., Fortunella Swingleand Sweet corn for sowing:                     Third countries
Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids, ex 0709 99 60
Capsicum spp. L., Helianthus
annuus L., Solanum lycopersicum
L., Medicago sativa L., Prunus L., - Beans (Phaseolus spp.) For
Rubus L., Oryza spp. L., Zea mays sowing:
L., Allium cepa L., Allium porrum L., 0713 33 10


                                           124
Phaseolus cocineus          spp.   L.,
Phaseolus vulgaris L.                    Almonds, for sowing:
                                         ex 0802 11 10
                                         ex 0802 11 90
                                         ex 0802 12 10
                                         ex 0802 12 90

                                         Corn seeds for sowing:
                                         1005 10 13
                                         1005 10 15
                                         1005 10 18
                                         1005 10 90

                                         Rice, for sowing:
                                         1006 10 10

                                         Sunflower seeds for sowing:
                                         1206 00 10

                                         Alfalfa seeds for sowing:
                                         1209 21 00

                                         - Other vegetable seeds for
                                         sowing:
                                         ex 1209 91 80

                                          - Other seeds for sowing:
                                         ex 1209 99 99
Solanum tuberosum L.                      Potato seeds, for sowing           Third countries
                                          ex 1209 91 80
9. Vegetable seeds from:
Pisum sativum L.                         Pea seeds (Pisum sativum), for Third countries
                                         sowing:
                                         0713 10 10
Vicia faba L.                            Broad beans and horse bean Third countries
                                         seeds, for sowing
                                         ex 0713 50 00

                                      - Other seeds for sowing:
                                      ex 0713 90 00
10. Seeds of oil and fiber plants of the following species::
Brassica napus L.,                       Seeds of oilseed rape for sowing:   Third countries
                                         1205 10 10
                                         ex 1205 90 00
Brassica rapa L.,                        Seeds of Brassica rapa, for         Third countries
                                         sowing:
                                         ex 1209 91 80
Glycine max (L.) Merrill,                Soybean seeds for sowing:           Third countries
                                         1201 10 00
Linum usitatissimum L.,                  Linseed for sowing:                 Third countries
                                         1204 00 10
Sinapis alba L.                          Mustard seeds for sowing:           Third countries
                                         1207 50 10



                                                125
11. Isolated bark of:
Conifers (Pinales)                    Vegetable products of bark not          Third countries other than EU and
                                      elsewhere specified or included,        Albania,     Andorra,     Armenia,
                                      fresh:                                  Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and
                                                                              Herzegovina, Canary Islands,
                                      ex 1404 90 00                           Faroe Islands, Georgia, Iceland,
                                                                              Liechtenstein,
                                      Fuel wood, in the form of logs,         Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro,
                                      billets, twigs, faggots or similar      Norway, Russia (only the following
                                      forms; wood in chips or similar         sections: Central Federal District,
                                                                              Northwestern Federal District,
                                      particles; sawdust and wood             Southern Federal District, North
                                      waste and scrap, whether or not         Caucasus Federal District and
                                      agglomerated, in the form of            Volga Federal District), San
                                      briquettes, pellets or similar forms:   Marino,         Serbia,      Great
                                      - wood waste and scrap, not             Britain,Switzerland, Turkey and
                                      agglomerated                            Ukraine.
                                      ex 4401 40 90
Acer saccharum Marsh, Populus         Vegetable products of bark not Third countries
L., and Quercus L. other than         elsewhere specified or included,
Quercus                               fresh:
suber L.
                                      ex 1404 90 00

                                      Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                      billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                      forms; wood in chips or similar
                                      particles; sawdust and wood
                                      waste and scrap, whether or not
                                      agglomerated, in the form of
                                      briquettes, pellets or similar forms:
                                      - wood waste and scrap, not
                                      agglomerated
                                      ex 4401 40 90
Fraxinus L., Juglans L., Pterocarya   Vegetable products of bark not          Canada, China, Democratic
Kunthand Ulmus davidiana Planch.      elsewhere specified or included,        People's Republic of Korea,
                                      fresh:                                  Japan, Mongolia, Republic of
                                                                              Korea, Russia, Taiwan and United
                                      ex 1404 90 00                           States
                                      Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                      billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                      forms; wood in chips or similar
                                      particles; sawdust and wood
                                      waste and scrap, whether or not
                                      agglomerated, in the form of
                                      briquettes, pellets or similar forms:
                                      - wood waste and scrap, not
                                      agglomerated
                                      ex 4401 40 90
Betula L.                             Vegetable products of bark not Canada and the United States
                                      elsewhere specified or included,
                                      fresh:
                                      ex 1404 90 00

                                      Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                      billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                      forms; wood in chips or similar


                                            126
                                       particles; sawdust and wood
                                       waste and scrap, whether or not
                                       agglomerated, in the form of
                                       briquettes, pellets or similar forms:
                                       - wood waste and scrap, not
                                       agglomerated
                                       ex 4401 40 90
Acer     macrophyllum      Pursh,      Vegetable products of bark not USA
Aesculus californica (Spach) Nutt.,    elsewhere specified or included,
Lithocarpus densiflorus (Hook. &       fresh:
Arn.) Rehd. and Taxus brevifolia
Nutt.                                  ex 1404 90 00

                                       Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                       billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                       forms; wood in chips or similar
                                       particles; sawdust and wood
                                       waste and scrap, whether or not
                                       agglomerated, in the form of
                                       briquettes, pellets or similar forms:
                                       - wood waste and scrap, not
                                       agglomerated
                                       ex 4401 40 90
12. Wood, which:
(a) is considered a plant product within the meaning of Article 3 of the Plant Health Law; and
and
b) has been obtained in whole or in part from one of the order, genera or species specified, other than wood
packaging material;
and
c) belongs to one of the respective tariff codes and corresponds to one of the descriptions in the middle column,
as stated in the Customs Clearance Guide:


Quercus L., including wood which       Fuel wood, in the form of logs, USA
has not kept its natural round         billets, twigs, faggots or similar
surface, other than wood which         forms;
meets the description of the
heading 4416 00 00 and where           - sawdust, wood waste and
there is documentary evidence that     scrap,whether agglomerated or
the wood has been processed or         not, in the form of briquettes,
produced using heat treatment to       pellets or similar forms:
reach a minimum temperature of         Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
176 ° C for 20 minutes
                                       billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                       forms;
                                       - Non-coniferous:
                                       ex 4401 12 00

                                       - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                       similar particles:

                                       - Non-coniferous:
                                       ex 4401 22 00




                                              127
- Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
not agglomerated:
- Sawdust:
ex 4401 40 10

- Wood waste and scrap (other
than sawdusts):
ex 4401 40 90

Wood in the rough, not stripped of
the bark and sapwood. or roughly
squared.

- Treated with paint, stains,
creosote or other substances:

- Non-coniferous:
ex4403 12 00

Wood in the rough, with or without
bark or sapwood, or roughly
squared:

- Other than treated with paint,
stains, creosote or other
substances:

- Of oak (Quercus spp.):
4403 91 00

Split poles, piles, pickets and
stakes, pointed but not sawn
lengthwise

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4404 20 00

Non-coniferous     railway       or
tramway sleepers of wood:

- Not impregnated
ex 4406 12 00

- Other (except unimpregnated)
ex 4406 92 00

Wood sawn or chipped length-
wise sliced or peeled, whether or
not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
of a thickness of over 6 mm :

- Of oak (Quercus spp.):
4407 91 15
4407 91 31
4407 91 39


      128
                                    4407 91 90

                                    Veneer sheets (including those
                                    obtained by slicing laminated
                                    wood), for plywood or similar
                                    laminated wood and other wood,
                                    sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
                                    whether or not planed, sanded,
                                    spliced or end-jointed of a
                                    thickness not exceeding 6 mm:

                                    - Other
                                    ex 4408 90 15
                                    ex 4408 90 35
                                    ex 4408 90 85
                                    ex 4408 90 95

                                    Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                    other cooper products and parts
                                    thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                    ex 4416 00 00

                                    Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                    ex 9406 10 00
Platanus L., including wood which   Fuel wood, in the form of logs, Albania, Armenia, Great Britain,
has not kept its natural round      billets, twigs, faggots or similar Switzerland, Turkey or USA
surface                             forms;
                                    - sawdust, wood waste and
                                    scrap,whether agglomerated or
                                    not, in the form of briquettes,
                                    pellets or similar forms:

                                    Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                    billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                    forms;
                                    - Non-coniferous:
                                    ex 4401 12 00

                                    - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                    similar particles:

                                    - Non-coniferous:
                                    ex 4401 22 00

                                    - Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
                                    not agglomerated:
                                    - Sawdust:
                                    ex 4401 40 10

                                    - Wood waste and scrap (other
                                    than sawdusts):
                                    ex 4401 40 90




                                          129
Wood in the rough, not stripped of
the bark and sapwood. or roughly
squared.

- Treated with paint, stains,
creosote or other substances:

- Non-coniferous:
ex4403 12 00

Wood in the rough, with or without
bark or sapwood, or roughly
squared:

- Other than treated with paint,
stains, creosote or other
substances:

ex 4403 99 00

Split poles, piles, pickets and
stakes of wood, pointed but not
sawn lengthwise

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4404 20 00

Non-coniferous     railway       or
tramway sleepers of wood:

- Not impregnated
ex 4406 12 00

- Other (except unimpregnated)
ex 4406 92 00

Wood sawn or chipped length-
wise sliced or peeled, whether or
not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
of a thickness of over 6 mm :
ex 4407 99 27
ex 4407 99 40
ex 4407 99 90

Veneer sheets (including those
obtained by slicing laminated
wood), for plywood or similar
laminated wood and other wood,
sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
whether or not planed, sanded,
spliced or end-jointed of a
thickness not exceeding 6 mm:
ex 4408 90 15
ex 4408 90 35
ex 4408 90 85


      130
                                   ex 4408 90 95

                                   Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                   other cooper products and parts
                                   thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                   ex 4416 00 00

                                   Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                   ex 9406 10 00
Populus L., including wood which   Fuel wood, in the form of logs, North, Central and South America
has not kept its natural round     billets, twigs, faggots or similar
surface                            forms;
                                   - sawdust, wood waste and
                                   scrap,whether agglomerated or
                                   not, in the form of briquettes,
                                   pellets or similar forms:
                                   Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                   billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                   forms;
                                   - Non-coniferous:
                                   ex 4401 12 00

                                   - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                   similar particles:

                                   - Non-coniferous:
                                   ex 4401 22 00

                                   - Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
                                   not agglomerated:
                                   - Sawdust:
                                   ex 4401 40 10

                                   - Wood waste and scrap (other
                                   than sawdusts):
                                   ex 4401 40 90

                                   Wood in the rough, not stripped of
                                   the bark and sapwood. or roughly
                                   squared.

                                   - Treated with paint, stains,
                                   creosote or other substances:

                                   - Non-coniferous:
                                   ex4403 12 00

                                   Wood in the rough, with or without
                                   bark or sapwood, or roughly
                                   squared:

                                   - Other than treated with paint,
                                   stains, creosote or other
                                   substances:



                                         131
- From poplar and aspen (Populis
spp.):
4403 97 00

Split poles, piles, pickets and
stakes of wood, pointed but not
sawn lengthwise

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4404 20 00

Non-coniferous     railway        or
tramway sleepers of wood:

- Not impregnated
ex 4406 12 00

- Other (except unimpregnated)
ex 4406 92 00

Wood sawn or chipped length-
wise sliced or peeled, whether or
not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
of a thickness of over 6 mm :

 - From poplar and aspen (Populus
 spp.):
4407 97 10
4407 97 91
4407 97 99

Veneer sheets (including those
obtained by slicing laminated
wood), for plywood or similar
laminated wood and other wood,
sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
whether or not planed, sanded,
spliced or end-jointed of a
thickness not exceeding 6 mm:

- Other
ex 4408 90 15
ex 4408 90 35
ex 4408 90 85
ex 4408 90 95

Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
other cooper products and parts
thereof, of wood, including staves:
ex 4416 00 00

Prefabricated buildings of wood
ex 9406 10 00




      132
Acer saccharum Marsh., Including      Fuel wood, in the form of logs, Canada and the United States
wood which has not kept its natural   billets, twigs, faggots or similar
round surface:                        forms;
                                      - sawdust, wood waste and
                                      scrap,whether agglomerated or
                                      not, in the form of briquettes,
                                      pellets or similar forms:

                                      Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                      billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                      forms;
                                      - Non-coniferous:
                                      ex 4401 12 00

                                      - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                      similar particles:

                                      - Non-coniferous:
                                      ex 4401 22 00

                                      - Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
                                      not agglomerated:
                                      - Sawdust:
                                      ex 4401 40 10

                                      - Wood waste and scrap (other
                                      than sawdusts):
                                      ex 4401 40 90

                                      Wood in the rough, not stripped of
                                      the bark and sapwood. or roughly
                                      squared.

                                      - Treated with paint, stains,
                                      creosote or other substances:

                                      - Non-coniferous:
                                      ex4403 12 00

                                      Wood in the rough, with or without
                                      bark or sapwood, or roughly
                                      squared:

                                      - Other than treated with paint,
                                      stains, creosote or other
                                      substances:
                                      ex 4403 99 00

                                      Split poles, piles, pickets and
                                      stakes, pointed but not sawn
                                      lengthwise

                                      - Non-coniferous:
                                      ex 4404 20 00



                                            133
                                      Non-coniferous     railway       or
                                      tramway sleepers of wood:

                                      - Not impregnated
                                      ex 4406 12 00

                                      - Other (except unimpregnated)
                                      ex 4406 92 00

                                      Wood sawn or chipped length-
                                      wise sliced or peeled, whether or
                                      not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
                                      of a thickness of over 6 mm :

                                       - from maple (Acer spp.)
                                      4407 93 10
                                      4407 93 91
                                      4407 93 99

                                      Veneer sheets (including those
                                      obtained by slicing laminated
                                      wood), for plywood or similar
                                      laminated wood and other wood,
                                      sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
                                      whether or not planed, sanded,
                                      spliced or end-jointed of a
                                      thickness not exceeding 6 mm:
                                      ex 4408 90 15
                                      ex 4408 90 35
                                      ex 4408 90 85
                                      ex 4408 90 95

                                      Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                      other cooper products and parts
                                      thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                      ex 4416 00 00

                                      Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                      ex 9406 10 00
Conifers (Pinales) including wood     Fuel wood, in the form of logs,       Kazakhstan, Russia and Turkey
that has not kept its natural round   billets, twigs, faggots or similar    and other third countries other than
surface                               forms;                                EU member states Albania,
                                                                            Andorra, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
                                      - sawdust, wood waste and             Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
                                      scrap,whether agglomerated or         Canary Islands, Faroe Islands,
                                      not, in the form of briquettes,       Georgia, Iceland, Liechtenstein,
                                      pellets or similar forms:             Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro ,
                                                                            Norway. San Marino, Serbia, Great
                                                                            Britain, Switzerland, and Ukraine.
                                      Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                      billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                      forms;

                                      - Coniferous:
                                      4401 11 00




                                             134
- Wood in the form of plywood and
similar particles:

- Coniferous:
4401 21 00

- Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
not agglomerated:

- Sawdust:
ex 4401 40 10

- Wood waste and scrap (other
than sawdusts):
ex 4401 40 90

Wood in the rough, not stripped of
the bark and sapwood. or roughly
squared.

- Treated with paint, stains,
creosote or other substances:

- Coniferous:
ex 4403 11 00

Wood in the rough, with or without
bark or sapwood, or roughly
squared:

- Conifers, other than those
treated with paint, stains, creosote
or other substances:

   of pine (Pinus spp.):

   ex 4403 21 10
   ex 4403 21 90
   ex 4403 22 00

   - of fir (Abies spp.) and spruce
   (Picea spp.):

   ex 4403 23 10
   ex 4403 23 90
   ex 4403 24 00

   - Other, coniferous:
   ex 4403 25 10
   ex 4403 25 90
   ex 4403 26 00

Split poles, piles, pickets and
stakes, pointed but not sawn
lengthwise


      135
- Coniferous:
ex 4404 10 00

Non-coniferous railway or tramway
sleepers of wood:

- Not impregnated
4406 11 00

- Other (except unimpregnated)
4406 91 00

Wood sawn or chipped length-
wise sliced or peeled, whether or
not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
of a thickness of over 6 mm :

- Coniferous:
    of pine (Pinus spp.):
    4407 11 10
    4407 11 20
    4407 11 90
    - of fir (Abies spp.) and
    spruce (Picea spp.):
    4407 12 10
    4407 12 20
    4407 12 90
    - Other, coniferous:
    4407 19 10
    4407 19 20
    4407 19 90

Veneer sheets (including those
obtained by slicing laminated
wood), for plywood or similar
laminated wood and other wood,
sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
whether or not planed, sanded,
spliced or end-jointed of a
thickness not exceeding 6 mm:

- Coniferous:
4408 10 15
4408 10 91
4408 10 98

Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
other cooper products and parts
thereof, of wood, including staves:
ex 4416 00 00

Prefabricated buildings of wood
ex 9406 10 00



      136
Fraxinus L., Juglans L., Pterocarya   Fuel wood, in the form of logs,      Canada, China, Democratic
Kunth and Ulmus davidiana             billets, twigs, faggots or similar    People's Republic of Korea,
Planch. including wood that has not   forms;                               Japan, Mongolia, Republic of
kept its natural round surface                                             Korea, Russia, Taiwan and United
                                      - sawdust, wood waste and            States
                                      scrap,whether agglomerated or
                                      not, in the form of briquettes,
                                      pellets or similar forms:

                                      Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                      billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                      forms;

                                      - Non-coniferous:
                                      ex 4401 12 00

                                      - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                      similar particles:

                                      - Non-coniferous:
                                      ex 4401 22 00

                                      - Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
                                      not agglomerated:
                                      - Sawdust:
                                      ex 4401 40 10

                                      - Wood waste and scrap (other
                                      than sawdusts):
                                      ex 4401 40 90

                                      Wood in the rough, not stripped of
                                      the bark and sapwood. or roughly
                                      squared.

                                      - Treated with paint, stains,
                                      creosote or other substances:

                                      - Non-coniferous:
                                      ex4403 12 00

                                      Wood in the rough, with or without
                                      bark or sapwood, or roughly
                                      squared:

                                      - Other than treated with paint,
                                      stains, creosote or other
                                      substances:
                                      ex 4403 99 00

                                      Split poles, piles, pickets and
                                      stakes, pointed but not sawn
                                      lengthwise

                                      - Non-coniferous:
                                      ex 4404 20 00


                                            137
                                      Non-coniferous     railway       or
                                      tramway sleepers of wood:

                                      - Not impregnated
                                      ex 4406 12 00

                                      - Other (except unimpregnated)
                                      ex 4406 92 00

                                      Wood sawn or chipped length-
                                      wise sliced or peeled, whether or
                                      not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
                                      of a thickness of over 6 mm :

                                      - From ash (Fraxinus spp.):
                                      4407 95 10
                                      4407 95 91
                                      4407 95 99

                                      - Other
                                      ex 4407 99 27
                                      ex 4407 99 40
                                      ex 4407 99 90

                                      Veneer sheets (including those
                                      obtained by slicing laminated
                                      wood), for plywood or similar
                                      laminated wood and other wood,
                                      sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
                                      whether or not planed, sanded,
                                      spliced or end-jointed of a
                                      thickness not exceeding 6 mm:
                                      ex 4408 90 15
                                      ex 4408 90 35
                                      ex 4408 90 85
                                      ex 4408 90 95

                                      Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                      other cooper products and parts
                                      thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                      ex 4416 00 00

                                      Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                      ex 9406 10 00
Betula L., including wood which has   Fuel wood, in the form of logs, Canada and the United States
not kept its natural round surface    billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                      forms;
                                      - sawdust, wood waste and
                                      scrap,whether agglomerated or
                                      not, in the form of briquettes,
                                      pellets or similar forms:




                                            138
Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
billets, twigs, faggots or similar
forms;
- Non-coniferous:
ex 4401 12 00

- Wood in the form of plywood and
similar particles:

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4401 22 00

- Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
not agglomerated:
- Sawdust:
ex 4401 40 10

- Wood waste and scrap (other
than sawdusts):
ex 4401 40 90

Wood in the rough, not stripped of
the bark and sapwood. or roughly
squared.

- Treated with paint, stains,
creosote or other substances:

- Non-coniferous:
ex4403 12 00

Wood in the rough, with or without
bark or sapwood, or roughly
squared:

- Other than treated with paint,
stains, creosote or other
substances:

- From birch (Betula spp.):
4403 95 10
4403 95 90
4403 96 00

Split poles, piles, pickets and
stakes, pointed but not sawn
lengthwise

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4404 20 00

Non-coniferous     railway     or
tramway sleepers of wood:

- Not impregnated


      139
                                         ex 4406 12 00

                                         - Other (except unimpregnated)
                                         ex 4406 92 00

                                         Wood sawn or chipped length-
                                         wise sliced or peeled, whether or
                                         not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
                                         of a thickness of over 6 mm :

                                         - From birch (Betula spp.):
                                         4407 96 10
                                         4407 96 91
                                         4407 96 99

                                         Veneer sheets (including those
                                         obtained by slicing laminated
                                         wood), for plywood or similar
                                         laminated wood and other wood,
                                         sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
                                         whether or not planed, sanded,
                                         spliced or end-jointed of a
                                         thickness not exceeding 6 mm:
                                         ex 4408 90 15
                                         ex 4408 90 35
                                         ex 4408 90 85
                                         ex 4408 90 95

                                         Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                         other cooper products and parts
                                         thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                         ex 4416 00 00

                                         Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                         ex 9406 10 00
Amelanchier Medik., Aronia Medik.,       Fuel wood, in the form of logs, Canada and the United States
Cotoneaster Medik., Crataegus L.,        billets, twigs, faggots or similar
Cydonia Mill., Malus Mill., Pyracantha   forms;
M. Roem., Pyrus L. and Sorbus            - sawdust, wood waste and
L.,including wood which has not kept     scrap,whether agglomerated or
its natural round surface, except        not, in the form of briquettes,
sawdust and shavings                     pellets or similar forms:

                                         Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                         billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                         forms;
                                         - Non-coniferous:
                                         ex 4401 12 00

                                         - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                         similar particles:

                                         - Non-coniferous:
                                         ex 4401 22 00



                                               140
- Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
not agglomerated:
- Sawdust:
ex 4401 40 10

- Wood waste and scrap (other
than sawdusts):
ex 4401 40 90

Wood in the rough, not stripped of
the bark and sapwood. or roughly
squared.

- Treated with paint, stains,
creosote or other substances:

- Non-coniferous:
ex4403 12 00

Wood in the rough, with or without
bark or sapwood, or roughly
squared:

- Other than treated with paint,
stains, creosote or other
substances:
ex 4403 99 00

Split poles, piles, pickets and
stakes of wood, pointed but not
sawn lengthwise

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4404 20 00

Non-coniferous     railway       or
tramway sleepers of wood:

- Not impregnated
ex 4406 12 00

- Other (except unimpregnated)
ex 4406 92 00

Wood sawn or chipped length-
wise sliced or peeled, whether or
not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
of a thickness of over 6 mm :
ex 4407 99 27
ex 4407 99 40
ex 4407 99 90

Veneer sheets (including those
obtained by slicing laminated
wood), for plywood or similar


      141
                                  laminated wood and other wood,
                                  sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
                                  whether or not planed, sanded,
                                  spliced or end-jointed of a
                                  thickness not exceeding 6 mm:
                                  ex 4408 90 15
                                  ex 4408 90 35
                                  ex 4408 90 85
                                  ex 4408 90 95

                                  Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                  other cooper products and parts
                                  thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                  ex 4416 00 00

                                  Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                  ex 9406 10 00
Prunus L., including wood which   Fuel wood, in the form of logs,       Canada, China, Democratic
has not kept its natural round    billets, twigs, faggots or similar    People's Republic of Korea, Japan,
surface                           forms;                                Mongolia, Republic of Korea, USA,
                                                                        Vietnam or any third country where
                                  - sawdust, wood waste and             Aromia bungii is known to be
                                  scrap,whether agglomerated or         present
                                  not, in the form of briquettes,
                                  pellets or similar forms:

                                  Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                  billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                  forms;
                                  - Non-coniferous:
                                  ex 4401 12 00

                                  - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                  similar particles:

                                  - Non-coniferous:
                                  ex 4401 22 00

                                  - Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
                                  not agglomerated:
                                  - Sawdust:
                                  ex 4401 40 10

                                  - Wood waste and scrap (other
                                  than sawdusts):
                                  ex 4401 40 90

                                  Wood in the rough, not stripped of
                                  the bark and sapwood. or roughly
                                  squared.

                                  - Treated with paint, stains,
                                  creosote or other substances:

                                  - Non-coniferous:
                                  ex4403 12 00


                                        142
Wood in the rough, with or without
bark or sapwood, or roughly
squared:

- Other than treated with paint,
stains, creosote or other
substances:
ex 4403 99 00

Split poles, piles, pickets and
stakes, pointed but not sawn
lengthwise

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4404 20 00

Non-coniferous     railway       or
tramway sleepers of wood:

- Not impregnated
ex 4406 12 00

- Other (except unimpregnated)
ex 4406 92 00

Wood sawn or chipped length-
wise sliced or peeled, whether or
not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
of a thickness of over 6 mm :

- from cherry (Prunus spp.)
4407 94 10
4407 94 91
4407 94 99

- Other
ex 4407 99 27
ex 4407 99 40
ex 4407 99 90

Veneer sheets (including those
obtained by slicing laminated
wood), for plywood or similar
laminated wood and other wood,
sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
whether or not planed, sanded,
spliced or end-jointed of a
thickness not exceeding 6 mm:
ex 4408 90 15
ex 4408 90 35
ex 4408 90 85
ex 4408 90 95




      143
                                           Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                           other cooper products and parts
                                           thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                           ex 4416 00 00

                                           Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                           ex 9406 10 00
Acer L., Aesculus L., Alnus L., Betula     Fuel wood, in the form of logs, Third countries on whose territory
L., Carpinus L., Cercidiphyllum            billets, twigs, faggots or similar Anoplophora glabripennis is known
Siebold & Zucc., Corylus L., Fagus L.,     forms;                             to be present
Fraxinus L., Koelreuteria Laxm.,           - sawdust, wood waste and
Platanus L., Populus L., Salix L., Tilia   scrap,whether agglomerated or
L. and Ulmus L., including wood which      not, in the form of briquettes,
has not kept its natural round surface     pellets or similar forms:

                                           Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                           billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                           forms;
                                           - Non-coniferous:
                                           ex 4401 12 00

                                           - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                           similar particles:

                                           - Non-coniferous:
                                           ex 4401 22 00

                                           - Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
                                           not agglomerated:
                                           - Sawdust:
                                           ex 4401 40 10

                                           - Wood waste and scrap (other
                                           than sawdusts):
                                           ex 4401 40 90

                                           Wood in the rough, not stripped of
                                           the bark and sapwood. or roughly
                                           squared.

                                           - Treated with paint, stains,
                                           creosote or other substances:

                                           - Non-coniferous:
                                           ex4403 12 00

                                           Wood in the rough, with or without
                                           bark or sapwood, or roughly
                                           squared:

                                           - Other than treated with paint,
                                           stains, creosote or other
                                           substances:

                                              - from beech (Fagus spp):


                                                 144
   4403 93 00
   4403 94 00

   - From birch (Betula spp.):
   4403 95 10
   4403 95 90
   4403 96 00

   - From poplar and aspen
   (Populus spp.):
   4403 97 00

   From other:
   ex 4403 99 00

Split poles, piles, pickets and
stakes of wood, pointed but not
sawn lengthwise

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4404 20 00

Non-coniferous     railway       or
tramway sleepers of wood:

- Not impregnated
ex 4406 12 00

- Other (except unimpregnated)
ex 4406 92 00

Wood sawn or chipped length-
wise sliced or peeled, whether or
not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
of a thickness of over 6 mm :

   - from beech (Fagus spp):
   4407 92 00

   - from maple (Acer spp.):
   4407 93 10
   4407 93 91
   4407 93 99

   - from ash (Fraxinus spp.):
   4407 95 10
   4407 95 91
   4407 95 99

   - of birch (Betula spp.):
   4407 96 10
   4407 96 91
   4407 96 99




      145
                                            - of poplar and aspen (Populus
                                            spp.):
                                            4407 97 10
                                            4407 97 91
                                            4407 97 99

                                            - of others:
                                            4407 99 27
                                            4407 99 40
                                            4407 99 90

                                         Veneer sheets (including those
                                         obtained by slicing laminated
                                         wood), for plywood or similar
                                         laminated wood and other wood,
                                         sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
                                         whether or not planed, sanded,
                                         spliced or end-jointed of a
                                         thickness not exceeding 6 mm:
                                         ex 4408 90 15
                                         ex 4408 90 35
                                         ex 4408 90 85
                                         ex 4408 90 95

                                         Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                         other cooper products and parts
                                         thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                         ex 4416 00 00

                                         Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                         ex 9406 10 00
Acer macrophyllum Pursh, Aesculus        Fuel wood, in the form of logs, USA
californica (Spach) Nutt., Lithocarpus   billets, twigs, faggots or similar
densiflorus (Hook. & Am.)Rehd. and       forms;
Taxus brevifolia Nutt                    - sawdust, wood waste and
                                         scrap,whether agglomerated or
                                         not, in the form of briquettes,
                                         pellets or similar forms:

                                         Fuel wood, in the form of logs,
                                         billets, twigs, faggots or similar
                                         forms;

                                         - Coniferous:
                                         ex 4401 11 00

                                         - Non-coniferous:
                                         ex 4401 12 00

                                         - Wood in the form of plywood and
                                         similar particles:

                                         - Coniferous:
                                         ex 4401 21 00



                                               146
 - Non-coniferous:
 ex 4401 22 00

 - Sawdust, scrap and wood waste,
 not agglomerated:

 - Sawdust:
 ex 4401 40 10

 - Wood waste and scrap (other
 than sawdust):
 ex 4401 40 90

 Wood in the rough, not stripped of
 the bark and sapwood. or roughly
 squared.

 - Treated with paint, stains,
 creosote or other substances:

 - Coniferous:
 ex4403 11 00

 - Non-coniferous:
 ex4403 12 00

 Wood in the rough, with or without
 bark or sapwood, or roughly
 squared:

 - Other than treated with paint,
 stains, creosote or other
 substances:

- Other, coniferous:

 ex 4403 25 10
 ex 4403 25 90
 ex 4403 26 00

 Wood in the rough, with or without
 bark or sapwood, or roughly
 squared:

 - Other than treated with paint,
 stains, creosote or other
 preservatives:

- Other, non-coniferous:
 ex 4403 99 00

 Split poles, piles, pickets and
 stakes, pointed but not sawn
 lengthwise



       147
- Coniferous:
ex 4404 10 00

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4404 20 00

Non-coniferous    railway        or
tramway sleepers:

- Not impregnated

- Coniferous:
ex 4406 11 00

- Non-coniferous:
ex 4406 12 00

- Other (except unimpregnated)

- Coniferous:
ex 4406 91 00

Non-coniferous:
ex 4406 92 00


Wood sawn or chipped length-
wise sliced or peeled, whether or
not planed, sanded or end-jointed,
of a thickness of over 6 mm :

- Coniferous
ex 4407 19 10
ex 4407 19 20
ex 4407 19 90

- from maple (Acer spp.):
4407 93 10
4407 93 91
4407 93 99

- of other:
 4407 99 27
 4407 99 40
 4407 99 90

Veneer sheets (including those
obtained by slicing laminated
wood), for plywood or similar
laminated wood and other wood,
sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled,
whether or not planed, sanded,
spliced or end-jointed of a
thickness not exceeding 6 mm:



      148
                                        - Coniferous:
                                        ex 4408 10 15
                                        ex 4408 10 91
                                        ex 4408 10 98

                                        Other
                                        ex 4408 90 15
                                        ex 4408 90 35
                                        ex 4408 90 85
                                        ex 4408 90 95

                                        Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and
                                        other cooper products and parts
                                        thereof, of wood, including staves:
                                        ex 4416 00 00

                                        Prefabricated buildings of wood
                                        ex 9406 10 00




                                                  Subsection B 2

   Plants, plant products and other objects and items, for whose entry on the territory of the Republic of
                         North Macedonia, no phytosanitary certificate is required



Plants, plant products and other Tariff code (TC) and designation              Country of origin or exporting
items that do not require                                                      country
phytosanitary certificate




Fruits of Ananas comosus (L.) Merrill   Pineapple, fresh or dried:              Third countries
                                        0804 30 00



Fruits of Cocos nucifera L.             Coconut, fresh or dried, whether peeled Third countries
                                        or not


                                        0801 12 00
                                        0801 19 00


Fruits of Durio zibethinus Murray       Durian:                                 Third countries




                                               149
                                     0810 60 00

Fruits of Musa L.                   Bananas, including plantains, fresh or Third countries
                                    dried;


                                    0803 10 10
                                    0803 10 90
                                    0803 90 90
                                    0803 90 10


Fruits of Phoenix dactylifera L     Dates, fresh or dried:                      Third countries
                                    0804 10 00


                                              Subsection B 3

  Other plants, plant products and other objects and items, other than those listed in subsection B 1 and
 subsection B 2, for which a phytosanitary certificate is required, based on a risk assessment, in order to
                     be introduced on the territory of the Republic of North Macedonia


  All plants, within the meaning of Bulbs, tubers, tuberous roots, roots, Third countries other than those
  Article 3 of the Law on Plant Health corms, cuttings and rhizomes, for listed in subsection B 1 and
                                       planting, in vegetation or in flower; subsection B 2
                                       plants and chicory root
                                       ex 0601 10 90
                                       ex 0601 20 10

                                       Cut flowers and flower buds of a kind
                                       suitable for bouquets or for
                                       ornamental purposes, fresh, dried,
                                       dyed, bleached, impregnated or
                                       otherwise prepared:
                                       0603 15 00
                                       0603 19 10
                                       0603 19 20
                                       ex 0603 19 70

                                       Foliage, branches and other parts of
                                       plants, without flowers or flower buds
                                       and grasses (not mosses or lichens)
                                       suitable for bouquets or ornamental
                                       purposes, fresh:
                                       ex 0604 20 90

                                       Onions, alma, garlic, leeks and other
                                       onions, fresh or chilled, except for
                                       planting



                                            150
ex 0703 10 19
ex 0703 10 90
ex 0703 20 00
ex 0703 90 00

Cabbage, cauliflower, kohlrabi, kale
and similar edible vegetables of the
family Brassicaceae, fresh, other
than those planted in a growing
substrate
ex 0704 10 00
ex 0704 90 10
ex 0704 90 90

Lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and chicory
(Cichorium spp.), fresh or chilled,
other than those planted in a growing
substrate:
ex 0705 11 00
ex 0705 21 00
ex 0705 29 00


Cucumbers and gherkins, fresh or
chilled:
0707 00 05
0707 00 90

Legumeinous vegetables, shelled or
unshelled, fresh or chilled:
0708 10 00
0708 20 00
0708 90 00

Asparagus, celery other than
celeriac, spinach, New Zealand
spinach and loboda (garden
spinach),    artichokes,      olives.
pumpkins, zucchini(Cucurbitаa spp)
salad vegetables, (other than lettuce
Lactuca sativa)        and chicory
(Cichorium spp.), chard and
cardoons, capers fresh or chilled,
other than planted in a growing
substrate

0709 20 00
ex 0709 40 00
ex 0709 70 00
0709 91 00
0709 92 10
0709 92 90
0709 93 10
0709 93 90


     151
ex 0709 99 10
ex 0709 99 20
0709 99 40
ex 0709 99 50
ex 0709 99 90

Dried legumes in grains, shelled or
unshelled or crushed:

ex 0713 20 00
ex 0713 31 00
ex 0713 32 00
ex 0713 34 00
ex 0713 35 00
ex 0713 39 00
ex 0713 40 00
ex 0713 60 00
ex 0713 90 00

Brazil nuts and cashews, fresh,
whole, in shell, not peeled, intended
for sowing:

ex 0801 21 00
ex 0801 31 00

Other nuts in shell, fresh or dried,
peeled or unpeeled, for sowing:

ex 0802 11 10
ex 0802 11 90
ex 0802 21 00
ex 0802 31 00
ex 0802 41 00
ex 0802 51 00
ex 0802 61 00
ex 0802 70 00
ex 0802 80 00
ex 0802 90 10
ex 0802 90 50
ex 0802 90 85

Figs, fresh or chilled:
0804 20 10

Melons (including         watermelons)
fresh or chilled:

0807 11 00
0807 19 00

Other fruits, fresh or chilled:

ex 0810 20 90
ex 0810 90 20


     152
ex 0810 90 75

Coffee berries (other than beans),
fresh, whole in husk, not roasted:
ex 0901 11 00

Tea leaves fresh whole, uncut,
unfermented
unflavoured
ex 0902 10 00
ex 0902 20 00

Thyme and fenugreek seeds for
sowing:

ex 0910 99 10
ex 0910 99 31
ex 0910 99 33

Bay leaves, fresh:
ex 0910 99 50

Barley, seeds for sowing:
1003 10 00

Oats, seeds for sowing:
1004 10 00
1004 10 00


Sorghum in grain, seed for sowing:
1007 10 10
1007 10 90

Buckwheat millet and canary seeds,
other cereals, seeds for sowing:

ex 1008 10 00
1008 21 00
ex 1008 30 00
ex 1008 40 00
ex 1008 50 00
ex 1008 90 00

Peanuts, fresh, not Кикирикиroasted
or otherwise cooked whole,
unshelled, not crushed, as well as
seeds for sowing:

1202 30 00
ex 1202 41 00

Other oilseeds for sowing and
oleaginous fruits; fresh, not broken:



     153
ex 1207 10 00
1207 21 00
еx 1207 30 00
1207 40 10
ex 1207 60 00
ex 1207 70 00
1207 91 10
1207 99 20

Seeds and fruits, of a kind used for
sowing:

1209 10 00
1209 22 10
1209 22 80
1209 23 11
1209 23 15
1209 23 80
1209 24 00
1209 25 10
1209 25 90
1209 29 45
1209 29 50
1209 29 60
1209 29 80
1209 30 00
1209 91 30
1209 91 80
1209 99 10
1209 99 91
1209 99 99

Hops, fresh:
ex 1210 10 00

Plants, other than those for planting,
and parts of plants (including seeds
for sowing and fruits), fresh or chilled,
not cut nor crushed or powdered

ex 1211 30 00
ex 1211 40 00
ex 1211 50 00
ex 1211 90 30
ex 1211 90 86

Locust beans for sowing and sugar
cane, fresh or chilled, not ground:
fruit stones and kernels for sowing
and other fresh vegetable products
not elsewhere specified or included

ex 1212 92 00
ex 1212 93 00
еx 1212 94 00


     154
                                         еx 1212 99 41
                                         ex 1212 99 95

                                         Vegetable materials primarily used
                                         for plaiting, fresh:
                                         ex 1401 90 00

                                         Vegetable products not elsewhere
                                         specified or included, fresh:
                                         ex 1404 90 00




                                                   Annex 6.
                                                    LIST VI
    PLANTS AND PLANT PRODUCTS FOR WHICH SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS MAY BE APPLIED
   1. regulated plants and plant products into production and imports - EMERGENCY MEASURES, IN
      ORDER TO PREVENT introduction and spreading of certain harmful organisms on the territory of
      the Republic of North Macedonia



            Certain plants and plant products                   Certain harmful organisms

wood of Fraxinus L., Juglans ailantifolia Carr., Juglans Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire
mandshurica Maxim., Ulmus davidiana Planch. and
Pterocarya rhoifolia Siebold and Zucc. Originating in
Canada and the United States, other than in the form of
        -     chips, particles, sawdust, shavings, wood
              waste and scrap obtained in whole or in part
              from these trees
        -     Wood packaging material:


                                             155
           Certain plants and plant products                    Certain harmful organisms


          but including wood which has not kept its natural
          round surface and furniture and other articles
          made of unprocessed wood with the headings
          ex 4401 12 00
          ex 4403 12 00
          ex 4403 99 00
          ex 4404 20 00
          ex 4406 12 00
          ex 4406 92 00
             4407 95 10
             4407 95 91
             4407 95 99
          ex 4407 99 27
          ex 4407 99 40
          ex 4407 99 90
          ex 4408 90 15
          ex 4408 90 35
          ex 4408 90 85
          ex 4408 90 95
          ex 4416 00 00
          ex 9406 10 00
plants for planting of Solanum lycopersicum L. and Tomato brown rugose fruit virus
Capsicum spp.,
plants other than seeds Rosa spp. Originating in Canada, Rose Rosette Virus and its vector
India or the United States                               Phyllocoptes fructiphilus
plants intended for planting, other than seeds, with a
diameter at the thickest part of the stalk or root collar of Aromia bungii (Faldermann)
more than 1 cm from Prunus spp. With the exception of
Prunus laurocerasus L.
- Wood which has been entirely or partially obtained
    from certain plants in the form of:
4401 12 00          No - coniferous fuel wood, logs, billets,
twigs or similar forms

4401 22 00         No - coniferous wood, in chips or
particles
4401 40            Wood     waste    and    scrap,    non-
agglomerated
4403 12 00         Wood in the rough, treated with paint,
                   stains, creosote or other preservatives,
                   whether or not stripped of the bark or
                   sapwood, or roughly squared
ex 4404 20 00      Non-coniferous wood for split poles,
                   piles, pickets and stacks of wood
                   pointed but not sawn lengthwise; wood
                   roughly cut but not bent or otherwise
                   worked, suitable for the manufacture of
                   walking sticks, umbrellas, tool holders
                   or similar products; tiles, strips and
                   similar of wood
4406               Railway or tramway sleepers of wood
4407 94            Cherry wood (Prunus spp): cut or sawn
                   lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether
                   or not planed, sanded or end-joined, of


                                              156
               Certain plants and plant products                             Certain harmful organisms

                       a thickness of more than 6 mm.

    4416 00 00         Casks, barrels, vats, tubs and other
                       cooper products and parts thereof, of
                       wood, including staves:
    9406 10 00         Prefabricated buildings of wood
    fruits of Capsicum L., Momordica L., Solanum                   Spodoptera frugiperda (Smith)
    aethiopicum L., Solanum macrocarpon L. and Solanum
    melongena L., and plants, other than pollen, tissue
    culture, seeds and grains of Zea mays L. originating in
    non-European countries3
    Plants for planting, other than seeds of Coffea, Lavandula Xylella fastidiosa (Wells et al)
    dentata L., Nerium oleander L., Olea europaea L.,
    Polygala myrtifolia L. and Prunus dulcis (Mill.) D.A. Webb,
    which have been grown at place that is subject to annual
    inspections by competent authorities, by taking sampling
    and laboratory analysis, carried out at an appropriate time
    for those plants to determine the presence of that harmful
    organism, using the sampling scheme in order to identify
    with at least 80 % of confidence at a level of presence of
    infested plants of 1 %
    host plants and all plants for planting, other than seeds,
    which are known to be susceptible to the European and
    non-European isolates of certain organisms and which
    belong to the following genera or species:
    Acacia
    Acer
    Albizia julibrissin Durazz.
    Alnus rhombifolia Nutt.
    Amaranthus retroflexus L.
    Ambrosia
    Ampelopsis arborea (L.) Koehne


3
 Third countries for the Republic of North Macedonia are considered both European countries and non-European countries.
European countries are countries of the European Union: Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark (excluding Faroe
Islands and Greenland), Germany (excluding Heligoland islands and Bessingen territory- Switzerland), Estonia, Ireland, Greece,
Spain (excluding Ceuta and Melilla), France (including Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique, Réunion and Mayote, with the
exception of the French overseas countries and territories covered by the fourth part of the TFEU: New Caledonia; Saint Pierre
and Miquelon; Saint Barthélemy, Saint Marteen, Wallis and Futuna, French Polynesia; French Southern Territories), Croatia,
Italy (excluding the municipalities of Livigno and Champion D'Italia and the national waters of Lake Lugano between the coast
and the political boundary of the area between Ponte Teresa and Porto Cerezio), Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania , Luxembourg,
Hungary, Malta, Netherlands (excluding the non-European territories), Austria, Poland, Portugal (including the Azores and
Madeira), Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland, Sweden and Northern Ireland and other European countriesAlbania, Andorra,
Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Great Britain, Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, Georgia, Iceland, Kosovo,
Liechtenstein, Moldova, Monaco, Norway, Russia (European part: Central Federal District) , Southern Federal District, North
Caucasus Federal District, Central Volga District), San Marino, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine, Montenegro, Switzerland. Non -
European countries are all countries outside the European continent which include: countries of the American continent (North,
Central and South America), countries of the African continent, countries of the Asian continent, countries of the Pacific, Australia
and New Zealand.




                                                      157
            Certain plants and plant products       Certain harmful organisms


Ampelopsis brevipedunculata (Maxim.) Trautv.
Ampelopsis cordata Michx.
Anthyllis hermanniae L.
Artemisia
Asparagus acutifolius L.
Baccharis
Brassica
Calicotome spinosa (L.) Link
Calicotome villosa (Poiret) Link
Callicarpa americana L.
Callistemon citrinus (Curtis) Skeels
Calluna vulgaris (L.) Hull
Carya
Catharanthus
Celtis occidentalis L.
Cercis canadensis L.
Cercis occidentalis Torr.
Cercis siliquastrum L.
Chamaecrista fasciculata (Michx.) Greene
Chamaesyce canescens (L.) Prokh.
Chenopodium album L.
Chionanthus
Chitalpa tashkentensis TS Elias & Wisura
Cistus
Citrus
Clematis cirrhosa L.
Coelorachis cylindrica (Michx.) Nash Coffea
Conium maculatum L.
Convolvulus cneorum L.
Coprosma repens A.Rich.


                                              158
            Certain plants and plant products     Certain harmful organisms


Coronilla glauca (L.) Batt.
Coronilla valentina L.
Cyperus eragrostis Lam.
Cytisus
Digitaria
Dimorphoteca
Diospyros kaki Lf
Diplocyclos palmatus (L.) C.Jeffrey
Dodonaea viscosa (L.) Jacq.
Elaeagnus angustifolia L.
Encelia farinosa A. Gray ex Torr.
Eremophila maculata (Ker Gawler) F. von Müller.
Erigeron
Erodium moschatum (L.) L’Hérit.
Erysimum
Euphorbia chamaesyce L.
Euphorbia terracina L.
Euryops chrysanthemoides (DC.) B.Nord
Euryops pectinatus (L.) Cass.
Fagus crenata Blume
Fallopia japonica (Houtt.) Ronse Decr.
Fatsia japonica (Thunb.) Decne. & Planch.
Ficus carica L.
Frangula alnus Mill.
Fraxinus
Genista
Ginkgo biloba L.
Gleditsia triacanthos L.
Grevillea juniperina Br.
Hebe


                                            159
           Certain plants and plant products        Certain harmful organisms


Helianthus
Helichrysum
Heliotropium europaeum L.
Hemerocallis
Hevea brasiliensis (Willd. Ex A.Juss.) Müll.Arg.
Hibiscus
Humulus scandens (Lour.) Merr.
Ilex aquifolium L.
Ilex vomitoria Sol. ex Aiton
Iva annua L.
Jacaranda mimosifolia D. Don
Juglans
Juniperus ashei J. Buchholz
Koelreuteria bipinnata Franch.
Lagerstroemia
Laurus nobilis L.
Lavandula
Ligustrum lucidum L.
Liquidambar styraciflua L.
Lonicera japonica Thunb.
Lupinus
Magnolia grandiflora L.
Mallotus paniculatus (Lam.) Müll.Arg.
Malva parviflora L.
Medicago arborea L.
Medicago sativa L.
Metrosideros
Mimosa
Modiola caroliniana (L.) G. Don
Morus


                                              160
            Certain plants and plant products     Certain harmful organisms


Insular myoporum R. Br.
Myrtus communis L.
Nandina domestica Murray
Neptunia lutea (Leavenw.) Benth.
Nerium oleander L.
Olea
Osteospermum ecklonis DC.
Osteospermum fruticosum (L.) Norl.
Parthenocissus quinquefolia (L.) Planch.
Paspalum dilatatum Poir.
Pelargonium
Persea americana Mill.
Phagnalon saxatile (L.) Cass.
Phillyrea angustifolia L.
Phillyrea latifolia L.
Phlomis fruticosa L.
Phoenix reclinata Jacq.
Phoenix roebelenii O 'Brien
Pinus taeda L.
Pistacia vera L.
Plantago lanceolata L.
Platanus
Pluchea odorata (L.) Cass.
Polygala myrtifolia L.,
Polygala x grandiflora Nana
Prunus
Pterospartum tridentatum (L.) Willk.
Pyrus
Quercus
Ratibida columnifera (Nutt.) Wooton & Standl.


                                            161
            Certain plants and plant products    Certain harmful organisms


Rhamnus alaternus L.
Rhus
Robinia pseudoacacia L.
Rosa
Rosmarinus officinalis L.
Rubus
Salvia mellifera Greene
Sambucus
Santolina chamaecyparissus L.
Sapindus saponaria L.
Sassafras
Setaria magna Griseb.
Solidago fistulosa Mill.
Solidago virgaurea L.
Sorghum halepense (L.) Pers.
Spartium
Stewartia pseudocamellia
Strelitzia reginae Aiton
Streptocarpus
Symphyotrichum divaricatum (Nutt.) GLNesom
Teucrium capitatum L.
Trifolium repens L.
UlexUlmus
Vaccinium
Vinca
Vitis
Westringia fruticosa (Willd.) Druce
Westringia glabra R.Br.
Xanthium strumarium L.




                                           162
          Certain plants and plant products                    Certain harmful organisms

-    Plants intended for planting, other than seeds, with a Anoplophora glabripennis
     diameter at thickest part of the stalk of over 1 cm from (Motschulsky)
     Acer spp., Aesculus spp., Alnus spp., Betula spp.,
     Carpinus spp., Cercidiphyllum spp., Corylus spp.,
     Fagus spp. ., Fraxinus spp., Koelreuteria spp.,
     Platanus spp., Populus spp., Salix spp., Tilia spp.
     and Ulmus spp .;
- wood packaging material obtained entirely or in part
     from certain plants;
- wood, obtained entirely or in part from certain plants,
     other than wood packaging material, fulfilling any oft
     the following points:
4401 10 00          Fuel wood, in the form of logs, billets,
twigs, faggots or similar forms;
4401 22 00          No - coniferous wood, in chips or
particles
ex 4401 39 80 other than shavings, waste and scrap,
whether agglomerated or not, in the form of briquettes,
pellets or similar forms
4403 10 00          Wood in the rough, treated with paint,
stains, creosote or other preservatives, whether or not
stripped of the bark or sapwood, or roughly squared
4403 92 wood in the rough of beech (Fagus spp.),
whether or not stripped of the bark or sapwood, or roughly
squared
ex 4403 99          non-coniferous wood in the rough
(other than beech (Fagus spp.), poplar (Populus spp.) or
birch (Betula spp.)), whether or not stripped of the bark or
the sapwood, or roughly squared
4403 99 10          wood in the rough of poplar (Populus
spp.), whether or not stripped of the bark or sapwood, or
roughly squared
4403 99 51           raw saw logs of birch (Betula spp.),
Whether or not stripped of the bark or sapwood, or
roughly squared
4403 99 59          wood in the rough of birch (Betula spp.)
whether or not stripped from the bark or sapwood, or
roughly squared
ex 4404 20 00 Non-coniferous wood for split poles,
piles, pickets and stacks of wood pointed but not sawn
lengthwise; wood roughly cut but not bent or otherwise
worked, suitable for the manufacture of walking sticks,
umbrellas, tool holders or similar products; tiles, strips
and similar of wood
4406 Railway or tramway sleepers of wood
4407 92 00           wood of beech (Fagus spp.), cut or
sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed,
sanded or end-joined of thickness of more than 6 mm
4407 93 wood of maple (Acer spp.), Cut or sawn
lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed,
sanded or end-joined, of thickness of more than 6 mm
4407 95 wood of ash (Fraxinus spp.), Cut or sawn
lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed,
sanded or end-joined, of thickness of over 6 mm.
ex 4407 99          Non-coniferous wood (other than
beech (Fagus spp.), maple (Acer spp.), ash (Fraxinus
spp.) or poplar (Populus spp.), cut or sawn lengthwise,
sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or end-
joineded, of thickness of over 6 mm.
4407 99 91          wood of poplar (Populus spp.) cut or
sawn lenghtwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed,
sanded or end-joined, of thickness of over 6 mm
9406 00 20          Prefabricated buildings of wood
Plants intended for planting, other than seeds, with a Anoplophora chinensis (Forster)


                                            163
          Certain plants and plant products                         Certain harmful organisms

diameter of the thickest part of the stalk over 1 cm from
Acer spp., Aesculus hippocastanum, Alnus spp., Betula
spp., Carpinus spp., Citrus spp., Cornus spp., Corylus
spp. , Cotoneaster spp., Crataegus spp., Fagus spp.,
Lagerstroemia spp., Malus spp., Platanus spp., Populus
spp., Prunus laurocerasus, Pyrus spp., Rosa spp., Salix
spp. and Ulmus spp .;
- plants (other than fruits and seeds) from Abies Mill.,       Bursaphelenchus xylophilus and its
     Cedrus Trew, Larix Mill., Picea A. Dietr., Pinus L.,      vector, which means beetles belonging
     Pseudotsuga Carr. and Tsuga Carr .;                       to the genus Monochamus Megerle in
- Coniferous trees (Coniferales) belonging to one of           Dejean, 1821;
     the following points: (i) wood within the meaning of
     Article 3 point 3 of the Plant Health Law (ii) wood
     which has not kept its round surface; (iii) wood in the
     form of a box for bees and nests for birds.
- suspicious wood which does not mean sawn wood or
     logs of Taxus L. and Thuja L., and wood which has
     undergone processing to eliminate the risk of being
     a host to PWN (Pine wood nematode);
- bark of conifers (Coniferales);
- Wood packaging material:
- plants (other than fruits and seeds) of Acer                 Phytophthora ramorumWerres,          De
     macrophyllum Pursh, Acer pseudoplatanus L.,               Cock & Man in 't Veld sp. nov.
     Adiantum aleuticum (Rupr.) Paris, Adiantum jordanii
     C. Muell., Aesculus californica (Spach) Nutt.,
     Aesculus hippocastanum L., Arbuturs menziesi,
     Arbutus unedo L., Arctostaphylos spp. Adans,
     Calluna vulgaris (L.) Hull, Camellia spp. L., Castanea
     sativa Mill., Fagus sylvatica L., Frangula californica
     (Eschsch.) Gray, Frangula purshiana (DC.) Cooper,
     Fraxinus excelsior L., Griselinia littoralis (Raoul),
     Hamamelis virginiana L., Heteromeles arbutifolia
     (Lindley) M. Roemer, Kalmia latifolia L., Laurus
     nobilis L., Leucothoe spp. D. Don, Lithocarpus
     densiflorus (Hook. & Arn.) Rehd., Lonicera hispidula
     (Lindl.) Dougl. ex Torr.&Gray, Magnolia spp. L.,
     Michelia doltsopa Buch.-Ham. ex DC, Nothofagus
     obliqua (Mirbel) Blume, Osmanthus heterophyllus
     (G. Don) P. S. Green, Parrotia persica (DC) C.A.
     Meyer, Photinia x fraseri Dress, Pieris spp. D. Don,
     Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirbel) Franco, Quercus
     spp. L., Rhododendron spp. L., other than
     Rhododendron simsii Planch., Rosa gymnocarpa
     Nutt., Salix caprea L., Sequoia sempervirens (Lamb.
     ex D. Don) Endl., Syringa vulgaris L., Taxus spp. L.,
     Trientalis latifolia (Hook), Umbellularia californica
     (Hook. & Arn.) Nutt., Vaccinium ovatum Pursh и
     Viburnum spp. L.;
- wood of Acer macrophyllum Pursh, Aesculus
     californica (Spach) Nutt., Lithocarpus densiflorus
     (Hook. & Arn.) Rehd., Quercus spp. L. and Taxus
     brevifolia Nutt .;
- isolated bark of Acer macrophyllum Pursh, Aesculus
     californica (Spach) Nutt., Lithocarpus densiflorus
     (Hook. & Arn.) Rehd., Quercus spp. L. and Taxus
     brevifolia Nutt .;
- cut wood without bark from Quercus spp. L.
     originating in the United States
plants of the genus Pinus L. and species Pseudotsuga           Gibberella   circinata   Nirenberg   &
menziesii, intended for planting, including seeds and          O’Donnell
propagating cones
live pollen and propagating plants for planting, other thanPseudomonas syringae pv. actinidae
seeds of Actinidia Lindl.                                  Takikawa,    Serizawa,   Ichikawa,
                                                           Tsuyumu & Goto
plants for planting, other than seeds, which can only grow Pomacea (Perry)


                                               164
          Certain plants and plant products                    Certain harmful organisms

in water or soil that is constantly saturated with water
Tubers of Solanum tuberosum L, including those Epitrix spp., Epitrix cucumeris
intended for planting                                   (Harris),Epitrix papa sp. n., Epitrix
                                                        subcrinita (Lec.) and Epitrix tuberis
                                                        (Gentner)
tomato seeds, Lycopersicon lycopersicum (L.) Karsten ex Pepino mosaic virus
Farw.




   2. PLANTS AND PLANT PRODUCTS FOR WHICH SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS MAY BE APPLIED




           1. Cereals and products thereof
           2. Dried leguminous plants
           3. Tubers of manioc and products thereof
           4. Residues from the production of vegetable oils




                                               165
