                               AGRICULTURAL PESTS ACT 36 OF 1983

 [ASSENTED TO 13 APRIL 1983]                [DATE OF COMMENCEMENT:               FEBRUARY 1984]


                                 (English text signed by the State President)

                                                  as amended by



                                 Agricultural Pests Amendment Act 17 of 1985
                                  gricultural Pests Amendment Act 47 of 1986
                                 Agricultural Pests Amendment Act 18 of 1989
                                  Agricultural Pests Amendment Act 9 of 1992
                                 Agricultural Pests Amendment Act 25 of 1996

                                                          ACT

 To provide for measures by which agricultural pests may be prevented and combated; and for
 matters connected therewith.

 1
         Definitions
                                                    1
       In this Act, unless the context otherwise indicates-


       'apiary equipment' means beehives, accessories to beehives and anything else in which honey-
bees, honey, beeswax or the eggs or larvae of honey-bees are kept or treated;

      , authorized person' means a person to whom a power or duty has been delegated or assigned
under section 2 (4);


       'control measure' means a control measure contemplated in section 6;

       'controlled goods' means anything mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b) of section 3 (1);

      'department' means the Department of Agriculture;


[Definition of 'department' substituted by s.          1 (a) of Act 18 of 1989 and by s. 1 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.]



      'Director-General' "".

                [Definition of 'Director-General' deleted by s. 1 (b) of Act 18 of 1989.

Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
       'executive officer' means an officer designated in terms of section 2 (1);


                [Definition of 'executive officer' substituted by s. 1 (b) of Act 9 of 1992.
 section
      'exotic animal' means any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom which is not indigenous to
 the Republic, and includes the eggs of such a member, but does not include such a member which is an
 animal to which the Livestock Improvement Act, 1977 (Act 25 of 1977), applies or which is a fish as
 defined in section 1 of the Sea Fishery Act, 1988 (Act 12 of 1988);



                 [Definition of 'exotic animal' substituted by s. 1 (c) of Act 18 of 1989.


       'growth medium' means any solid or liquid substance in which or on which plants are or can be
cultivated, including soil in containers or structures used for the cultivation of plants;

       'honey' means honey, whether in combs or not, and pollen collected by honey-bees, and includes
any preparation or product consisting of or containing honey or such pollen;

       'import' means to introduce controlled goods into the Republic or to bring about the introduction of
such goods into the Republic;

                       [Definition of 'import' inserted by s. 1 (d) of Act 18 of 1989.


      'infectious thing' means anything, except a plant, which may serve as a medium for the importation or
spreading of any pathogen, insect or exotic animal;


    'insect' means any invertebrate member of the animal kingdom, irrespective of the stage of
development thereof, but not such a member-

            (a       included in the definition of 'fish' in section 1 of the Sea Fishery Act, 1988 (Act 12
            )
                     of 1988);

            (b)     that can affect man or an animal only;

                     [Definition of 'insect' substituted by s. 1 re) of Act 18 of 1989.


      'local authority' means any institution or body contemplated in section 84 (1) (I) of the
Provincial Government Act, 1961 (Act 32 of 1961);


Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
                  [Definition of 'local authority' substituted by s. 1 (I} of Act 18 of 1989.

        'Minister' means the Minister of Agriculture;



       'officer' means an officer or employee as defined in section 1 of the Public Service Act, 1984
  (Act 111 of 1984);

                      [Definition of 'officer' substituted by s. 1 (g) of Act 18 of 1989.

        'order' means an order contemplated in section 4 or 7;


                          [Definition of 'order' substituted by s. 1 of Act 47 of 1986.

       'owner', in relation to land-

             (a
                      means the person in whom the ownership of that land is vested or in whose name that
             )
                      land is registered or, if that person is absent from the Republic or his whereabouts are
                      unknown, his representative in the Republic;

             (b)
                     which has been sold, includes a buyer in whose name such land has not yet been
                     registered;

             (c)     subject to a usufruct, means the usufructuary;

             (d) under the control of a loca! authority, means that local authority;


     'pathogen' means any algae, fungus, bacterium, virus, mycoplasm, spiroplasm, viroid or rickettsia-
like organism, but does not include any such pathogen that can cause a disease in man or an animal
only;

                   [Definition of 'pathogen' substituted by s. 1 (h) of Act 18 of 1989.:

      'permit' means a permit mentioned in section 3 (I) or 6 (3)


      'plant' includes any live or dead part of a plant and any derivation of a plant;


       'prescribe' means prescribe by regulation;


    , quarantine area' means an area which has been determined as a quarantine area in an order
under section 7;

Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
         regulation' means a regulation made under this Act;


        'this Act' includes the regulations;

        user of land' means an owner of land, and includes-

                                                                                                                  ~
              (a      a person who has a personal or real right in respect of land in his capacity of fiduciary ,
              )
                      fideicommissary , holder of a servitude, possessor, lessee or - occupier, irrespective of
                      whether he resides thereon;

             (b)
                     a person who has the right to cut trees or wood on land or to remove trees, wood
                     or organic material from land; ,

             (c)
                     a person who has the right to remove sand, soil, clay, stone or gravel from land;



             (d)     a person who carries on prospecting or mining activities on land.

 2       Persons charged with administration of Act


     (I) The Minister shall designate as many officers of the department as he may deem necessary as
executive officers, who shall, subject to the instructions of the Minister, exercise the powers and
perform the duties conferred or imposed upon an executive officer under this Act.



                               [Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 2 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.


      (2) An executive officer may delegate any power conferred upon him by or under this Act to
an officer, except the power to order under section 7 that something be destroyed.

                               [Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 2 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.


     (3) Any decision or order of such an officer may at any time be withdrawn or amended by the
executive officer concerned and shall, until it has been so withdrawn or amended and except in the
application of this paragraph, be deemed to be a decision or order of such executive officer.



                               [Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 2 (a) of Act 9 of 1992,


Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
          (4) (a) If the Minister deems it fit, he may delegate or assign any power conferred upon him by
     section 8 or any power or duty conferred or imposed upon an executive officer by or under this Act
     to a person who is not an officer.

                               [Para. (a) substituted by s. 2 (b) of Act 9 of 1992.


          (b) When the Minister thus delegates or assigns a power or duty, he may determine that-


              (i)
                      the power or duty shall be exercised or performed at the expense of the person
                      concerned;

             (ii)
                      the person concerned shall have no recourse against the State for any expenses thus
                      incurred; and

            (iii)
                      the person concerned shall exercise his powers and perform his duties subject to the
                      instructions of the executive officer concerned.

                           [Sub-para. (iii) substituted by s. 2 (c) of Act 9 of 1992.]


         (c) A juristic person established under any law and to whom a power or duty has thus been
    delegated or assigned, shall, notwithstanding the absence of any express provision to that effect in
    the law under which it was established, be deemed to be competent to exercise such power or
    perform such duty.

         (d) Such juristic person may in writing authorize any person in its employment to exercise the
    power or to perform the duty concerned.

                             [Sub-s. (4) substituted by s. 2 (a) of Act 18 of 1989.


     v" (5) Any decision or order of an authorized person may at any time be withdrawn or amended by
    the Minister or the executive office~ concerned, as the case may be, and shall, until it has been so
    amended or withdrawn and except in the application of this subsection, be deemed to be a decision or
    order of the Minister or such executive officer.

         [Sub-s. (5) substituted by s. 2 (b) of Act 18 of 1989 and by s. 2 (d) of Act 9 of 1992.]

    3     Importation of controlled goods


        (I) Subject to the provisions of subsections (4), (5) and (6) no person shall import into the
    Republic-

u
            (a       any plant, pathogen, insect, exotic animal, growth medium, infectious thing, honey,
            )
                     beeswax or used apiary equipment;

            (b)      anything detennined by the Minister by notice in the Gazette,

except on the authority of a pennit.


      (2) A person importing controlled goods into the Republic on the authority of a permit


            (a)     shall do so only through a prescribed port of entry , except where an executive officer has
                    determined some other place;

            (b)     shall present them at that place to the executive officer concerned for such
                    inspection as he deems necessary;

            (c) shall not remove them from that place before the executive officer concerned has
                    consented in writing thereto.

                               [Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 3 of Act 9 of 1992.


    (3) An executive officer may, on application by a person importing controlled goods and against
payment of the prescribed fees-

            (a      carry out an inspection contemplated in subsection (2) (b) at a time other than during
            )
                    the official office hours of such executive officer; or

            (b)     perfonn any other function in respect of such controlled goods

           [Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 3 of Act 18 of 1989 and by s. 3 of Act 9 of 1992.


      (4) The Minister may by notice in the Gazette determine that any controlled goods or class of
controlled goods be imported into the Republic without a permit, subject to conditions set out in
that notice.

      (5) The Minister may import into the Republic exotic animals of a specified kind, or pathogens
or insects of a kind not indigenous to the Republic, if he is of the opinion that the presence thereof in
the Republic-

            (a      is desirable in order to combat the occurrence of plants, pathogens, insects or
            )
Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
                      exotic animals of a specified kind in the Republic;

              (b)     is otherwise in the interest of a specified branch of agriculture.


     (6) The Minister may by notice in the Gazette determine controlled goods or a class of controlled
 goods in respect of which a permit for their importation into the Republic may not be issued.


 4       Powers of executive officer


       (1) If an executive officer has ascertained or suspects on reasonable grounds that controlled
 goods have been imported into the Republic or have been or will be conveyed contrary to the
 provisions of this Act or a condition referred to in section 3 (4) or of the permit concerned, or that
 there is with or in any imported goods any pathogen, insect or exotic animal the importation of
 which has not been authorized, he may-

             (a       order the person in charge of the vehicle with which those goods have been
             )
                      imported or conveyed or will be conveyed-

                      (i)      not to off -load;

                      (ii)
                               not to convey any further;

                      (iii)
                               to off -load at a place determined by him,


                     such goods or such part thereof as he may determine;

             (b)
                     order the person by whom or on whose behalf such goods have been imported, or the
                     person in possession or in charge of such goods-

                    (i)
                               to destroy at the place, in the manner and within the period determined by
                               him;

                    (ii)
                               to remove from the Republic through the port, in the manner and within the
                               period determined by him;

                  (iii)
                               to treat, dispose of or deal with at the place, in the manner and within the period
                               determined by him,

                     such goods or such part thereof as he may determine. including any container

Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
                      or material employed in the importation thereof;

                                 [Para. (b) amended by s. 4 (a) of Act 18 of 1989.

              (c)
                     destroy or cause to be destroyed such goods or such part thereof as he may determine,
                     after having given the person by whom or on whose behalf those goods have been
                     imported or the person in possession or in charge of those goods at least seven days'
                     written notice of his intention to do so: Provided that where in the opinion of such
                     executive officer the destruction of the goods is urgently required or the giving of
                     notice is impracticable, notice need not be given;



  [Para. (c) substituted by s. 4 (b) of Act 18 of 1989 and amended by s. 4 (b) of Act 9 of 1992.

             (d)
                     where a person refuses or neglects to carry out any provision of an order
                     contemplated in paragraph (a) or (b), destroy or cause to be destroyed the goods
                     in question;

                               [Para. (d) substituted by s. 4 (b) of Act 18 of 1989.:

             (e)
                     order that such goods or such part thereof as he may determine, be off -loaded,
                     removed or detained as he may determine, with a view to the exercise of any of his
                     powers;

             (f)
                     order the owner or person in possession or in charge of controlled goods descended
                     from such controlled goods, or produced or acquired through, from or by means of
                     such controlled goods (hereafter referred to as acquired goods) to deal with those
                     acquired goods as provided in paragraph (b) (i) or (iii), irrespective of the degree of
                     descent or relationship concerned, or the connection between such controlled goods
                     and acquired goods.

                                       [Para. (I) added by s. 2 of Act 47 of 1986.]
                                    [Sub-s. (1) amended by s. 4 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.


      (2) When anything is required to be done in terms of this Act within a certain period, an
executive officer may, before or after the expiry thereof and on application or of his own accord, in
his discretion determine a further period within which it shall be done.

                               [Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 4 (c) of Act 9 of 1992.]


Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
          (3) When an executive officer deems it necessary for the exercise of his powers or the
     performance of his duties, he may institute any inquiry and in his discretion request any information
     and demand the production of any document from any person who in his opinion can supply such
     information or has the custody of such document.

                                    [Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 4 (c) of Act 9 of 1992.


          (4) When an executive officer may issue or grant any order, permit or authority in terms of this
     Act, he may at any time, on application or of his own accord-

                  (a) make it subject to such conditions as he thinks fit;

                  (b)     amend the provisions thereof or the conditions concerned;

                 (c)     withdraw it.


                                     [Sub-s. (4) amended by s. 4 (d) of Act 9 of 1992.

     5
             Compulsory notification of presence of certain pests on land


         A user of land shall forthwith notify the nearest officer of the department or an authorized
    person if flying locusts or voetgangers have appeared on the land concerned or if flying locusts have
    deposited eggs thereon or roosting or breeding swarms of red-billed quelea are present thereon,
    describe to him as accurately as possible where on such land the flying locusts, voetgangers, eggs or
    red-billed quelea occur, and give him such further relevant information as he may request.



                    [8. S substituted by s. S of Act 18 of 1989 and by s. S of Act 9 of 1992.

6
            Prescribing of control measures by Minister


         (1) In order to prevent and combat the spreading of pathogens, red-billed quelea, insects and
    exotic animals, the Minister may by notice in the Gazette prescribe control measures which shall be
    complied with or carried out by a user of land.

                                   [Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 6 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.


          (2) Control measures may relate to-



    Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
              (a      the destruction of plants;
              )
              (b)
                      the cleansing or destruction of plants or any particular thing infected with
                      pathogens or insects;

             (c)      the combating of pathogens, red-billed quelea, insects or exotic animals;

                                [Para. (c) substituted by s. 6 (b) of Act 9 of 1992.

             (d) the keeping, planting or cultivation of plants;


             (e)     the keeping of pathogens, insects, exotic animals or any particular thing;

             (fJ     the removal of plants, pathogens, insects, exotic animals or any particular thing-


                    (i)
                               from any land within a specified area to any other land within the same area;


                    (ii)
                               from any land within a specified area to any land within any other
                               specified area;

             (g)
                     the notification of the occurrence of specified pathogens, roosting or breeding swarms
                     of red-billed quelea, insects or exotic animals on land;

                                [Para. (g) substituted by s. 6 (c) of Act 9 of 1992.

             (h)     any other matter which the Minister may deem necessary or expedient to
                     prescribe in order to further the objects of this Act,

and the generality of the power conferred by paragraph (h) shall not be limited by the
preceding paragraphs.

      (3) A control measure may-


            (a       contain a prohibition or obligation with regard to any matter referred to in
            )
                     subsection (2) ;

            (b) provide that an executive officer may exempt any person from such a

                    prohibition or obligation by means of a permit;

Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
                                 [Para. (b) substituted by s. 6 (d) of Act 9 of 1992.

              (c)
                      set out the fees payable by a person applying for a permit referred to in
                      paragraph (b).

                                     [Para. (c) added by s. 6 of Act 18 of 1989.


        (4) Different control measures may be prescribed in respect of different plants, pathogens, insects,
 exotic animals or other things, or in respect of different areas or in respect of different circumstances
 or in such other respects as the Minister may think fit.
 7.1
          Orders with regard to land


      (1) An executive officer may by written notice, which shall be served in the prescribed manner,
 order any user of land to observe or carry out the provisions of a particular control measure on or with
 respect to any quarantine area determined in that order, or to do or omit to do any other act on or with
 respect to such quarantine area in order to further the objects of this Act.



                               [Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 7 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.


      (2) Such an order may provide that anything required in terms thereof, shall be done or omitted
 in the manner or within or during the period mentioned therein.

     (3) The executive officer concerned may, upon application by the user of land concerned and
against payment of the prescribed fees, if any, withdraw or amend an order, and for that purpose carry
out the necessary inspection of the quarantine area.

                               [Sub-s. (3) substituted by s. 7 (b) of Act 9 of 1992.


       (4) (a) Notwithstanding any prohibition in an order referred to in subsection (1) the executive
officer concerned may in writing authorize a user of land to remove anything from the quarantine area
concerned in order to cleanse or destroy it.

       (b) An application for such authority shall be submitted in writing to the executive officer
concerned.

                               [Sub-s. (4) substituted by s. 7 (b) of Act 9 of 1992.


Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
      (5) (a) If anything has been destroyed by virtue of an order contemplated in subsection (I) the
Minister may, with the concurrence of the Minister of Finance, out of moneys appropriated by
Parliament for that purpose pay such compensation as he may consider reasonable in respect thereof.



                                [Para. (a) substituted by s. 3 of Act 47 of 1986.]


 v (b) An application for the payment of compensation in terms of paragraph (a) shall only be
considered if it is submitted in writing to the executive officer concerned within 90 days after the date
on which the things in question have been destroyed.

                               [Para. (b) substituted by s. 7 (c) of Act 9 of 1992.

.8
        Powers of Minister


      (1) The Minister may out of moneys appropriated by Parliament for that purpose do any act on
or with respect to any land that he considers necessary in order to-

            (a      combat flying locusts, voetgangers and red-billed quelea, and destroy eggs of flying
            )
                    locusts;

                               [Para. (a) substituted by s. 7 (a) of Act 18 of 1989.


            (b)     carry out the provisions of a control measure or an order where the user of land
                    concerned refuses or neglects to do so;

            (c)     release on or remove from any land any pathogen, insect or exotic animal imported
                    in terms of section 3 (5) ;

            (d)     further the objects of this Act.


      (2) The Minister may authorize any person to perform at the expense of such person and subject
to the control of the Minister, the acts referred to in subsection (1) (a) and (b), and such person shall
have no recourse against the State for any expenses so incurred.

                                [Sub-s. (2) added by s. 7 (b) of Act 18 of 1989.

    (3) Any act referred to in subsection (1) (a) may be performed by a person referred to in
subsection (2) on land forming part of a park or the parks as defined in section (1) of the
National Parks Act, 1976 (Act 57 of 1976), only after having obtained the consent of the

Copyright Jutastat (Pty) LId
 National Parks Board of Trustees established under section S (1) of the said Act, or any officer
 or employee of such board authorized thereto by the board.

                                [Sub-s. (3) added by s. 7 (b) of Act 18 of 1989.

 9        Powers of entry and investigation


       (I) A person authorized by the Minister to do an act contemplated in section 8 may at any
 reasonable time-

              (a)
                      enter upon any land in order to do that act on or in connection with such land or any
                      other land;

             (b)
                     proceed over any land in order to reach land on or in connection with which that act
                     is to be done.

       (2) Such person may-


             (a)
                     after having notified the user of land concerned of his intention to do so, take with him
                     such persons, animals, vehicles, goods and material as he may
                     require for the purposes of an act referred to in subsection (1) when he enters upon or
                     proceeds over that land: Provided that such notice need not be given if the user of the
                     land concerned does not reside on that land and cannot readily be traced.


                               [Para. (a) substituted by s. 8 of Act 18 of 1989.

             (b)
                     require the user of land concerned or his manager, agent or employee on that land to
                     render him such reasonable assistance as may be necessary in the circumstances to
                     enable him to do the act in question.

  v (3) No compensation shall be payable to any person in respect of the rendering of assistance in terms
of subsection (2) (b) .
      /'
      (4) An executive officer may at any reasonable time-


            (a)     enter upon or enter and inspect any land, building or vehicle if he suspects on
                    reasonable grounds that there may be any controlled goods on or in it, and for that
                    purpose he may inspect anything on or in that land, building or vehicle and remove it
                    or a sample thereof for investigation;
Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
              (b)
                      inspect any book or document at or on that land, building or vehicle which he
                      suspects on reasonable grounds may relate to any controlled goods, and make copies
                      of or extracts from that book or document;

             (c)
                      demand an explanation in connection with any relevant entry in such a book or
                      document or in connection with anything observed by him during his inspection, from
                      any person who in his opinion has knowledge of the entry concerned or of that
                      observed by him;

             (d)
                     in his discretion seize anything which may serve as evidence of the commission of an
                     offence in terms of this Act, and for that purpose remove it or a sample thereof or
                     anything else from the land, building or vehicle in question, and affix any
                     identification mark or seal to anything;

             re)
                     enter upon any land in order to demarcate a quarantine area and for that
                     purpose effect or erect any marker, peg, label or other mark on or in
                     connection with any land;

             (f)
                     enter upon any land in order to determine if the user of land concerned is
                     complying with or carrying out or has complied with or carried out the
                     provisions of any control measure or order;

             (g)
                     proceed over any land in order to reach land so that he can exercise any of his powers
                     or perform any of his duties;

             (h)     enter upon or enter any land, building or vehicle in order to carry out any other
                     investigation in connection with any matter mentioned in this Act.

                                [Sub-s. (4) amended by s. 8 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.


     (5) When an executive officer wishes to exercise any power referred to in subsection (4) on or in
connection with any land, building or vehicle, he may require the user of land, owner or person in
charge concerned, or his manager, agent or employee, to render him such reasonable assistance as may
be necessary in the circumstances to enable him to exercise the power in question.



                               [Sub-s. (5) substituted by s. 8 (b) of Act 9 of 1992.



Copyright Jutastat {Pty) Ltd
    v (6) No compensation shall be payable to any person in respect of the rendering of assistance in terms
 of subsection (5) .


       (7) Any person authorized under this section to enter upon, enter or proceed over any land,
 building or vehicle shall show to the user of land, owner or person in charge concerned, or his
 manager, agent or employee, proof of his identity if he is asked to do so.

 10      Recovery of fees and expenses


       (I) Any amount owing in respect of fees contemplated in section 3 (3), 6 (3) or 7 (3), expenses
 incurred in the exercise of any power mentioned in section 4 (I) (c) or (d) or 8 (I) (b) and the interest
 mentioned in subsection (3) shall constitute a debt to the State or any person authorized in terms of
 section 8 (2) , as the case may be, by the person or user of land concerned from the dates
 contemplated in subsections (2) and (3), respectively.

       (2) Where such fees are owing or where such expenses have been incurred, the executive officer
 concerned or the authorized person concerned, as the case may be, shall determine the amount thereof
 and shall cause a notice to be served on the person or user of land concerned in which he is ordered to
 pay that amount by not later than a date specified in the notice.

                                [Sub-s. (2) substituted by s. 9 of Act 9 of 1992.


     (3) If the amount owing is unpaid on the specified date, interest thereon shall be payable from the
day following immediately on that date at the standard rate of interest determined in terms of section
26 (1) of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1975 (Act 66 of 1975), and applicable on the date of the notice
mentioned in subsection (2) .

                                  [8. 10 substituted by s. 9 of Act 18 of 1989.

1       Appeal to Minister

     (I) If an executive officer has refused any application, submitted to him in writing, to act under
any of his powers, or if he of his own accord has amended or withdrawn any order, authority or permit
or any condition attached thereto, he shall as soon as practicable notify the person concerned in writing
of the reasons for his refusal or conduct.

                               [Sub-s. (1) substituted by s. 10 of Act 9 of 1992.


      (2) Any person who feels aggrieved by such refusal or conduct, may appeal against it to

Copyright Jutastat {Pty) Ltd
 the Minister in the prescribed manner, and upon payment of the prescribed amount.


       (3) The Minister may, after considering the prescribed documents, confirm the refusal or conduct
 or make such other order as he may think fit, including an order that the prescribed amount, or such
 part thereof as he determines, be refunded to that person.

 12
         Preservation of secrecy


      No person shall, except for the purposes of exercising his powers or performing his duties in
 terms of this Act, or for the purposes of legal proceedings under this Act, or when required to do so by
 any court or under any law, disclose to any other person any information acquired by him in the
 exercise of those powers or the performance of those duties and relating to the business or affairs of
 any person.

 13v
         Offences and penalties

       (1) Any person who-

             (a      contravenes or refuses or fails to comply with the provisions of section 3 (1) or (2) ,
             )
                     including any condition imposed in connection with a permit, or any condition in a notice
                     referred to in section 3 (4) ;

                               [Para. (a) substituted by s. 10 (a) of Act 18 of 1989.


          ~aA) if found in possession of controlled goods in respect of which there is a reasonable
                   suspicion that such goods were imported without a permit referred to in section 3 (1), or
                   contrary to a condition of such a permit or a condition set out in a notice issued under
                   section 3 (4), and who is not able to give a satisfactory account of such possession;



                               [Para. (aA) inserted by s. 10 (b) of Act 18 of 1989.]

            (b)
                    refuses or neglects to notify the person referred to in section 5 (1) as required or to
                    give him the requested further information;

            (c)
                    refuses or neglects to comply with or carry out the provisions of a control measure,
                    order or authority, including any condition imposed in connection therewith;


            (d)     obstructs or hinders an executive officer, an officer or an authorized person in
Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
                    the exercise of his powers or the performance of his duties;

                                 [Para. (d) substituted by s. 11 of Act 9 of 1992.

            re)
                    effects any unauthorized entry or deletion on any document issued or required under
                    this Act;

            (f}
                    refuses or neglects to supply information, produce a document or give an explanation
                    to any person who is in terms of this Act authorized to ask therefor, or who supplies
                    information or gives an explanation knowing it to be false;


            (g)     refuses or neglects to render the assistance contemplated in section 9 (2) (b) or (5);


            (h)     damages, destroys, removes, shifts, alters or otherwise tampers with any
                    marker, peg, label or other mark effected or erected for the purpose of
                    demarcating a quarantine area;

            (i)     discloses information contrary to the provisions of section 12;

            a)      contravenes any other provision of this Act not specifically provided for in the
                    preceding paragraphs,

shall be guilty of an offence and liable-

           (i)
                    on a first conviction of an offence in terms of paragraph (a) or (aA), to a fine not
                    exceeding R20 000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or to
                    both such fine and such imprisonment;

      [Para. (i) substituted by s. 1 (a) of Act 17 of 1985 and by s. 10 (c) of Act 18 of 1989.]

          (ii)
                    on a first conviction of an offence in terms of paragraph (b), (c), (d) or (e), to a fine not
                    exceeding R4 000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year or to both
                    such fine and such imprisonment;

                               [Para. (ii) substituted by s. 10 (c) of Act 18 of 1989.]

         (iii)
                    on a second or subsequent conviction of an offence mentioned in subparagraph (i) ,
                    whether the same or some other offence mentioned in that subparagraph, in
Copyright Jutastat (Pty} Ltd
                      the case of a natural person, to imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years, and
                      in the case of a juristic person, to a fine not exceeding R50 000;

                               [Para. (iii) substituted by s. 10 (c) of Act 18 of 1989.

          (iv)
                     on a second or subsequent conviction of an offence mentioned in subparagraph (ii) ,
                     whether the same or some other offence mentioned in that subparagraph,
                     to a fine not exceeding RB 000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years
                     or to both such fine and such imprisonment;

                                 [Para. (iv) added by s. 10 (c) of Act 18 of 1989.

           (v)
                     on conviction of an offence in terms of paragraph (I). (g) , (h) , (i) or (j) , to a fine
                     not exceeding R2 000 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or
                     to both such fine and such imprisonment.

                                 [Para. (v) added by s. 10 (c) of Act 18 of 1989.


     (2) A magistrate's court shall be competent to impose any punishment provided for in this
section.

14      Presumptions and evidence

      In criminal proceedings under this Act-

             (a)     it shall be presumed that the applicable provisions of this Act apply to the land on or
                     in respect of which the offence concerned has allegedly been committed, unless the
                     contrary is proved;

            (b) a document which purports to have been certified by an executive officer to
                    the effect that it is a copy of the order to which the proceedings relate, shall be received
                    as evidence in any court without further proof or the production of the original order;



                               [Para. (b) substituted by s. 12 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.]

            (c)
                    if a copy of an order referred to in paragraph (b) purports to have been endorsed by
                    an executive officer to the effect that the order concerned has been served on the
                    person named in that order in a certain manner, it shall be presumed that such order
                    has been served on the said person in that manner,
Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
                     unless the contrary is proved;

                               [Para. (c) substituted by s. 12 (a) of Act 9 of 1992.


             (cAY any statement or entry contained on any parcel or in a book or document kept by or
                    purported to be issued by any person, or by the manager, agent or employee of such a
                    person, shall be admissible in evidence against such person as proof of the facts set
                    forth in that statement or entry , unless it is proved that such statement or entry was
                    not made by such person, or by the manager, agent or employee of such person in the
                    course of his work as manager or in the course of his agency or employment;



                                 [Para. (cA) inserted by s. 11 of Act 18 of 1989.

             (d)
                     where it is proved that a marker, peg, label or other mark has been damaged, destroyed,
                     removed, shifted, altered or otherwise tampered with contrary to the provisions of this
                     Act, it shall be presumed that it was done by the person who was the user of land in
                     respect of the land in question on the date on which an executive officer became aware
                     of such damage, destruction, removal,
                     shifting, alteration or tampering, unless the contrary is proved.

                               [Para. (d) substituted by s. 12 (b) of Act 9 of 1992.

15
        Liability of employer or principal


      (1) Any act or omission of a manager, agent or employee constituting an offence under this
Act shall be deemed to be the act or omission of his employer or principal, and the said employer or
principal may be convicted and sentenced in respect thereof unless he proves-

            (a)     that he did not permit or connive at the act or omission;

            (b)
                    that he took all reasonable steps to prevent an act or omission of the nature in
                    question; and

            (c)
                    that an act or omission, whether legal or illegal, of the nature in question did not under
                    any condition or circumstances fall within the course of the employment or the scope
                    of the authority of the manager, agent or employee in question.




Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
       (2) The fact that an employer or principal has forbidden an act or omission of the nature in
question, shall not by itself be regarded as sufficient proof that he has taken all reasonable steps as
required by subsection (I) (b).

    (3) The provisions of subsection (1) shall not affect the criminal liability of the manager, agent or
employee concerned.

16      Regulations

       (1) The Minister may make regulations regarding-

             (a      the manner in which application shall be made for any permit or authority;
             )
            (b)
                    the ports of entry through which controlled goods shall be imported in terms of section
                    3 (3) (a);

            (c)     fees payable in terms of this Act;

            (d)
                    the manner in which any notice, order or other document mentioned in this Act shall be
                    or may be served;

            (e)
                    the manner in which and the period within which an appeal shall be noted in terms of
                    section 11, the officer by whom and the manner in which the refusal or conduct in
                    question shall be investigated, the manner in which an appellant may submit
                    information or evidence or make representations, whether personally or through a
                    legal representative, and the preparation and submission of a report and
                    recommendation to the Minister;

            (f)     any matter required or permitted to be prescribed under this Act;

            (g)
                    generally any matter which he may deem necessary or expedient to prescribe in
                    order to further the objects of this Act,

and the generality of the power conferred by paragraph (g) shall not be limited by the
preceding paragraphs.

      (2) Different regulations may be made in terms of this section in respect of different areas in
the Republic or in such other respects as the Minister may think fit.

      (3) A regulation prescribing fees shall only be made with the concurrence of the Minister
Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
 of Finance.

 17
         Delegation of powers by Minister


     (1) The Minister may delegate to an officer any power conferred upon him under this Act,
 except the power-

             (a      conferred upon him by section 3 (1) (b), (4) or (6);
             )
             (b)     to prescribe control measures under section 6;

             (c)     to decide an appeal under section 11 ;

             (d)     to make regulations under section 16.


       (2) The provisions of section 11 shall apply mutatis mutandis in respect of any decision or order
of an officer referred to in subsection (1).
18      Limitation of liability


     No person, including the State, shall be liable in respect of anything done in good faith in the
exercise of any power or the performance of any duty conferred or imposed upon him under this Act.


19      Certain provisions bind State

      The provisions of this Act, except sections 11,13 and IS, shall bind the State: Provided that no
fees shall be payable by the State in tenns of this Act.

20      Repeal of laws


      (1) Subject to the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) the Agricultural Pests Act, 1973 (Act 3 of
1973), and sections 40 and 41 of the Plant Improvement Act, 1796 (Act No. 53 of 1976), are hereby
repealed.

       (2) A permit issued in terms of section 11 (1) of the Agricultural Pests Act, 1973, and which is of
 force at the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be a permit contemplated in section 3 (1).

         (3) A written notice in teffils of section 19 (2) of the Agricultural Pests Act, 1973, or an

Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
act repealed by that Act, under which land has been declared to be under quarantine and which is
of force at the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be an order served under section 7
on the user of land concerned.

 21
         Short title and commencement

       (1) This Act shall be called the Agricultural Pests Act, 1983, and shall come into
operation on a date fixed by the State President by proclamation in the Gazette.

       (2) Different dates may be fixed under subsection (I) in respect of different provisions of this Act.



                    AGRICULTURAL PESTS AMENDMENT ACT 17 OF 1985

[ASSENTED TO 12 MARCH 1985]                     [DATE OF COMMENCEMENT: 3 APRIL 1985]


                               (Afrikaans text signed by the State President}

                                                     ACT

To amend the Agricultural Pests Act, 1983, so as to emend the text of section 13.


1 Amends section 13 (1) of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a)
substitutes subparagraph (i); and paragraph (b) amends the Afrikaans text.

2     Short title

      This Act shall be called the Agricultural Pests Amendment Act, 1985.

                    AGRICUL TURAL PESTS AMENDMENT ACT 47 OF 1986

[ASSENTED TO 30 APRIL 1986]                      [DA TE OF COMMENCEMENT: 7 MA y 1986]


                               (Afrikaans text signed by the State President)

                                                     ACT


To amend the Agricultural Pests Act, 1983, so as to extend the definition of 'order', and to provide for
the disposal of the progeny or products of controlled goods illegally imported, and for matters
connected therewith.

Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
    1 Amends section 1 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by substituting the definition of 'order'.



    2     Amends section 4 (1) of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by adding paragraph (I)


    3     Amends section 7 (5) of the Agricultural Pests Ac              36 of 1983 by substituting paragraph

    (a)

    4     Short title

          This Act is called the Agricultural Pests Amendment Act, 1986.

                       AGRICUL TURAL PESTS AMENDMENT ACT 18 OF 1989

    ASSENTED TO 7 MARCH 1989]                       [DATE OF COMMENCEMENT: 15 MARCH 1989]


                                   (Afrikaans text signed by the acting State President)

                                                            ACT


    To amend the Agricultural Pests Act, 1983, so as to define or further define certain expressions; to
    further regulate the delegation of powers and assignment of duties to a person who is not an officer; to
    extend the powers of the executive officer with regard to imported controlled goods; to oblige users of
    land to report the presence of red-billed quelea on land; to provide that payment of fees may be
    required from persons applying for exemption from the provisions of a control measure; to empower
    the Minister to combat red-billed quelea and to authorize other persons to perform such combating and
    certain other acts on land; to provide that notice of entry upon land need not be given if the user of the
    land does not reside upon the land and cannot readily be traced; to
    extend the powers regarding the recovery of fees and expenses; to create further
    offences and to increase penalties; and to further provide for the furnishing of evidence; and to provide
    for matters connected therewith.



    1 Amends section 1 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes the
    definition of 'department'; paragraph (b) deletes the definition of 'Director-General'; paragraph (c)
    substitutes the definition of 'exotic animal'; paragraph (d) inserts the definition of 'import'; paragraph
    (e) substitutes the definition of 'insect'; paragraph (I) substitutes the definition of 'local authority';
    paragraph (g) substitutes the definition of 'officer'; and paragraph (h) substitutes the definition of
    'pathogen'.


u   Copyright Jutastat (Pty) LId
 2 Amends section 2 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
 subsection (4); and paragraph (b) substitutes subsection (5).

 3     Amends section 3 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by substituting subsection (3).


 4 Amends section 4 (1) of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
 the words preceding paragraph (b) (i); and paragraph (b) substitutes paragraphs (c) and (d).


 5     Substitutes section 5 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983.

6      Amends section 6 (3) of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by adding paragraph (c).


7 Amends section 8 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
paragraph (a); and paragraph (b) adds subsections (2) and (3), the existing section becoming
subsection (1).

8 Amends section 9 (2) of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by substituting paragraph (a).



9      Substitutes section 10 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983.


10 Amends section 13 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
subsection (1) (a); paragraph (b) inserts subsection (1) (aA); and paragraph (c) substitutes subsection (3) (i)
up to and including (v) for subsection (3) (i), (ii) and (iii).

    1 Amends section 14 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by inserting paragraph (cA),

13 Short title

       This Act shall be called the Agricultural Pests Amendment Act, 1989.

                    AGRICUL TURAL PESTS AMENDMENT ACT 9 OF 1992

[ASSENTED TO 3 MARCH 1992]                     [DATE OF COMMENCEMENT: 11 MARCH 1992]


                               (Afrikaans text signed by the State President)

                                                         ACT



Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
\-1

        To amend the Agricultural Pests Act, 1983, so as to emend certain definitions; to provide for the
        designation of more than one executive officer; to provide that the Minister may assign certain of
        his powers to a person who is not an officer; to make other provision in connection with the person
        to be notified of the presence of certain pests; and to extend the powers of the Minister to prescribe
        control measures so as to include red-billed quelea; and to provide for matters connected therewith.



        1 Amends section 1 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
        the definition of 'department'; and paragraph (b) substitutes the definition of 'executive officer'.



        2 Amends section 2 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
\-.1
        subsections (1), (2) and (3); paragraph (b) substitutes subsection (4) (a); paragraph (c) substitutes
        subsection (4) (b) (iii); and paragraph (d) substitutes subsection (5).

       3 Amends section 3 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by substituting subsections (2) and (3).



       4 Amends section 4 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes in
       subsection (1) the words preceding paragraph (a); paragraph (b) substitutes the proviso to subsection
       (1) (c); paragraph (c) substitutes subsections (2) and (3); and paragraph (d) substitutes in subsection
       (4) the words preceding paragraph (a).

       5      Substitutes section 5 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983.


       6 Amends section 6 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
       subsection (1); paragraph (b) substitutes subsection (2) (c); paragraph (c) substitutes subsection
       (2) (g); and paragraph (d) substitutes subsection (3) (b).

       7 Amends section 7 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
       subsection (1); paragraph (b) substitutes subsections (3) and (4); and paragraph (c) substitutes
       subsection (5) (b) .

       8 Amends section 9 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes in
       subsection (4) the words preceding paragraph (a); and paragraph (b) substitutes subsection (5) .



       9      Amends section 10 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by substituting subsection

       (2).

u      Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
10 Amends section (1).
                               of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by substituting subsection



11 Amends section 13 (1) of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983 by substituting paragraph (d).



12 Amends section 14 of the Agricultural Pests Act 36 of 1983, as follows: paragraph (a) substitutes
paragraphs (b) and (c); and paragraph (b) substitutes paragraph (d).

13 Short title

      This Act shall be called the Agricultural Pests Amendment Act, 1992.




Copyright Jutastat (Pty) Ltd
