                               Legal Notice No.78/2003

         Regulations Regarding Import Permits and Declared Goods

                                     I-Preliminary

1. Short Title
   These Regulations may be cited as the " Regulations Regarding Import
   Permits and Declared Goods-Legal Notice No. 78/2003".

2. Definition

     Unless the context otherwise requires:

     1 "Imports" means goods brought from abroad into Eritrea;
     2 "Declared Article" shall have the meaning given to it under Proclamation
        No. 125/2002;
     3 "Minister or Ministry" means the Minister or Ministry of Trade and
        Industry, respectively;
     4 "Person" means a physical or juridical person;
     5 "Import Permit" means a written document issued by the Ministry to a
         person permitted to import goods;
     6 "Franco-valuta" refers to a process of importing goods by a person
         permitted to do so by using foreign currency from his own source.


                                         II-Imports

3.     Import permits

       (!) Any person desiring to import commercial goods shall first obtain an
            import permit from the Ministry or any person authorized by it.
       (2) An import permit shall be required for every consignment.
       (3) An application for an import permit shall only be filled in a form
             especially prepared by the Ministry for this purpose.
       ( 4) The Ministry shall issue an import permit taking into account that the
            application complies with national priorities established from time to time and
            time and that the goods for which the· import permit is applied are of
            competitive value. The time limit for an import permit shall be
            determined by the Ministry.

4.     Mode of using impOl't permit

       (I) Any person given an import permit by the Ministry shall import only
           through the Bank of Eritrea or the commercial banks by opening a letter
           of credit with the Bank of Eritrea or the commercial banks of Eritrea or
           employing any other mode of payment approved by the Bank of Eritrea.
       (2) The Bank of Eritrea or the commercial banks shall ascertain that the

                                              4
               importer has acquired an import permit from the Ministry before
              opening the letter of credit.
          (3) Importing through "Franco-Valuta" shall be pennitted, but an import
              permit shall be required.

                                    Ill-Declared Articles

S. Declared Articles

      (I) The commo<lities enumerated herein below have been designated "declared
          articles" pursuant to Proclamation NO. 125/2002:


       No.             Comrnoditv Grouo                              Remarks
               A. Food
      1        Cereals                                  imported wheat, sorghum or maize
      2        Flour
      3        Pasta
      4        Rice
      5        Leguminous vegetables                    imported beans, peas, chick peas or
                                                        lentils
      6        Edible Oil
      7        Milk <nowder)
      g        Sui:,ar
      9        Coffee                                   Imported and roasted or unroasted
                                                        coffee
      10       Tea

      11.      B. Textile                               Abuiedid, kaki or blanket
               C. Building Materials
      12       Cement
      13       Metals used for construction
      14       Metal sheets used for construction
      15       wood used for construction
      16       oaints used for construction


(2)   The Ministiy shall impose price control on the above-mentioned declared articles
      and such price control shall be exercised:
       (a) by determining the maximum selling price, or
       (b) by fixing the sales price.
The Ministiy shall issue orders and directives regarding the market situation and
distributicn of every declared article.




                                                    s
                         IV-Miscellaneous Provisions

6. Inspection

   The Minister or inspectors appointed by the Minister may enter into premises where
   goods are sold or stored to ascertain that the provisions of Proclamation NO.
   125/2002 are complied with.

7. Entry in to force

   These Regulations shall enter into force as of the date of their publication in the
   Gazette ofEritrean Laws.

                                               Done at Asmara this 8"' day ofJuly,2003.
                                                               Dr. Giorgis Teklemikael
                                                        Minister of Trade and Industry.




                                           6
