                                   COUNCIL OF MINITERS
                                        ________

                                        Decree nº 5/2009

                                             1st July

The agricultural sector in Mozambique is revealing an increasing potential to exports during the
recent years, which demands to the country a need to strengthen its capacity to comply with
international quality and phytosanitary standards, including pest surveillance, pest risk analysis
and inspection systems as to increase the country credibility at regional and international levels,
on the phytosanitary certificates issuance for plant and plant products exports.

In this terms, aiming to set out the legal framework on Phytosanitary Inspection and Plant
Quarantine, under the paragraph f) nº 1) of article 204 of the Constitution of the Republic, the
Council of Ministers decrees:

Article 1. It is approved the Phytosanitary Inspection and Plant Quarantine Regulation, attached
to the present Decree thereof an integrant part of it.
Article 2. It is revoked all the legislation contrary to the present Decree.
Article 3. The present Decree enters into force 90 days after its publication.

Approved by the Council of Ministers, 17th February 2009.

Be published,

The Primer Minister, Luisa Dias Diogo


REGULATION OF PHYTOSANITARY INSPECTION AND PLANT QUARANTINE

                                          CHAPTER I
                                           General

                                          ARTICLE 1
                                          Definitions

In the context of the present regulation the following terms are being defined:

   1.    BEES: common name of insects belonging to the order Hymenopter, responsible for
         honey production.
   2.    PHYTOSANITARY ACTION: any official operation, as inspection, vigilance, test
         or treatment, carried out by the National Phytosanitary Authority for the
         implementation of any phytosanitary measure.
   3.    OFFICIAL ACT: any act established, authorized, carried out or ordered by the
         National Phytosanaitary Authorit, or carried out by any public entity on its behalf.
   4.    PEST RISK ANALYSIS (PRA): a process of biological assessment or other
         scientific and economic proofs to determine if a pest should be subject to a control
         and to define the scope of the equivalent phytosanitary measure.
5.    APPREHENSION: maintain the consignment under official guardian or
      confinement as phytossanitary measure that may be or not returned to the proprietor.
6.    LOW PEST PREVALANCE AREA (LPPA): an area, whether all of country a
      country or part of a country, region or part of it as identified by competent
      authorities, in which a specific pest occurs at low levels and which is subject to
      effective pest surveillance, control or eradication measures.
7.    PEST FREE AREA (PFA): an area in which a specific pest does not occur, which
      is proven under scientific evidence and such condition shall be officially maintained.
8.    ENDANGER AREA: a national territory area with favourable ecological factors for
      the establishment of a pest, which presence in that area would result in significant
      economic losses.
9.    NATIONAL PHYTOSSANITARY AUTHORITY – NPA
10.   TECHNICAL ADVISER COMMITTEE – TAC
11.   CONFISCATE: detain the consignment for destruction.
12.   CONTAMINATION: presence of harmful organisms on products subject to control.
13.   CONTROL: elimination, containment or eradication of pest population.
14.   PACKING MATERIAL: any material utilised to cover, enclose or protect products
      subject to control.
15.   POST-ENTRY QUARANTINE STATIONS: a site approved by the National
      Phytosanitary Authority for the purpose of               observation or for     further
      inspections of goods after their import.
16.   EXPORTER: individual or collective consigners of goods that exit the national
      territory.
17.    IMPORTER: individual or collective consignees to whom the goods are consigned
      and are entering into the country.
18.   PHYTOSSANITARY INSPECTION: visual examination of products subject to
      control with a purpose of detecting the presence of pests or compliance with the
      phytosanitary requisites.
19.   PHYTOSSANITARY INSPECTOR: a nominated or designated official to undertake
      a phytosanitary inspection.
20.   IPPC: International Plant Protection Convention denominated as Convenção
      Internacional de Plantas in Portuguese.
21.   IMPORT PHYTOSANITARY LICENCE: an official document that sets import
      conditions and requisites of products subject to control, issued by NPA or other
      public entity to which it has designated that competence.
22.   PROVISIONAL MEASURE: a phytosanitary measure established without relevant
      scientific evidence, with a purpose to overcome the absence of pertinent information
      to undertake the phytosanitary act.
23.   EMERGENCY MEASURES: phytosanitary measure established in the ocurrence of
      a new or sudden phytosanitary situation, which may be or not provisional.
24.   PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES: any legislation or official procedure aiming to
      prevent the introduction establishment and/or spread of pests or diseases of plants
      and plant products subject to quarantine or measures aiming to limit the economic
      impact of not regulated pests.
25.   QUARANTINE OBJECT: any harmful organisms or plants or any plant pests.
26.   NOXIOUS ORGANISMS: any living form of animal or plant or any pathogenic
      agent injurious to plants or plant products.
27.   COUNTRY OF ORIGIN: the country where the plants or plant products were
      cultivated.



                                            2
28. COUNTRY OF PROVINIENCE: export country of products subject to control
    indenpendently of being or not the country of origin
29. PLANT: any living organism of plant nature or part of it.
30. PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO CONTROL: any plant or part of it, plant product, bee
    products, growing substrate, packing material, containers, soil, other organisms,
    objects or material liable to host or spread plant pests.
31. OFFICIAL ENTRY OR EXIT POINT: the border of the country including airports,
    harbors, inland border posts or other sites defined or identified by law.
32. PHYTOSANITARY INSPECTION POST (PIP): inspection sites established by the
    NPA next to the entry and exit points.
33. PEST: any specie or strain or biotype of plant, animal or pathogenic agent noxious to
    plants or plant products.
34. REGULATED PEST: plant pests that are quarantine object or regulated pests and
    not subject to quarantine.
35. QUARANTINE PESTS: pests that cause potential economic injury in an endangered
    area, but not present in the country, or if not present, still not widely distributed and
    is being subject to an active official control.
36. REGULATED PESTS AND NOT QUARANTINE OBJECT: plant pests that are
    not a quarantine object but affects the use of these plants which may result in an
    unsustainable economic impact to the country and therefore its entry and movement
    into the country shall be under official control.
37. CONSIGNED PRODUCT: goods subject to control, entering or exiting the national
    territory accompanied respectively by a unique import or export certificate according
    to the transaction in progress.
38. PLANT PRODUCTS: seeds, any non-manufactured material of plant origin as well
    manufactured products, which by their nature and/or that of their processing, may
    constitute a risk for the introduction and/or spread of pest plants in the Mozambican
    territory.
39. PROPRIETOR: any individual that possesses any product or exerts an effective
    control on the product, possession, simple detention or use;
40. PLANT QUARANTINE: official confinement of products subject to control in a
    zone or specific area for observation, testing, treatment or application of another
    appropriate phytosanitary measure carried out by NPA or under its order and
    supervision.
41. RETENTION. Apprehension of merchandise for laboratory analysis.
42. SPS: Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, denominated Medidas Fitossanitarias in
    Portuguese.
43. PHYTOSANITARY TREATMENT: any form of disinfection or disinfestations by
    physical, chemical, mechanical process carried out by NPA or under its order and
    supervision.
44. TRANSIT: when the goods proceeding from abroad reach the country without
    rupture of the cargo, are consigned to the country of destination, independently of the
    temporary period of permanency in the country.
45. TRANSPORT: any mean utilized for the merchandise conveyance, including the
    planes, boats, tracks, containers, wagons and others.
46. VEGETABLES: all living plants and part of plants including seeds.
47. WTO: World Trade Organization, denominated Organizacao Mundial do Comercio
    in Portuguese.
48. BUFFER ZONE: established area all along the infected and/or infested zone, where
    specific control measures are maintained according to the pest epidemiology.


                                           3
                                          CHAPTER II
                                          Competencies

                                          ARTICLE 2
                                  Object and territorial scope

1. The present regulation establishes rules to prevent and control propagation of the pest in the
country.

2. The present regulation it is applicable to all national territory

                                            ARTICLE 3
                                            Objectives

The main objectives of the present regulation are:

a) To prevent the introduction and propagation/spread into the country of harmful organisms
       especially the quarantine objects;
b) To control such pests and diseases within the country with the objective of preventing their
       spread, and where possible, to bring about their erradication
c) To secure the necessary means to carry out phytossanitary inspection and certification of
       imports and exports.

                                           ARTICLE 4
                                          Competencies

For the implementation of the present Regulation, the National Phytossanitary Authority
(NPA) is the Ministry that supervises agriculture through the National Directorate of Agrarian
Service (DNSA).

                                          ARTICLE 5
                                        Executive entities

The implementation of the present Regulation will be particularly under the responsibility of
the following entities:

a)      Direcção Ncaional dos Serviços Agrários(NDAS), through the phytossanitary
inspectors,
b)      The local entities which can be given competencies officially recognized in the present
regulation

                                         ARTICLE 6
                                     Competencies of (NPA)

In full command of this function, the NPA competences are:

a) The NPA shall establish administrative and phytossanitary rules required for import,
export, re-exportation, treatment, movement and growing of regulated products and for
control of harmful organisms considered quarantine objects


                                                  4
b) To array regulated products under quarantine regime in the official station or with
equivalent conditions during a period of time,

c) Carry out inspection and control of regulated product as well as package and transport
vehicles under custom regime including the franc zone,

d) Issue import permit and phytossanitary certificate for import and export of regulate
product,


e) To confiscate, prescribe treatment, re-exportation or destruction of regulated product when
       do not comply with the present regulation and other disposals upon phytossanitary
       inspection and plant quarantine,

f) To inspect and control agricultural production areas as well as forest population, seedlings,
        storage and vegetable selling locations in order to evaluate the phytossanitary situation
        and detect possible presence of quarantine organisms

g) To propose the due fee regarding the phytossanitary inspection service and plant
      quarantine,

h) To determine vegetable species that are likely to be alternative host of harmful organism in
       order to forbid its cultivation or recommend its eradication,

i) To delegate competences foreseen in the present regulation,

j) To promote dissemination of the present regulation and other legislation of the sector;

k) To establish cooperation with other countries on plant protection issues at regional or
      internationallevel.

                                       ARTICLE 7
                                Technical adviser committee

1. The Technical Adviser Committee, also briefly designated by (TAC)it is a consultation
organ of the Ministry that supervises agriculture in plant protection related matters.

2. The Technical adviser committee is composed as follow:

a) Minister that supervises agriculture as chairperson,
b) National Directorate of Agrarian Service
c) Head of Plant Protection Department
d) One representative of National Directorate of Veterinary Services
e) One representative of Agrarian Research Institute of Mozambique

f) One representative of Agriculture Promotion Centre (CEPAGRI),
g) One representative of academia
h) One representative of the Ministry of Health
 i) One representative of the Ministry of environmental coordination and action


                                               5
j) One representative Industry and Commerce
k) One representative of the Ministry of Turism
l) One representative of the Ministry of Public Safety (M. Interior)
m)One representative of the Ministry of Customs (M. Actividade Tributaria)
n) One representative of the private sector from the CTA
o) One representative of the Botany Production and Inspection Center

3. Without prejudice to other applicable internal rules, the members mentioned in the
paragraphs d) and m) shall be nominated by the respective institutions.

4. The members of Technical Adviser Committee (TAC), are invested by the Minister that
supervises agriculture, that approves its Internal Regulation;

5. Technical Adviser Committee shall meet twice per year; extraordinary meetings may be
convened by the Minister supervising agriculture,

6. The first session will take place at least three months after the present regulation entered
into force,

7. The Minister supervising agriculture may convene other entities or individuals to be part of
the Committee.

                                        ARTICLE 8
                              Duty of Phytossanitary Inspector

1. The duty of phytossanitary inspector must be acknowledged in the Public Function of
       career and remuneration system.
2. When required, the Ministry that supervises agriculture, in coordination with any other
       ministry or public entity, may indicate one qualified officer to undertake temporarily
       duty of phytossanitary inspector
3. The officer indicated in terms of number above must comply with the qualifications
       required for the duty during a period of one year which can be renewed according to
       the terms of reference

                                        ARTICLE 9
                                   Competence of Inspector

1. Competes to the Phytossanitary Inspector:

a) To inspect and certify regulated product, imported and to be exported,

b) To inspect growing plant, storage product or in transportation with the purpose of detecting
        the presence, emergence or propagation of pest of regulated plants,

c) To insure compliance with the phytossanitary international standard
d) To prescribe phytossanitary treatment of consigning product
e) To ask additional information to the import country whenever necessary,
f) To carry out any phytossanitary action established in terms of the present regulation and
        other applicable regulation.



                                                6
                                       ARTICLE 10
                          Special power/competences of inspectors

1. If any inspector has any evidence or suspicion of violation to the provisions disposed in the
present regulation or other applicable low, through the credential letter issued by the NPA the
inspector is authorized to:

a) Access any area or site and make the necessary investigations taking into account the
      relevant legal provisions,
b) Require from any agent involved in export or import of products under control the
      exhibition of the legal phytosanitary documents


c) Inspect, examine and make copy of document mentioned in the previous paragraphs,
       including to take extracts or to proceed with their apprehension,

d) Detain and search any luggage, packaging, transport or goods subject to controls that are in
       transit, entering or leaving the country,

e) Suspend, in case of suspicion of occurrence of pest, the distribution, sale or use of products
       under control,

f) Confiscate or apprehend products under control,

g) Order the destruction or treatment of products under control whose expenses are to be
      borne by the owner,

2. The inspector to seize and order treatment, return or destruction of a product under
      subparagraphs f) and g) number 1, must devise and immediately send a notification to
      the proprietor with a description of actions,

3. In the exercise of their functions the inspector must identify himself to the effect of
displaying his identification card and other applicable distinctives and may be accompanied
by a staff member of the police authority.

                                       CHAPTER III
                                     Importation of plant

                                      ARTICLE 11
                       Phytossanitary Measure of plants importation

1. Phytossanitary Measures to be observed on importation of product under control are
established on the appendix 1 and 2, which can be updated whenever necessary,

2. The ANF can with immediate effect modify and revoke the requirements and phytosanitary
measures established and under the SPS/WTO agreement, notify the contracting parties,




                                               7
3. The ANF has competence to publish in the Bulletin of the Republic and other appropriatae
means, the requirements and phytosanitary measures stated in the number 1 of the present
article as well as other actions performed in the same context,

4. If there is a risk of introduction and/or propagation of a pest not forseen in the
subparagraph of number 1 of the present artcle, the ANF could establish new requirements
and phytosanitary measures for a limited period of time shall include in the import permit an
explanatory note regarding the afore mentioned measure,

5.In case that the import permit has been previously issued before the measure mentioned in
number 4 came into force or before the importation was realized, the ANF must communicate
the importer by official letter and the phytossanitary authority of the exporting country


                                        ARTICLE 12
                                      Entry Conditions

1. The importation or transit of the product under control are bound to request previously an
importation authorization issued by ANF and the original of the Phytosanytary Certificate,
including an additional declaration if required, excepting special cases to be defined by the
minister that supervises agriculture

2. Importation of products subject to control not specified in Appendix 1 of this Regulation, it
       is subject to a previous authorization by the Phytossanitary authority, to be issued
       following a Pest Risk Assessment;

3. Importation of soil is forbidden as well as product under control holding soil except in case
of research studies even so the material must be destroyed after studies, under AFN
supervision

4. The original phytossanitary certificate issued by Phytossanitary authority of the exporter
      country must be filled according to the requirements stated in the import permit.

5. The phytosanitary certificate of the exporting country is valid for 14 days since the data of
       issue except in case that the consignment comes by ship which validity is extended up
       to 30 days;

6.     The despatch of custom formalities by custom officer must be done after verification
       and previously report opinion by phytossanitary inspector

                                        ARTICLE 13
                                       Import Licence

1. The Phytosanitary Import Licence model in the appendix 4 must be issued by request of
interested individual, who would fill in the form number 3 and submit to ANF;

2. The licence issued by ANF is valid for 180 days. In the cases of partial importation each lot
must be accompanied by the respective phytossanitary certificate;




                                               8
3. Importation of growing substrates and alive organisms in any development stage either for
scientific purpose or research require a Phytosanitary import licence;

4. The issuance of the phytosanitary import licence demands a previous authorization from
the Department of Seeds from the Ministry that superintends agriculture.

                                        ARTICLE 14
                              Post of Phytosanitary Inspection

Recognized Posts of phytosanitary inspection are the posts established by NPA at the entry
points and defined by low.

                                      ARTICLE 15
             Phytosanitary Certificates of the Country of Origin or Shipment

1. The product under control must be accompanied by a Phytossanitary Certificate from the
       country of shipment and/or the country of origin; in accordance with rules of
       International Plant Protection Convention

2. The certificate must be correctly filled out in Portuguese, Spanish, French or English.
       The date of dispatch of the certificate must be at least 14 (fourteen) days before the
       dispatch of the goods from the country of shipment and/or the country of origin;

3. The section of the certificate concerning "additional declarations" must be correctly filled
       out in accordance with the requirements specified in the Phytossanitary Import
       Licence

4. Corrections erasure not confirmed render invalid Phytosanitary Certificate,

5. When the imported consignment is in more than one part, and each part is consigned to
      different entry point, each part must be accompanied by its own separate Phytosanitary
      Certificate;

6 Only Phytosanitary Certificates issued by the official service responsible for plant
      inspection and plant quarantine in the country of origin or shipment are valid.

7. When the imported consignment has been fractionized, moved from the original package or
      from the different transport in the country of origin (called re-exportation country), the
      consignment must be accompanied by re-exportation Phytosanitary Certificate in
      concordance with the form designed by the authority and an attested copy of the
      Phytosanitary Certificate of origin country

8. Only Phytossanitary Certificates of re-exportation issued by the official service responsible
       for plant inspection and plant quarantine in the country of re-exportation will be
       considered valid.

                                        ARTICLE 16
                                      Declaration Duty




                                               9
The importer are obliged to declare to the phytosanitary inspector in the point of entry before
arrival any consignment and to requirer the due inspection;

                                         ARTICLE 17
                                     Inspection on arrival

1. All products under control, growing substrate or any other imported product or in transit
    including those listed in Appendix 1 of the present regulation, will be subject to
    inspection by an Inspector at the entry point on their arrival;

2. To facilitate the inspection the importer, or his representative, is shall apply to the Service
       for the inspection with a minimum of 14 (fourteen) days before the arrival of the
       merchandise, providing all necessary documents and paying all costs deriving from
       the execution of the inspection;

3. Depending on the merchandise, the inspection may be carried out on the whole lot or on the
       representative sample. according to the procedure established in the phytosanitary
       inspection manual.

                                         ARTICLE 18
                                        Inspection Site

1. Inspectors, duly identified, may enter customs areas and other points of entry, mail bags,
       and stores containing plants, plant products, growing substrates and others.

                                         ARTICLE 19
                                  Post- Inspection Measures

1. As per the result of the inspection, the phytosanitary inspector can decide the following
measures:

a)     Approval
b)     Treatment
c)     Retention
d)     Quarantine
e)     Devolution for the origin country
f)     Destruction

2. The expenses and other costs due of the application of measure prescribed in the previous
number are of the responsibility of the importer

3.The Mozambican State is not responsible for deterioration, destruction or other injury
caused to the products under control, resulting from the implementation of any post-
inspection measure undertaken in terms of the present regulation,




                                               10
                                       ARTICLE 20
                                   Eentry Authorization

1. In connection with the inspection referred to in Article 17, the merchandise will be checked
        by the Inspector to assess confirmity with the conditions stated in the Phytosanitary
        Import Licence.

2. Should the inspection result in the discovery of any harmful organism mentioned in
      appendices 1 of the present Regulation, the Inspector can, at the expense of the
      importer, order the treatment of the merchandise, its re-exportation, destruction or any
      other appropriate quarantine measure;

3. When only part of the consignment is affected by any of the harmful organisms referred to
      in appendices 1 & 2 of the present Regulation, the Inspector can, at the expense of the
      importer, order the treatment of that part, its re-exportation, destruction or any other
      appropriate quarantine measure consulting the NPA

                                      CHAPTER IV
                         Exportation, Re-Exportation And Transit

                                      ARTICLE 21
                               Consigned Products to Export

1. When required by the law of the importing country, the exportation of product under
      control and growing substrates must be accompanied by a Phytossanitary Certificate
      according to the International Plant protection Convention.

2. The exportation will be executed by request of the concerned contracting party or his
representative who must fill in and submit the request form for exportation appendix 5, being
issued the phytosanitary certificate appendix 6 in conformity with the import permit issued by
the importing country phytosanitary authority.

3. The exporter or his representative is required to apply to the Service for an inspection at
       least 14 (fourteen) days before the date of the exportation of the merchandise. In
       addition, the exporter must be prepared to provide all the means necessary for the
       execution of the inspection in a satisfactory manner, including covering all the costs
       involved.

4. The request mentioned in the terms of number 2 of present article must be submit to
NPA15 days before the probable date for exportation

5. The exporter proviede with the phytossanitary certificate will comply with insurance
requirement before export according to the procedure established on phytossanitary
Inspection manual

                                      ARTICLE 22
                              Consigned Product to Re-export

   1. When the consignment of product is imported to Mozambique and afterwards
      exported to other country, the exporter must:


                                              11
   a) Request to the NPA the phytosanitary certificate of re-exportation, which will be issued
   in conformity with the form presented in appendix 7,

   b) Provide all documentation required in terms of present regulation

   c) Ensure the availability of the consignment of product for phytossanitary inspection

2. The request mentioned in terms of sub-heading a) number 1 of the present article shall be
submited to the NPA 15 days before the probable date for re-exportation

3. The consignment of product for re-exportation must be accompanied with the
correspondent original phytosanitary certificate

                                       ARTICLE 23
                               Consignment Product in Transit

1. The transit of product under control in the country, packaked and sealed in the country of
origin is authorized if accompanied by the import permit issued by the importing country and
the phytosanitary certificate of the exporting country and if it does not represent a risk of pest
dissemination.

2. In the merchandise does not come sealed or with rupture of consignment, that will be
subject to obligatory inspection according what the stipulations foreseen in the present
regulation

3. The responsibility associated with operation mentioned in number 2 will be covered by the
owner of consignment


                                          ARTICLE 24
                                        Internal Transit

Movement of Products Subject toControl in National Territory.

   1. Whenever a pest occurrence constitutes a risk to spread to other regions, the NPA
      (NPPO) determine domestic quarantine measures that shall be divulgated through the
      mass media of larger coverage in the country.
   2. In the areas covered by domestic quarantine, the movement of products that constitute
      a risk for pest dissemination is subject to an authorization issued by NPA (NPPO),
      through a transit declaration which shall contain the following statements:

       a) Name and address of the applicant;
       b) Local of origin(Province, District,Locality);
       c) Type of product;
       d) Quantity;
       e) Transport to be utilized;
       f) Vehicle identification;
       g) Transporter identification.



                                                12
   3. The NPA (NPPO) it is entitled to establish the phytosanitary requisites to be observed
      during the transport of products subject to control, from an affected region to other
      areas.
   4. Transport of products in contravention to the disposals in number 1 and 2 of the
      present article are apprehended and destroyed in the site and all incurred expenses will
      be under the responsibility of the proprietor.

                                         CHAPTER VI
                                          Quarantine

                                        ARTICLE 25
                                      Quarantine Régime

1. The NPA (NPPO) shall imposes a quarantine regime in a defined site if verifies:
   a) Existence of reasons and/or evidence to suspect that products subject to control are
       infected/infested by pests;
   b) Presence of products subject to control infected or infested by pests that are listed in the
       quarantine object pests in the country;
   c) Existence of products subject to control that have been maintained or have been in transit
       in infected/infested areas or suspected areas;
   d) Potential risk of pest to spread to free areas.
2. Whenever determined by the NPA (NPPO), entrance, exit, movement and transit of products
   subject to control will be subject to quarantine.
3. Quarantine is made known at local and national levelthrough an advice, written or radio
   diffused communication.
4. Products subject to control retained may be subjected to quarantine regime and all costs
   incurred shall be covered by the proprietor.

                                       ARTICLE 26
                                  Quarantine Limited Areas

   1. Quarantine limited areas are temporary or permanent areas.
   2. Permanent areas shall be accessible areas near to the ports, airports and land borders.
   3. Temporary quarantine areas are established according to the binding need and the
      nature of pest suspected to be present.

                                   ARTICLE 27
          Management, maintenance and operation of quarantine limited areas

   1. Management, maintenance and operation of limited quarantine areas are of National
      Phytosanitary Authority (NPPO) responsibility.
   2. Competes to the NPA (NPPO) the observation, diagnosis and prescribe treatment to
      products subject to control, submitted to quarantine regime.

                                       ARTICLE 28
                   Rules to be observed in the Quarantine Limited Areas

   1. Products subjected to control under quarantine regime are maintained in official
      stations or similar approved equivalent places.



                                               13
2. It is prohibited the entrance of persons and vehicles in the quarantine stations, without
   previous authorization of the NPA (NPPO).
3. The entrance authorization it is temporary, lasting upon the quarantine period
   determined by the NPA (NPPO).
4. In accordance with the conditions specified in Annex I or following a decision by the
   NPA, certain products subject to control may, immediately on arrival, be placed in
   quarantine regime.
5. If, during the period in quarantine, the products subject to control are found to be
   affected by any of the harmful organisms mentioned in Annex 2 of the present
   Regulation, the products are subjected to treatment or destruction with no right of
   compensation to the importer.
6. If, during the period in quarantine,harmful organisms are found absent from the
   products subject to control, these must be released to the importer.
7. The importer will be formally informed in writing of the period of quarantine fixed by
   the authority that may be prolonged if necessary.
8. Quarantine regime may entail total or partial restrictions, with or without conditions
   for movement of plant products subject to control, vehicles, people or other materials
   or articles susceptible to disseminate pest infection or infestation.

                                    CHAPTER VII
                                     Pest Control

                                    ARTICLE 29
                           Declaration of Regulated Pests

1. The NPA (NPPO) may declare a pest as “quarantine object” or “regulated pest but not
   quarantine object” only based on pest risk analysis.
2. Competes to NPA (NPPO) to publish the declaration referred to in the number 1 in the
   present article and the subsequent alterations in the Boletim da Republican and other
   means of mass media.

                                    ARTICLE 30
                            Obligation of communication

1. Pests of binding declaration listed in Annex 1 in the present Regulation must be
   declared immediately and constitutes the duty of all citizens to communicate the NPA
   or any local administrative authority the occurrence of any regulated pest, the NPA
   shall notify the countries in the region, trade partners and the International Plant
   Protection Convention.
2. Proprietors or producers are specially obliged to communicate if suspect the existence
   of regulated pests specified in the binding declaration of Pest Quarantine List.
3. Communications are made verbally or in writing, the most number of elements must
   be mentioned to enable the pest identification.
4. The binding declaration pest list is to be updated according to the national and
   international phytosanitary situation.
5. The update of the binding declaration pest list it is of NPA responsibility being
   announced and published in the Boletim da Republica, without prejudice of immediate
   actions to be adopted by the NPA (NPPO).




                                          14
                                  ARTICLE 31
   Measures in case of suspicion, evidence and occurrence of quarantine pests

1. The Phytosanitary Inspector in case of suspicion of the occurrence of a quarantine pest
    in a certain locality shall:
            a)      Assess the locality, according to the provisions set in the line a) number
            1 of the article 10in the present Regulation;
            b)      Inspect the products subject to control;
            c)      Make or not a proposal to determine the locality as a area in quarantine
            regime.
2. Following the proposal elaborated according to the provisions mentioned on paragrapg
    c) of the previous number, the NPA (NPPO) may adopt other emergency measures.
The NPA (NPPO) may revoke or order to cease the quarantine status in the area or
locality declared as such.

                                    ARTICLE 32
                            Declaration of Pest Free Areas

1. NPA (NPPO) declares a area as free of pest by means of scientific evidence of pest
absence’
2. In the case referred to in the previous number, the NPA must:
          a) Adopt control measures to sustain and maintain the declared pest free area;
          b) Establish in these areas a monitoring system to ensure compliance with the
measures referred to in the previous paragraph, being the determinant conditions observed
in the establishment of the pest free area to be preserved.

                                     ARTICLE 33
                             Area of Low Pest Prevalence

1. NPA (NPPO) declares an area of low pest prevalence proven that a pest occurs at
    minimum levels in a specific area.
2. In the case referred to in the previous number, the NPA (NPPO) must:
            a) Adopt control measures to maintain the area declared as of low pest
prevalence;
            b) Establish in these areas a monitoring system to ensure compliance with the
    measures referred to in the previous paragraph, the determinant conditions observed in
    the establishment of the low pest free area shall be maintained.

                                  ARTICLE 34
                Implementation of Phytosanitary Control Measures

1. Any contaminated area or suspected to be contaminated by regulated pests, as well as
    any area declared as a pest free or as of low pest prevalence or as a buffer zone, may be
    subjected to the following official phytosanitary control measures:
    a) Destruction of products subject to control;
            b) Treatment prescription to
     products subject to control or to the means of transport used to carry contaminated
cargo;
            c) Prohibition or restriction of movement of products subject to control;



                                           15
                 d) Prohibition of cultivation or replanting of any specified plant species in certain
   localities;
                 e) Any other phytosanitary measure considered pertinent by the NPA (NPPO).

   2. The NPA shall notifythe proprietor , using a proper form, on the area referred to in
      number 1 of the present article about the
      Specific control phytosanitary measures to be implemented.

   3. The destruction referred to in the line number 1 of the present article must be carried
      out by the NPA on the presence of proprietor of the area and other relevant
      authorities.
   4. The implementation of the official control phytosanitary measures referred to in
      number 1 of the present article, excepting the line a) , are of the responsibility of the
      proprietor of the area under the NPA supervision.

                                          CHAPETR VIII
                                           Supervision

                                           ARTICLE 35
                                           Competencies

Competes to NPA to supervise the compliance with the provisions stated in the present
regulation, detect infractions and raise the Notification Act without prejudice to specific
competencies and functions of other institutions.


                                         ARTICLE 36
                            Intervenients in the supervision process

   Other entities than NPA may intervein in the supervision process: public security agents,
   security and protection forces, forest and wild animals control agents, fisheries control
   agents and all public officials including the community agents, whenever formally
   authorized by the NPA..

                                           ARTICLE 37
                                           Notifying Act

       The notifying act shall be triple drawn up and contain the following:
          a) Identification of the infractor and other infraction intervenientes;
          b) Date, time and location of the infraction and the act;
          c) Statement of facts and proofs of infraction;
          d) The legal provision infringed;
          e) The fixed fine to be applied;
          f) The means and products under infraction;
          g) The apprehensions executed by the official agent;
          h) Name, signature and function of the official;
          i) Identification of thewitness if existing.




                                                  16
                                        CHAPTER IX
                                  Infractions and Penalities

                                         ARTICLE 38

Constitutes a phytosanitary infraction, from wich the legal entitled of the holding or the
ocuppier, the proprietor, the orderer, the official or the executor agent shall responds:
   a) Possession, selling, transportation or distribution of any products subject to control
       contaminated by Quarantine object pest;
   b) Assault, resistance, intimidation, threatening or obstruction against full execution of
       functions of any Phytosanitary Inspector;
   c) No compliance of any order or instruction legally set out according to the terms
       defined in the phytosanitary import license ;
   d) Introduction into the country of any products subject to control through entry points
       other than those decleared in Anex I of the present Regulation;
   e) Import of any products subject to control in contrary conditions to the phytosanitary
       requisits defined in Annex I of of the present Regulation;
   f) Permission or intentional introductional into the country or spreading of any pest
       subject to control;
   g) Export of any product subject to control without the fulfilment of phytosanitary
       conditions established in terms of article 21 of the present Regulation;
   h) Failure to comply with the safety phytosanitary measures established to export
       consigned products, following the issuance of a phytosanitary certificate according to
       the terms defined in nr 5 of article 21 of the present Regulion;
   i) Refusal of access to production areas phytosanitary, transport and storage premises for
       the purpose of monitoring, inspection or collection of samples by the competent
       officials ubder the terms of the present Regulation;
   j) Removal of stamps from packagings containing products subject to control unduly
       authorized by the Phytosanitary Inspector;
   k) False declarations intentionally or by negligency pursuing the issuance of documents
       or any advantages resulting from the obligations imposed in the present Regulation;
   l) Alteration, forge, disfiguration or destruction of any document issued under the terms
       of the present Regulation;

                                         ARTICLE 39
                                          Penalties

1. Phytosanitary infractions described in article 38 of the present Regulation are punisheable
   according to the Table in Annex 10;
2. .Besides the penalties referred to in Annex 10 of the present article, the infractors are to be
   penalized in conformity with the penal law;
3. The stipulated amounts in the table referred in the previous number are to be up dated by
   the Ministers that supervise the agriculture and finance areas.
4. Double penalty shaal be applied in case of reincidence
5. Cumulative infractions are penalized with the sum of penalties and the related fines,

                                         ARTICLE 40
                                      (Payment of Fines)




                                               17
The stated period for fine payment it is of fifteen days, to be counted from the date of
notification..

                                          ARTICLE 41
                                     Destiny of Fine Values

6. Without prejudice to the provisions stated in the current applicable legislation, 40% of the
   monitory values resulting from the penalties applied due to infractions to the present
   regulation, revert to the State Treasury and the remaining 60% revert to the Ministry of
   Agriculture, the application of these values are determined by the respective Minister with
   the purpose of ensuring the operationality of the NPA.

                                          CHAPTER X
                                             Fees

                                          ARTICLE 42
                                             Fees

Srvices rendered under the phytosanitary activity are subject to fee payment by the
beneficiary, according to established in the table of fixed fees in Annex 8 of the present
regulation.

                                         ARTICLE 43
                                   Distribuition of Revenues

Revenues resulting from the charges applied under the present regulation revert in 60% to the
State Treasury and the remaining 40% revert in favour to the Ministry that superintends
agriculture, the mechanisms of use are determined by the respective Minister pursuing the
operationality of the NPA.

                                        CHAPTER XI
                                    Cooperating Obligations

                                      ARTICLE 44
             Obligations of Cooperation from Public Entities and Authorities

Entities and public authorities namely: the customs, ports, airports, airline companies, mail, naval
services, police and autharchic authorities, whenever requested, shall support and provide
assistance to the phytosanitary inspectors for the execution of the functions established in the
terms of the present Regulation.

                                         CHAPTER XII
                                          Resources

                                          ARTICLE 45
                                           Resources

The proprietor of the productive holdings, transport operator or the importer of products
   subject to control may, in the terms of the present Regulation, appeal to decisions
   formulated by the NPA to the Minister that superintends agriculture.


                                                18
ANEXO – 1. List of Quarantine or Regulated Pests and conditions for import of major commodities to Mozambique
                                                       Actinidia chinensis (Kiwi)

Type of Material           Condition of                                        Additional declaration
                               entry                Animal Pests                           Diseases             Nematodes
1. Plants with roots       Pr
2. Propagation material    P, PC        The material is free from:
(only vegetative                        a) Eotetranychus sexmaculatus
propagation material)                   b) Pseudaulacaspis pentagona




                                                          Agave spp. (Sisal)

Type of Material           Condition of                                        Additional declaration
                              entry                   Animal Pests                          Diseases            Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr
2. Propagation material   P, PC, Q        1. The material is free from:                                 The material is free from
(only vegetative                          a) Scyphophorus acupunctatus                                  nematodes, mites and other
propagation material)                                                                                   harmful organisms




                                                                                                                                1
                                                            Allium spp. (Garlic and Onion)

Type of Material                         Condition                                          Additional declaration
                                         of entry    Animal Pests                     Diseases                     Nematodes
                  1. Plants with roots   Pr

                  2.Propagation          P, PC, Q                                     The production area is free from:       The material is free from:
                  material (only                                                      a) Tomato black ring virus              a) Ditylenchus dipsaci.
                  vegetative                                                          b) Tobacco rattle virus                 b) Heterodera spp. and            other
                  propagation                                                         c) Onion yellow dwarf virus             nematodes.
                  material)                                                           d) Urocystis cepulae
                                                                                      e) Sclerotium cepivorum
B. Species that   1.Plants with roots    Pr
can be
propagated by     2. Propagation         Pr          The material is free from:
seed.             material                           a) Acrolepia spp.
                                                     b) Dyspessa ulula.
                                                     c) Aceria tulipae
                                                     d) Delia platura
                                                     e) Naupactus leucoloma
                                                     f) Scirtothrips dorsalis
                                                     g) Caliothrips indicus
                                                     h) Hydraecia micacea
                  3. Seeds               P, PC                                           The mother plants were officially The seed is free from:
                                                                                         inspected at appropriate times and Ditylenchus dipsaci.
                                                                                         found free from:
                                                                                         a) Tomato black ring virus
                                                                                         b) Tobacco rattle virus
                                                                                         c) Onion yellow dwarf virus
                                                                                         d) Urocystis cepulae
                                                                                         e) Sclerotium cepivorum
                                                     The seed has been health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA (International
                                                     Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically free from other harmful
                                                     organisms.
                                         TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on the
                                                     Phytosanitary Import Licence.
C. Bulbs For      See BULBS,
consuption        CORMS,
                  TUBERS and
                  RHIZOMES.



                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                 Anacardium occidentale (Cashew)

Type of Material          Condition of                                   Additional declaration
                          entry        Animal Pests                         Diseases              Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr
2. Propagation material   P, PC,Q      The material is free from:
(only vegetative                       a) Aleurodicus cocois
propagation material)                  b) Anastrepha spp.
                                       c) Helopeltis antonii Signoret
                                       d) Tetranychus cinnabarinus
3. Seeds                  P, PC        The material is free from:
                                       a) Helopeltis antonii Signoret
                                       b) Tetranychus cinnabarinus




                                                                                                              3
                                                  Ananas comosus (Pineaple)

Type of Material          Condition of                                       Additional declaration
                          entry
                                         Animal Pests                       Diseases                         Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr
2. Propagation material   P, PC          The material is free from:
                                         a) Opogona sacchari Bojer

                                                  Annona spp. (Custard apple)

Type of Material          Condition of                                        Additional declaration
                          entry            Animal Pests                        Diseases                        Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr
2. Propagation material   P, PC            The material is free from:
(only vegetative                           a) Aleurocanthus spiniferus
propagation material)                      b) Aleurodicus dispersus
                                           c) Anastrepha spp.
                                           d) Bactrocera spp
3. Seeds                  P, PC            PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
                                           harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment

4. Fruit                  See FRESH
                          FRUIT


                                                         Apis spp. (Bee)

Type of Material          Condition of                                       Additional declaration
                          entry
                                         Animal Pests                           Diseases                            Nematodes
1. Bees                   Pr
2. Bee equipment          Pr
3. Bee products           P, PC          The consignment is free from harmful organisms.
                          TR             Heat treatment at a temperature of 100 oC for a duration of 30 minutes.

                                                                                                                                4
                                                    Apium graveolens (Celery)

Type of Material       Condition of                                           Additional declaration
                       entry          Animal Pests                 Diseases                                       Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Seeds               P, PC                                       The mother plants were officially
                                                                   inspected at appropriate stages of growing
                                                                   and found to be free from:
                                                                   a) Pseudomonas syringae pv. Apii

                                      The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                      ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and declared free from quarantine objects and
                                      practically free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR              It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                      on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.




                                                                                                                                                5
                                                     Arachis hypogea (Groundnut)

Type of Material       Condition                                            Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests                             Diseases                          Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Seeds               P, PC       The country of production is free        The country of production is      The country of production is
                                   from of the mother plants were           free from of the mother plants    free from or the mother plants
                                   officially inspected at appropriate      were officially inspected at      were officially inspected at
                                   times and found to be free from:         appropriate times and found       appropriate times and found
                                   a) Alphitobius laevigatus                to be free from:                  to be free from :
                                   b) Naupactus leucoloma                   a) Peanut clump virus             a) Aphelenchoides arachidis
                                   c) Holotrichia serrata                   b) Peanut mottle virus
                                   d) Diabrotica speciosa                   c) Peanut stunt virus

                                   The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                   ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                   practically free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on
                                   the Phytosanitary Import Licence..




                                                                                                                                               6
                                                     Asparagus spp. (Asparagus)

Type of Material       Condition                                            Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests           Diseases                                            Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Rhizomes            P, PC, Q                           The country of production is free from:             The rhizomes are Free from:
                                                          a) Asparagus latent virus                           a) Ditylenchus dispsaci.
                                                                                                              b) Washed free of soil.
3. Seeds               P, PC                              The country of production is free from:
                                                          a) Aspragus latent virus.

                                                        Beta vulgaris (Beetroot)

Type of Material       Condition                                            Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests               Diseases                                  Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Seeds               P, PC       The material is free       1.The area of production is free from
                                   from:                      or the mother plants were officially
                                   a) Zabrus tenebrioides     inspected at appropriate intervals and
                                   b) Epitrix tuberis         found to be free from:
                                   c) Hydraecia micacea       a) Corynebacterium flaccumfaciens
                                                              pv. Betae
                                                              b) Peronospora farinosa
                                                              c) Pseudomonas syringae pv. Aptata
                                                              d) Tomato black virus
                                   The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA
                                   (International Seed Tested Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically free
                                   from other harmful organisms.

                       TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on
                                   the Phytosanitary Import Licence.




                                                                                                                                               7
                                                          BOXES, CARTONS

Type of Material            Condition of                                        Additional declaration
                            entry             Animal Pests                         Diseases                                   Nematodes
1. Boxes, cartons           Are new and
                            free from
                            harmful
                            organisms
2. Packing Leaves,          Packaging
material   straw,bark       material should
           and other        comply with
           material of      ISPM 15
           plant origin

              Sawdust       Pr



                                              BULBS, CORMS, TUBERS E RHIZOMES

Type of Material        Condition                                           Additional declaration
                        of entry     Animal Pests                Diseases                     Nematodes
1. For plantation       P, PC                                                                 The area of production is free from:
                                                                                              a) Heterodera rostochiensis.
                                                                                              b) Heterodera pallida.
                                                                                              c) Ditylenchus dipsaci.

2. For consumption      P, PC                                                                   1.The area of production is free from:
                                                                                                a) Heterodera rostochiensis.
                                                                                                b) Heterodera pallida

                                     The consignment is practically free from soil and is free from harmful organisms.




                                                                                                                                          8
                                                        Cactaceaen (Cactus family)

Type of Material             Condition of                                      Additional declaration
                             entry          Animal Pests                     Diseases                       Nematodes
1. Plants with roots         Pr                                                                             The material was rooted in
                                                                                                            sterilized growing medium and
                                                                                                            is free from nematodes and
                                                                                                            other harmful organisms. ?????
2. Propagation material      P, PC          PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
(only vegetative                            organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
propagation material)
3. Seeds                     P, PC          PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                            organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                           Camelia sinensis (Tea)

Type of Material          Condition                                         Additional declaration
                          of entry     Animal Pests                   Diseases                           Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr
2. Propagation            P, PC                                       The production area is free
material (only                                                        from:
vegetative                                                               a) Phomopsis theae
propagation material)                                                    b) Exobasidium vexans
                                       The consignment is free from
                                       mites and other harmful
                                       organisms.
3. Seeds                  P, PC                                       1.The area of production is free
                                                                      from:
                                                                      a) Exobasidium vexans.



                                                                                                                                             9
                                                       Capsicum frutescens (Chilli)

Type of           Condition                                                Additional declaration
Material          of entry     Animal Pests                    Diseases                                        Nematodes
1. Plants with    Pr
roots
2. Propagation    P, PC        The material is free from:      The area of production is free from or the
material and                   a) Listroderes costirostris     mother plants were officially inspected at
Seeds                          b) Opogona sacchari             appropriate times and found to be free
                               c) Scirtothrips dorsalis        from:
                               d) Heliothis virescens          a) Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria.

                               The seed has been seed health tested at an officially laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA
                               (International Seed Tested Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically free from
                               other harmful organism.

                  TR           It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on the
                               Phytosanitary Import Licence.


                                                         Carica papaya (Pawpaw)

Type of Material        Condition                                           Additional declaration
                        of entry     Animal Pests                     Diseases                                 Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Propagation          P, PC, Q      The material is free from:      The mother plants were officially
material (only                       a) Bactrocera carambolae         inspected at appropriate times and
vegetative                           b) Erinnyis alope                found to be free from:
propagation material)                c) Erinnyis ello
                                     d) Bactrocera spp.               a) Papaya bunchy-top virus.
                                                                      b) Papaya ring spot virus.




                                                                                                                                               10
                                                          Carya spp. (Pecan nut)

Type of Material           Condition of                                       Additional declaration
                           entry           Animal Pests                       Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots       Pr
2. Propagation material    Pr
3. Seeds                   P, PC           PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                           organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                 BARK

Type of Material          Condition of                                       Additional declaration
                          entry           Animal Pests                      Diseases                               Nematodes
1. From Quercus suber     See
                          QUERCUS
2. Other types of bark    Pr


                                                         Castanea spp. (Chestnut)

Type of Material          Condition of                                       Additional declaration
                          entry           Animal Pests                      Diseases                               Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr

2. Seeds                  P, PC                                             The area of production is free from:
                                                                            a)Endothia parasitica.
3.Timber, wood            See WOOD




                                                                                                                                       11
                                            Chrysanthemum morifolium (Chrysanthemum)

Type of Material        Condition                                          Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                     Diseases                         Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Propagation          P, PC       The area of production is free   The area of production is free
material (only                      from:                            from:
vegetative                          a) Amauromyza maculosa.          a) Didymella chrysanthemi.
propagation material)               b) Didymella chrysanthemi        b) Puccinia Horiana.
                                    c) Macrosiphoniella
                                    sanborni
                                    d) Nemorimyza maculosa

                                    The consignment is free from: The consignment is free from: The consignment is free from:
                                    a) Mites and other harmful a) Erwinia chrysanthemi pv. a) Aphelenchoides ritzemabosi.
                                    organisms.                    chrysanthemi.
                                                                  b)Virus,especially
                                                                  Chrysanthemum stunt viroid.

                                    The plants were rooted in                                       The plants were rooted in sterilized
                                    sterilized growing medium                                       growing medium and are free from
                                    and are free from mites                                         nematodes, and other harmful
                                                                                                    organisms.
3. Seeds                P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                    organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                           12
                                                         Cicer arietinum (Chickpea)

Type of Material           Condition of                                          Additional declaration
                           entry           Animal Pests                       Diseases                                   Nematodes
1. Plants with roots       Pr

2. Seeds                   P, PC                                              The mother plants were officially
                                                                              inspected at appropriate times during
                                                                              the growing season and found free
                                                                              from:
                                                                                  a) Ascochyta rabiei

                                           The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                           ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                           practically free from other harmful organisms.

                           TR              It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                           on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.
                                                                                                                                                         Formatado: Inglês (Reino Unido)


                                                          Cichorium spp. (Chicory)

Type of Material            Condition of                                           Additional declaration
                            entry            Animal Pests                           Diseases                           Nematodes
1. Plants with roots and    Pr
Rhizomes

2. Seeds                    P, PC            PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                             organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                         Citrus spp. (Citrus)

Type of Material        Condition                                        Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                        Diseases                           Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    P, PC, Q    PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
including grafted and               organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
budded plants

2.Propagation         P, PC, Q                                         The mother plants have been
material       (only                                                   indexed in connection with an
vegetative                                                             official certification scheme and
propagation material)                                                  found to be free from virus,
including bud wood                                                     Mycoplasm and Spiroplasm.

                                                                       The country of production is free
                                                                       from or the mother plants were
                                                                       officially inspected at appropriate
                                                                       times and found to be free from:
                                                                       a) Xanthomonas campestris pv.
                                                                       citri.

3.Tissue cultures                                                      The mother plants have been           . The material was rooted
                                                                       indexed in connection with an         in sterilized growing
                                                                       official certification scheme and     medium and is free from
                                                                       found to be free from virus,          nematodes and other
                                                                       rickettsia, mycoplasm and             harmful organisms.
                                                                       spiroplasm.

4. Seed                 P, PC                                          The country of production is free
                                                                       from or the area of production has
                                                                       been found to be free from:

                                                                       a) Xanthomonas campestris pv.
                                                                       citri.



                                                                                                                                         14
5. Fresh fruit   P, PC   The area of origin is free from:
                         a) Anastrepha fraterculus.
                         b) Anastrepha ludens.
                         c) Anastrepha mombinpraeoptan.
                         d) Dacus dorsalis
                         e) Dacus tryoni.
                         f) Aleurodicus dispersus
                         g) Bactrocera invadens.
                         h) Ceratitis quinaria
                         i) Cryptoblabes gnidiella
                         j) Dialeurodes spp.
                         k) Diaphorina citri
                         l) Diaspidiotus perniciosus
                         m) Panonychus ulmi
                         n) Prays citri
                         o) Pseudococcus calceolariae
                         p) Tetranychus cinnabarinus

                         The containers are free from harmful organisms.




                                                                           15
                                                  Cocos nucifera (Coconut)

Type of Material              Condition                                    Additional declaration
                              of entry  Animal Pests                      Diseases                         Nematodes
1. Plants with                Pr
roots
2.Seeds for Non-germinated               The area of production is free   The area of production is free   The area of production is
planting       seed           P, PC, Q   from:                            from:                            free from:
                                         a) Aleurodicus dispersus         a) Coconut lethal yellowing      a)       Rhadinaphelenchus
                                         b) Aleurodicus pulvinatus        and diseases of uncertain        cocophilus
                                         c) Dysmicoccus cocotis           etiology including:              b)Rhyncophorus palmarum.
                                         d) Elaeidobius kamerunicus       b) Root wilt
                                         e) Leucopholis coneophora        c) Leaf scotch
                                         f) Aceria guerreronis            d) Malaysian wilt
                                         g) Aleurodicus cocois            e) Bronze leaf wilt
                                                                          f) Bristle top disease.
              Germinated seed P, PC, Q   The seed was germinated in       The area of production is free   The area of production is
                                         sterilized growing medium        from:                            free from:
                                         and is free from mites.          a) Cocos lethal yellowing and    a)       Rhadinaphelenchus
                                                                          diseases of uncertain etiology   cocophilus
                                                                          including:                       b)Rhyncophorus palmarum.
                                                                          b) Root wilt
                                                                          c) Leaf scotch               The seed was germinated in
                                                                          d) Malaysian wilt            sterilized growing medium
                                                                          e) Bronze leaf wilt          and is free from nematodes
                                                                          f) Bristle top disease.      and       other    harmful
                                                                                                       organisms.
3. Coconuts a)       Imported P, PC      PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
for          from countries              harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
consumption. in Southern
             Africa
             b) Importation Pr
             from countries
             outside Southern
             Africa

                                                                                                                                    16
                                                         Coffee arabica (Coffee)

Type of Material               Condition of                                     Additional declaration
                               entry            Animal Pests            Diseases                                             Nematodes
1. Plants with roots           Pr
2. Propagation Varieties                        PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
material (only which can P, PC, Q               harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
vegetative         be growing
propagation        from seed
material)
                   Varieties  Pr
                   which
                   cannot
                   be growing
                   from seed
3. Seeds                      P, PC, Q                                  The area of production is free from or the mother
                                                                        plants were officially inspected at appropriate
                                                                        times and found to be free from:
                                                                        a) Coffea ringspot virus
                                                                        b) Globerella cingulata        (CBD strain).


                                                          Coniferae (Conifers)

Type of Material          Condition of                                           Additional declaration
                          entry                         Animal Pests                            Diseases                    Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr

2. Wood with bark         Pr

3. Seeds                  P, PC               PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
                                              harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment

4.Timber, wood            See WOODS


                                                                                                                                         17
                                                      Cruciferae (Crucifers)

Type of Material       Condition of                                        Additional declaration
                       entry          Animal Pests                        Diseases                                 Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Seeds               P, PC           The area of production is free
                                      from or the mother plants were
                                      officially inspected at
                                      appropriate times and found to
                                      be free from:
                                      a) Listroderes costirostris
                                      b) Phyllotreta striolata
                                      c) Pieris brassicae

                                      The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                      ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                      practically free from other harmful organisms

                       TR             It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                      on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.




                                                                                                                                               18
                                                       Cucurbitaceae

Type of Material       Condition of                                       Additional declaration
                       entry          Animal Pests                           Diseases                                     Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Seeds               P, PC                                                   The consignment is free from:
                                                                              a)    Pseudomonas      syringae       pv.
                                                                              lachrymans.

                                      The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by
                                      the ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects
                                      and practically free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR             It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions
                                      stated on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.




                                                                                                                                        19
                                                      Daucus carota (Carrot)

Type of Material       Condition of                                         Additional declaration
                       entry          Animal Pests                         Diseases                                 Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Seeds                                                                   The mother plants were officially
                       P, PC                                               inspected at appropriate times and
                                                                           found to be free from:
                                                                           a) Xanthomonas campestris
                                                                           pv.carotae.

                                      The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                      ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                      practically free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR             It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                      on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.
                                                                                                                                                    Formatado: Inglês (Reino Unido)




                                                                                                                                               20
                                                   Dianthus spp. (Carnation, Pinks)

Type of Material          Condition of                                        Additional declaration
                          entry          Animal Pests                         Diseases                              Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr
2. Propagation material                  The mother plants were officially
                                                                      The mother plants were officially             The consignment is
(only vegetative          P, PC          inspected at appropriate times and
                                                                      inspected at appropriate times and            free from nematodes
propagation material)                    found to be free from:       found to be free from:                        and other harmful
                                         a) Liriomyza spp.            a) Cacoecimorpha pronubana.                   organisms.
                                                                      b) Carnation streak virus.
                                         The consignment is free from c) Carnation etched virus.                  The material was
                                         Mites.                           c) Carnation necrotic fleck.            rooted in sterilized
                                                                                                                  growing medium and
                                                                               The consignment is free from:      is free from
                                                                              a) Erwinia chrysanthemi         pv. nematodes and other
                                                                              diathicola.                         harmful organisms.
                                                                              b) Pseudomonas caryphylii.
                                                                              c) Fusarium oxysporum f.sp dianthi.
                                                                              d) Phialophora cinerescens.




                                                                                                                                         21
                                                          Dioscorea spp. (Yam)

Type of Material          Condition                                         Additional declaration
                          of entry     Animal Pests                   Diseases                        Nematodes
1. Plants with roots      Pr
2. Propagation                          The plants were rooted in The mother plants have been         The plants were rooted in sterilized
material (only            P, PC, Q     sterilized growing medium indexed in connection with an        growing medium and are free from
vegetative                             and are free from mites    official certification scheme and   nematodes and other harmful
propagation material)                                             have been found to be free from     organisms.
                                                                  virus especially:
                                                                  a) Dioscorea mosaic virus.



                                                       Diospyros spp. (Persimmom)

Type of Material              Condition of entry                                     Additional declaration
                                                       Animal Pests                  Diseases                         Nematodes
1. Plants with roots          Pr

2. Propagation material       Pr

3. Seeds                      P, PC                    PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free
                                                       from harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment


                                                         Dolichos lablab (lab-lab)

Type of Material              Condition of                                     Additional declaration
                              entry           Pests                           Diseases                                 Nematodes
1. Plants with roots          Pr

2. Seeds                      P, PC           The consignment is free from:   The consignment is free from:
                                              a) Anticarsia gemmatalis        a) Corynebacterium flaccumfaciens pv.
                                                                              flaccumfaciens

                                                                                                                                          22
                                                     Elaeis guineensis (Oil palm)

Type of Material           Condition of                                     Additional declaration
                           entry          Animal Pests                     Diseases                           Nematodes
1. Plants with roots       Pr

2. Propagation material    P, PC, Q                                        The material is free from:         The area of production
(only vegetative                                                           a) Fusarium oxysporum         f.sp is free from:
propagation material)                                                      elaedis.                           a) Rhadinaphelenchus
                                                                           b) Cercospora elaeidis.            cocophilus.
                                                                                                              b) Rhyncophorus
                                                                                                              palmarum.
3. Seeds      Non-                                                         The material is free from:         The material is free
              Germinated   P, PC, Q                                        a) Fusarium oxysporum        f.sp. from:
                                                                           elaeidis.                          a)     Rhadinaphelnchus
                                                                                                              cocophilus.
                                                                                                              b)         Rhyncophorus
                                                                                                              palmarum.
              Germinated   P, PC, Q                                        The material is free from:         The material is free
                                                                           a) Fusarium oxysporum        f.sp. from:
                                                                           elaeidis.                          a)     Rhadinaphelnchus
                                                                                                              cocophilus.
                                                                                                              b)         Rhyncophorus
                                                                                                              palmarum.

                                          The seed was germinated in sterilized growing medium.




                                                                                                                                    23
                                                  Eucalyptus spp. (Eucalyptus)

Type of Material           Condition of                                    Additional declaration
                           entry          Animal Pests                        Diseases                      Nematodes
1. Plants with roots and
propagation material       Pr

2. Seeds                   P, PC          PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
                                          harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment

3. Wood, Timber            See WOOD




                                                         Fresh Flowers

Type of Material           Condition of                                    Additional declaration
                           entry          Animal Pests                                 Diseases                Nematodes
1. Flowers                 P, PC          The consignment is free from regulated pests
                                          especially:
                                          a) Amauromyza maculosa.
                                          b) Cacoecimorpha pronumbana
                                          c) Liriomyza spp.




                                                                                                                              24
                                                           Fragaria spp. (Strawberry)

Type of Material        Condition                                                Additional declaration
                        of entry        Animal Pests                  Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Propagation          P, PC, Q        The consignment is free     The mother plants have been indexed in The consignment is free from:
material (only                          from:                       connection with an official certification a) Aphelenchoides fragariae
vegetative                              a) Mites and other          scheme and found to be free from:         and other nematodes.
propagation material)                   harmful organisms           a) Viruses
                                                                    b) Phytophthora fragariae
3. Seeds                P, PC           PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                        organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment

4. Fresh fruit          See FRESH
                        FRUIT



                                                                  Fresh Fruit
                                (Except Citrus spp., Cocos spp., Malus spp., Musa spp., Prunus spp. e Pyrus spp)

Type of Material        Condition                                               Additional declaration
                        of entry        Animal Pests                         Diseases                              Nematodes
1. Fresh fruit          P, PC           The area of origin is free from:
                                        a) Anastrepha spp.
                                        b) Dacus spp.
                                        c) Aleurodicus dispersus

                                        The fruit is in good condition and is packed in treated boxes.




                                                                                                                                        25
                                                    Glycine max (Soyabean)

Type of Material        Condition                                         Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                       Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Seeds a) For                      The material is free from:        The mother plants were officially
             sowing     P, PC       a) Anticarsia gemmatalis           inspected at appropriate times and
                                    b) Aphis glycines                  found to be free from:
                                    c) Cerotoma trifurcata             a) Colletotrichum trucantum.
                                    d) Delia platura                   b) Corynebacterium flaccumfaciens
                                    e) Helicoverpa zea                 pv. flaccumfaciens.
                                    f) Heliothis virescens             c) Diaporthe phaseolorum var
                                                                       caulivora.
                                    g) Caliothrips indicus
                                                                       d) Septoria glycines
                                    h) Clanis bilineata
                                                                       e) Tobacco ringspot virus.
                                    i) Omiodes diemenalis
                                    j) Omiodes indicata
                                    k) Diabrotica speciosa
                                    l) Anticarsia gemmatalis
                                                                                                               The seed is free from:
                                                                                                               a) Heterodera glycines.

                                    The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                    ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                    practically free from other harmful organisms.

                        TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                    on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.
            b) For      P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
            Consumption             organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                             26
                                                          Gossypium spp. (Cotton)

Type of Material        Condition                                             Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                               Diseases                       Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2.Capsules              Pr
3. Seeds                P, PC       The seed was acid delinted.

                                    The area of production is free from:        The seed is free from:
                                    a) Anthonomus spp.                          a) Ascochyta gossypii
                                    b) Crocidosema plebejana
                                    c) Dysdercus cingulatus
                                    d) Oxycarenus laetus

                                     The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA
                                    (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically free
                                    from other harmful organisms.

                        TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on the
                                    Phytosanitary Import Licence.
4. Seeds not delinted   P
                        TR          Fumigation with Methyl bromide.




                                                                                                                                                27
                                                              Graminae
                                (Except Hordeum spp., Triticum spp., Triticale, Oryza spp. and Zea spp. )

Type of Material                    Condition                                      Additional declaration
                                    of entry     Animal Pests      Diseases                             Nematodes
A. SPECIES       1. Rooted plants   Pr
WHICH
CANNOT BE  2. Propagation           P, PC, Q     PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
PROPAGATE  material (only                        harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
D BY SEED  vegetative
           propagation
           material)
           3. Leaves, straw         Pr                             The area of production is free from:    The area of production is free
           and packing                                             a) Ryegrass toxicity syndrome.          from:
           material                                                                                        a) Anguina agrostis.
B.   OTHER 1. Rooted plants         Pr
SPECIES
           2. Propagation           Pr
           material
           3. Seed s                P, PC                          The area of production is free from:    The area of production is free
                                                                   a) Ryegrass toxicity syndrome.          from:
                                                                                                           a) Anguina agrostis.
                                                                    The seed is free from:
                                                                   a) Claviceps spp.

                                                 The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods
                                                 recommended by the ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free
                                                 from quarantine objects and practically free from other harmful organisms.

                                    TR           It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the
                                                 conditions stated on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.
4. Leaves, Straw and Packing        Pr
material



                                                                                                                                        28
                                                            Growing Media

Type of Material      Condition                                            Additional declaration
                      of entry      Animal Pests                                     Diseases         Nematodes
1. Peat               P, PC         The material came directly from the peat bog and is free from weed seeds.
2. Other a) Not       Pr
types    sterilized

           b)         P, PC         The material has been sterilized and is free                        The material has been sterilized and
           Sterilized               from insects and other harmful organisms.                           is free from nematodes.




                                                    Helianthus annus (Sunflower)

Type of Material        Condition                                            Additional declaration
                        of entry      Animal Pests             Diseases                                     Nematodes
Plants with roots       Pr
Seeds        a) For     P, PC                                   The mother plants were officially
             sowing                                            inspected at appropriate times and found
                                                               to be free from:
                                                               a) Plasmopara halstedii.

                                      The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                      ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                      practically free from other harmful organisms.

                        TR            It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                      on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.
           b) For      P, PC           PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
           consumption                organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                               29
                                                        Hevea brasiliensis (Rubber tree)

Type of Material            Condition                                            Additional declaration
                            of entry     Animal Pests            Diseases                                  Nematodes
1. Plants with roots        Pr
2. Propagation              P, PC, Q                             1. The country of origin is free from:
material (only vegetative                                        a) Microcyclus ulei.
propagation material)

3. Seeds                    P, PC         PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                         organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment

                                                             Hordeum spp.(Barley)

Type of Material                    Condition                                       The material is free from
                                    of entry      Animal Pests                       Diseases                                 Nematodes
1. Plants with roots                Pr
2. Leaves, Straw and Packing        Pr
material
3. Seeds For sowing                 P, PC                                              The mother plants were officially
                                                                                      inspected at appropriate times and
                                                                                      found to be free from:
                                                                                      a) Barley stripe mosaic virus.
                                                                                      b) Cephalosporium gramineum.

                                                                                       The seed is free from:
                                                                                       a) Ustilago nuda
                                                                                       b) Claviceps spp.
                                                   The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended
                                                  by the ISTA (International Seed Tested Association) and is declared free from quarantine
                                                  objects and practically free from other harmful organisms.
                                    TR             It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions
                                                  stated on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.
              b) For                P, PC         PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
              consumption                         harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment

                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                   Ipomoea batata (Sweet potato)

Type of Material                Condition                                     Additional declaration
                                of entry    Animal Pests           Diseases                                     Nematodes
1. Plants with roots            Pr
2. Propagation material (only   P, PC, Q    The material is free   The mother plants have been indexed in
vegetative propagation                      from:                  connection with an official certification
material)                                   a) Naupactus           scheme and found free from virus? and
                                            leucoloma              Mycoplasm.

                                                                   The material is free from:
                                                                   a) Monilochaetes infuscans
                                                                   b) Streptomyces ipomoea
                                                                   c) Ceratocystis fimbriata

3. Seeds                        P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
                                            harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment

4.   Tubers a) From             P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from
and foliage countries within                harmful organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
for         Southern Africa
consumption
            b) From             Pr
            countries
            outside
            Southern Africa




                                                                                                                                31
                                                        Lactuca sativa (Lettuce)

Type of Material       Condition                                            Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests              Diseases                                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Seeds               P, PC                                 Following an official analysis the level of infection
                                                             with lactuca mosaic virus did not exceed 0.1% or
                                                             the plants producing the was inspected at an
                                                             appropriate time and the level of infection did not
                                                             exceed 2%.

                                   The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA
                                   (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically
                                   free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatment are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on the
                                   Phytosanitary Import Licence.




                                                                                                                                                 32
                                                      Litchi chinensis (Litchi)

Type of Material        Condition                                        Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                      Diseases                            Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation          P, PC       The material is free from:
material (only                      a) Aleurodicus dispersus
vegetative                          b) Bactrocera spp.
propagation material)               c) Batocera spp.
                                    d) Cryptophlebia ombrodelta
                                    e) Tessaratoma papillosa
                                    f) Aceria litchi
                                    g) Tetranychus cinnabarinus
3. Seeds                P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                    organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                33
                                                   Lycopersicum esculentum (Tomato)

Type of Material       Condition                                            Additional declaration
                       of entry      Animal Pests            Diseases                                    Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   P, PC, must PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                       be cultivated organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
                       in Substract
2. Seeds               P, PC                                 1.The mother plants were officially
                                                             inspected at appropriate times and found to
                                                             be free from:
                                                             a) Corynebacterium michiganense pv.
                                                             michiganense.
                                                             b)      Xanthomonas       campestris    pv.
                                                             vesicatoria.
                                                             c) Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersisi
                                                             race 3.
                                                             d) Didymella lycopersici.
                                                             e) Tobacco ringspot virus
                                                             f) Tomato black ring virus
                                                             g) Potato spindle tuber viroid
                                                             h) Tomato rinspot virus

                                     The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA
                                     (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically
                                     free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR            It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on the
                                     Phytosanitary Import Licence.

3. Fresh fruit         See FRESH
                       FRUIT




                                                                                                                                                34
                                                           Malus sylvestris (Apple)

Type of Material        Condition                                        Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                     Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Propagation          P, PC       The material if free from:       The mother plants have been indexed
material (only                      a) Rhagoletis pomonella.         in connection with an official
vegetative                          b) Mites and other harmful       certification scheme and found to be
propagation material)               organism                         free from virus and Mycoplasm
                                                                     especially:
                                                                     a) Apple proliferation mycoplasm.
                                                                     b) Cherry rasp leaf virus.
                                                                     c) Tomato ringspot virus.
                                                                     d) Soil-borne viruses.

                                                                     The area of production in a radius of
                                                                     1 (one) Km is free from:
                                                                     a) Erwinia amylovora.

                                                                     The material if free from:
                                                                     a) Nectria galligena.

3. Seeds                P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                    organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
                        TR                                           Bactericide     against       Erwinia
                                                                     amylovora.

4. Fresh fruit          P, PC       The area of production is free The area of production is free from:
                                    from:                          a) Erwinia amylovora
                                    a) Cydia spp.
                                    b) Quadraspidiotus pernciosus
                                    c) Anastrepha spp.
                                    d) Dacus spp.
                                    e) Aleurodicus spp.
                                    f) Bactrocera spp.

                                                                                                                                35
                                                              Mangifera indica (Mango)

Type of Material        Condition                                            Additional declaration
                        of entry        Animal Pests                        Diseases                            Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    P, PC, must     PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                        be cultivated   organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
                        in Substract
2. Propagation          P, PC           The area of production is free from:   The area of production is free from:
material (only                          a) Ceroplastes rusci                   a) Mango bunchy top mycoplasm.
vegetative                              b) Toxoptera odinae
propagation material)                   c) Aleurodicus dispersus
                                        d) Bactrocera spp.
                                        e) Batocera spp.
                                        f) Cryptoblabes gnidiella
                                        g) Deporaus marginatus
                                        h) Rastrococcus invadens
                                        i) Aceria mangiferae
                                        j) Anastrepha spp.
                                        k) Erosomyia mangiferae
                                        l) Tetranychus cinnabarinus
                                        m)Rastrococcus iceryoides

3. Seeds                P, PC, Q        The seed is free from:
                                        a) Sternochetus spp.
                                        b) Sternochetus frigidus




                                                                                                                                    36
                                                     Manihot esculenta (Cassava)

Type of Material                Condition                                    Additional declaration
                                of entry    Animal Pests                  Diseases                 Nematodes
1. Plants with roots            Pr

2. Propagation material         P, PC       The material is free from:     The mother plants were 1. The material is free from:
including tubers for planting               a) Zonocerus variegatus        officially inspected at a) Aphelenchoides besseyi
and tissue cultures                         b) Maconellicoccus hirsutus appropriate times and b) Aphelenchoides ritzemabosi
                                            c) Maconellicoccus hirsutus found to be free from:        c) Ditylenchus destructor
                                            d) Oligonychus gossypii        a)   American   cassava    d) Radopholus similis
                                            e) Anastrepha manihoti         mosaic.
                                            f) Aleurodicus dispersus       b) Cassava brown
                                                                           streak agent.
                                            g) Chilozela trapeziana
                                                                           c)          Sphaceloma
                                            h) Erinnyis ello
                                                                           manihoticola.
                                            i) Phenacoccus herreni
                                                                           d) Cassava witches,
                                            j) Vatiga illudens             broom agent.
                                            k) Erinnyis ello               e) Uromyces spp.
                                            l)Tetranychus cinnabarinus
3. Seeds                        P, PC, Q    PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                            organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
4.Tubers for a)From             P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
consumption. countries                      organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
             within
             Southern
             Africa

                b)From          Pr
                countries
                outside
                Southern
                Africa




                                                                                                                                        37
                                                      Medicago sativa (Lucerne)

Type of Material       Condition                                            Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests               Diseases                      Nematodes
1. Fodder              Pr
2. Plants with roots   Pr

3. Seed s              P, PC                                  The mother plants were officially inspected at          The material is free
                                                              appropriate times and found to be free from:            from:
                                                              a) Alfalfa mosaic virus.                                a) Ditylenchus
                                                              b) Corynebacterium michiganense                         dipsaci.
                                                                 pv. insidiosum.
                                                              c) Phoma medicaginis.
                                                              d) Verticillium albo-atrum and          Verticillium
                                                              dahliae.

                                                               The material is free from:
                                                              a) Sclerotium spp.

                                   The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA
                                   (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically
                                   free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on
                                   the Phytosanitary Import Licence.




                                                                                                                                               38
                                                         Musa spp. (Banana)

Type of Material        Condition                                          Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                Diseases                             Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation          P, PC, Q    The area of production is  The area of production is free from: The area of production is free from:
material (only                      free from:                 a) Abaca mosaic virus.               a) Radopholus similis and other
vegetative                          a) Opogona sacchari        b) Bunchy top virus.                 parasitic nematodes.
propagation material)               b)         Hercinothrips   c) Xanthomonas campestris pv.
                                    bicinctus                  celebensis.
                                                               d) Mycosphaerella fijiensis.
3. Seeds                P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                    organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
4. Fresh a)From         P, PC       The fruit is free from
fruit    countries                  fruit flies.
         within
         Southern
         Africa

            b) From     Pr
            other
            countries




                                                                                                                                           39
                                                    Nicotiana tabacum (Tobacco)

Type of Material       Condition                                           Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests                Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr

2. Seeds               P, PC, Q                                The mother plants were officially
                                                               inspected at appropriate times and
                                                               found to be free from:

                                                                a) Tomato black ring virus.
                                                                b) Tobacco ringspot virus
                                                                c) Peronospora hyoscyami f.sp.
                                                                Tabacina
                                                                d) Ralstonia solanacearum
                                    The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                   ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                   practically free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR          It is obligatory that the pesticides used, methods of application employed, and duration of the treatment
                                   are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.???

3. Tobacco leave       P, PC       The material is free        The country of origin is free from:
(non-manufactured)                 from;
                                   a) Heliothis virescens      a) Peronospora tabacina or the
                                   b) Omiodes diemenalis       tobacco leaves and packing material
                                   c) Omiodes indicata         has been vacuum fumigated.




                                                                                                                                               40
                                                         Oryza sativa (Rice)

Type of Material         Condition                                          Additional declaration
                         of entry    Animal Pests                                Diseases                            Nematodes
1. Plants with roots     Pr
2. Dry foliage and straw Pr
including packing
material
3. Seeds a)           For P, PC      The area of production is free from:        The seed is      free from:         The      area     of
             sowing                  a) Brevennia rehi                           a) Xanthomonas campestris pv.       production is free
                                     b) Chilo auricilius                         oryza.                              from:
                                     c) Chilo infuscatellus                      b) Xanthomonas campestris pv.       a) Aphelenchoides
                                     d) Chilo polychrysus                        oryzicola                           Besseyi.
                                     e) Chilo suppressalis                       c) Balansia oryza sativae.
                                     f) Chilo zacconius                          d) Tilletia barclayana
                                                                                 e) Sclerophtora macrospora
                                     g) Dicladispa armigera
                                     h) Leptocorisa acuta
                                     i) Leptocorisa oratorius
                                     j) Nilaparvata lugens
                                     k) Scirpophaga incertulas
                                     l) Scirpophaga nivella
                                     m) Sesamia cretica
                                     n) Sesamia inferens
                                     o)Lissorhoptrus oryzophilus

                                     The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                     ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                     practically free from other harmful organisms.
                         TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                     on the Phytosanitary Import Licence.
           b) For      P, PC         PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
           consumption               organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                              41
                                                        PALMACEAE
                                        (Except Cocos spp., Elaeis spp., Phoenix dactylifera)

Type of Material       Condition                                         Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests              Diseases                             Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr

2. Propagation         Pr
material
3. Seeds               P, PC                                 The area of production is free The area of production is free from:
                                                             from:                          a)Rhadinaphelenchus cocophilus.
                                                             a) Cocos lethal yellowing      b) Rhyncophorus palmarum




                                                   Persea gratissima (Avocado)

Type of Material       Condition                                         Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests               Diseases                               Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr

2. Propagation
material               Pr

3. Seeds               P, PC,Q                                1.The mother plants were officially
                                                              inspected at appropriate times and
                                                              found to be free from:
                                                              a) Cercospora purpures.
                                                              b) Sunblotch virus.




                                                                                                                                   42
                                                 Phaseolus vulgaris (Phaseolus bean)

Type of Material       Condition                                           Additional declaration
                       of entry
                                   Animal Pests                               Diseases                          Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr

2. Seeds               P, PC       The material is free from:                 The mother plants were
                                   a) Callosobruchus analis                   officially    inspected     at
                                   b) Chaetocnema confinis                    appropriate stages of growth
                                   c) Cryptoblabes gnidiella                  and found to be free from:
                                   d) Zabrotes subfasciatus                   a)           Corynebacterium
                                   e) Diabrotica speciosa                     flaccumfaciens             pv.
                                                                              flaccumfaciens.
                                                                              b
                                                                              c) Pea early browning virus
                                                                              d) Cowpea severe mosaic
                                                                              virus

                                   The seed has been seed health tested at an officially laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                   ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                   practically free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on
                                   the Phytosanitary Import Licence.




                                                                                                                                               43
                                                   Phoenix dactylifera (Date palm)

Type of Material        Condition                                        Additional declaration
                        of entry
                                    Animal Pests              Diseases                                  Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation          P, PC       The consignment is free   The area of production is free from:      The area of production is free
material (only                      from:                     a) Cocos lethal yellowing                 from:
vegetative                          a) Mites and other        b) Mauginiella scaettae                   a)Rhadinaphelenchus cocophilus
propagation material)               harmful organisms.        c)Fusarium       oxysporum        f.sp.   b)Rhyncophorus palmarum
                                                              albedinis.
                                                              d) Phymatotrichum omnivorum

3. Seeds                P, PC                                 The area of production is free from:
                                                              a) Cocos lethal yellowing.
4.Other    PHOENIX See
spp.               PALMACE
                   AE



                                                        Piper nigrum (Pepper)

Type of Material        Condition                                        Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests              Diseases                                  Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Seeds                P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                    organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                         44
                                                          Pisum sativum (Pea)

Type of Material        Condition                                           Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                 Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Seeds                P, PC       The material is free from:   The mother plants were officially The material is free from:
                                    a) Delia platura             inspected at appropriate stages of a) Ditylenchus dipsaci
                                    b) Diabrotica speciosa       growth and found to be free from:
                                    c) Bruchus pisorum           a) Pea seed-borne mosaic virus.
                                    d)Anticarsia gemmatalis      b) Pseudomonas syringae pv. pisi.
                                                                 c) Phoma pinodella

                                    The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                    ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                    practically free from other harmful organisms.

                        TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on
                                    the Phytosanitary Import Licence.


                                                          Populus spp. (Poplar)

Type of Material        Condition                                           Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                 Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation          P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
material (only                      organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
vegetative
propagation material)

3. Seeds                P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                    organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
4.Wood, timber          See WOOD

                                                                                                                                                45
                                                       Prunus spp. (Damask)

Type of Material        Condition                                      Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                 Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation          P, PC       The consignment is free       The mother plants have been indexed in
material (only                      from:                         connection with an official certification
vegetative                          a) Anarsia lineatella.        scheme and found free from virus and
propagation material)               b) Anastrepha spp.            mycoplasms especially:
                                    c) Dacus spp.                 a) Cherry rasp leaf virus.
                                    d) Other harmful organisms    b) Peach mosaic virus.
                                                                  c) Sharka disease (Plum pox).
                                                                  d) Soil borne virus.
3. Seeds                P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                    organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
4. Fresh fruit          P, PC       The field of production has
                                    been officially inspected and
                                    certified free from:
                                    a)Quadraspidiotus
                                    perniciosos.
                                    b)Rhagoletis cerasi.




                                                                                                                                46
                                                         Pyrus communis (Pear)

Type of Material          Condition                                        Additional declaration
                          of entry  Animal Pests                       Diseases                                    Nematodes
1. Plants with roots
including budded and      Pr
grafted plants

2. Propagation material   P, PC, Q   The material is free from:        The mother plants have been indexed in
(only vegetative                     a) Anarsia lineatella             connection with an official certification
propagation material)                b) Aleurodicus dispersus          scheme and found free from:
                                                                       a) Virus and Mycoplasms especially
                                                                       Pear decline mycoplasm.

                                     The consignment is free from:   The area in a radius of 1 (one) kilometre
                                     a) Nectria galligena.           is free from:
                                     b) Psylla pyricola              a) Erwinia amylovora.
                                     c) Mites and other harmful
                                     organisms.
3. Seeds                  P, PC      PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                     organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
                          TR                                         With an appropriate bactericide against
                                                                     Erwinia amylovora.

4.Fresh fruit             P, PC      The area of production has been   The area of production has been
                                     officially inspected and found    officially inspected and found free
                                     free from:                        from:
                                     a) Anastrepha spp.                a) Erwinia amylovora.
                                     b) Dacus spp.
                                     c)Psyla pyricola.
                                     d) Quadraspidiotus perniciosos
                                     e) Anarsia lineatella
                                     f) Aleurodicus dispersus.


                                                                                                                                 47
                                                         Quercus spp.(Oak)

Type of Material        Condition                                        Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests       Diseases                                                 Nematodes
1. Plants with roots
and Propagation
material                Pr

2. Seeds                P, PC                          The area of production has been found to be free from:
                                                       a) Ceratocytis fagacearum
3.Timber                See WOOD

4. Bark of Quercus P, PC            PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
suber                               organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
                   TR               Fumigation with methyl bromide.



                                                          Rosa spp. (Rose)

Type of Material        Condition                                        Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests              Diseases                              Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation                      The consignment is free The consignment is free from:
material (only          P, PC       from:                    a) Rose wilt pathogen.
vegetative                          a)Mites    and     other
propagation material)               harmful organisms.

3. Seeds                P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                    organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                48
                                                            Rosaceae (Rose family)

                                    (Except Fragaria spp., Malus spp., Prunus spp., Pyrus spp. and Rosa spp.)


Type of Material        Condition                                             Additional declaration
                        of entry       Animal Pests               Diseases                                  Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation          P, PC          The consignment is free The area of production in a radius of 1
material (only                         from:                      (one) kilometre is free from:
vegetative                             a) Anarsia lineatella.             a) Erwinia amylovora.
propagation material)                  b) Nectria galligena.
                                       c) Mites and other
                                       harmful organisms.
3. Seeds                P, PC          PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                       organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment
                        TR                                        With an appropriate bactericide against
                                                                  Erwinia amylovora




                                                                                                                                   49
                                                 Saccharum officinarum (Sugarcane)

Type of Material        Condition                                           Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                 Diseases                                      Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation          P, PC, Q    The material is free from:   The mother plants were officially inspected
material (only                       a)Aleurolobus               at appropriate stages of growth andfound to
vegetative                          barodensis                   be free from:
propagation material)               b) Bissetia steniella        a) Chlorotic streak virus.
                                    c) Chilo infuscatellus       b) Fiji disease.
                                    d) Chilo tumidicostalis      c) Grassy shoot.
                                    e) Melanaspis                d) Peronosclerospora sacchari.
                                    glomerata                    e) Sereh disease virus.
                                    f) Chilo sacchariphagus
                                    g) Sesamia cretica
                                    h) Sesamia inferens
                                    i) Holotrichia serrata
                                                                 The consignment is free from:                 The consignment is free
                                                                 a) Clavibacter xyli subsp. xyli               from:
                                                                 b) Xanthomonas campestris pv. vasculorum      a) Heterodera sacchari
                                                                                                               and other nematodes.
3.Cane             for Pr
consumption

                                                      Sesamum indicum (Sesame)

Type of Material        Condition                                         Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                     Diseases                         Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Seeds                P, PC       The material is free from:
                                    a) Acherontia styx
                                    b) Amsacta moorei
                                    c) Orosius orientalis


                                                                                                                                         50
                                                  Solanum melanogena (Aubergine)

Type of Material       Condition                                           Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests                 Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr

2. Seeds               P, PC                                    The consignment is free from:
                                                                a) Phomopsis vexans.
                                                                b) Eggplant mosaic virus.

                                   The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                   ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                   practically free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on
                                   the Phytosanitary Import Licence
3. Fresh fruit         See FRESH
                       FRUIT.




                                                                                                                                               51
                                                  Solanum tuberosum (Potato)

Type of Material       Condition                                        Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests            Diseases                               Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr

2. Tubers   a) For                 The       area     of   1. The country of origin is free from: The area of production is free
            planting   P, PC       production is free      a) Corynebacterium michiganense pv. from:
                                   from:                   sepedonicum.                            a) Globodera rostochiensis
                                   a)Leptinotarsa                                                  Rhadopholus similis.
                                   decemlineata            2. The area of production is free from: b) Heterodera pallida.
                                   b) Premnotrypes spp.    a) Potato spindle tuber viroid          c) Heterodera rostochiensis.
                                   c) Listroderes          b) Andean potato mottle virus           d) Ditylenchus destructor.
                                   costirostris            c) Andean potato latent virus           e) Ditylenchus dipsaci.
                                   d) Naupactus            d) Clavibacter michiganensis            f) Nacobbus spp.
                                   leucoloma               e) Angiosorus solani.
                                   e) Phlyctinus           f) Leptinotarsa decemlineata.           2. The fields of production have
                                   callosus                g) Synchytrium endobioticum.            been analysed a maximum of 12
                                   f) Tetranychus                                                  (twelve) months before the
                                   cinnabarinus            3. The mother plants were officially shipment of the tubers and found
                                   g) Epitrix tuberis      inspected at appropriate times during free of the above named species
                                                           the growing season and the level of of nematodes.
                                                           infection did not exceed the following
                                                           tolerances (% plants infected):         3. The tubers were inspected a
                                                           a) Erwinia carotovora var. atrseptica- maximum of 2 (two) weeks
                                                           ---0.1%                                 before shipment and the levels of
                                                           b) Mosaic---------------------0.2%      infection did not exceed the
                                                           c) Potato leafroll virus-------0.2%     following tolerances (% tubers):
                                                           d) Other diseases caused by virus----- a) Polyschtalum pustulans-----0%
                                                           ---0.5%                                 b)Meloidogyne spp.-------------1%
                                                           e) Verticillium albo-atrum and c) Pratylenchus spp.----------0.5%
                                                           Verticillium dahliae----------0.5%
                                                           f) Fusarium oxysporum and other
                                                           species of Fusarium----------0.5%



                                                                                                                                       52
                                           4. The tubers were inspected a
                                           maximum of 2 (two) weeks before
                                           shipment and the levels of infection
                                           did not exceed the following
                                           tolerances (% tubers):
                                           a)Polyschtalum pustulans------0%
                                           b) Phthorimaea operculella---0.1%
                                           c) Rhizoctonia solani--------------10%
                                           d) Streptomyces scabies or/and
                                           Spongospora subterrania---------10%
                                           e) Phytophthora infestans----------.1%
                                           f) Non identified rots
                                           Rots caused by fungi and bacteria---
                                           1%
                                           g)Erwinia        carotovora         var.
                                           atroseptica--0.1%

b) For      P, PC   The consignment is practically free from soil and mechanical damage.
consumption
                                                The country of origin is free
                                                from:
                                                a)             Corynebacterium
                                                michiganense pv. sepedonicum.



                    The area of production is   The area of production is free
                    free from:                  from:
                    a)Leptinotarsa              a) Angiosorus solani.
                    desemlineata.               b) Potato spindle tuber viroid.
                    b) Premntrypes spp.         c) Pseudomonas solanacearum.
                                                d) Synchytrium endobioticum.

                                                The tubers were inspected a The area of production is free
                                                maximum of 2 (two) weeks from:

                                                                                                             53
                                                   before shipment and the level of     a) Globodera rostochiensis
                                                   infection and damage, did exceed     Rhadopholus simillis.
                                                   the following tolerances (%          b) Heterodera pallida.
                                                   tubers):                             c) Heterodera rostochiensis.
                                                   a) Rots and internal damage---5%     d) Ditylenchus destructor.
                                                   b) Insect damage, nematode           e) Ditylenchus dipsaci.
                                                   damage and mechanical damage-        f) Nacobbus spp.
                                                   --------------15%                    or
                                                   c) Deep scurf-------------------10%  the fields of production have been
                                                   d) Green tubers-----------------2%   analysed a maximum of 12
                                                   e) Deformed tubers-------------5%    (twelve) months before the
                                                   f) Soft tubers--------------------5% shipment of the tubers an found
                                                   Maximum tolerances (a-f) = 20%       free of the above named species
                                                                                        of nematodes.
                       The consignment is practically free from soil and is free from other harmful organisms.
3. True seed   P, PC   PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                       organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                             54
                                                     Sorghum spp. (Sorghum)

Type of Material        Condition                                        Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                      Diseases                           Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Seeds    a)     For P, PC        The consignment is free from:     The mother plants were
            sowing                  a) Diatraea grandiosella          officially    inspected      at
                                    b) Helicoverpa zea )              appropriate times during the
                                    c) Spodoptera frugiperda          growing season and found free
                                    d) Dicladispa armigera            from:
                                    e) Holotrichia serrata            a) Maize dwarf mosaic virus.
                                    f) Sesamia cretica

                                    The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                    ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                    practically free from other harmful organisms.

                        TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                    on the Phytosanitary Import Licence
            b)For       P, PC       PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
            consumption             organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                             55
                                    SPECIES OF PLANTS NOT SPECIFIED IN THIS APPENDIX

Type of Material            Condition of                            Additional declaration
                            entry          Animal Pests               Diseases               Nematodes
1. Bulbs, corms, tubers     See BULBS,
and rhizomes                CORMS,
                            TUBERS and
                            RHIZOMES
2. Tissue cultures          P, PC

3. Seeds                    P, PC

4. Weeds                    See WEEDS

5. Fresh fruit vegetables   See FRESH
                            FRUIT

6. Vegetables               P, PC

7.Wood, Timber              See WOOD
8. Propagation material     P, PC
9. Rooted plants            Pr




                                                                                                         56
                                                      Spinacia oleracea (Spinach)

Type of Material        Condition                                             Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                 Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Seeds                P, PC                                    The mother plants were officially
                                                                 inspected at appropriate times during
                                                                 the growing season and found free
                                                                 from:
                                                                 a) Peronospora farinosa.

                                    The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA
                                    (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically free
                                    from other harmful organisms.

                        TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on the
                                    Phytosanitary Import Licence

                                                       Theobroma cacao (Cocao)

Type of Material        Condition                                             Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                 Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Propagation          P, PC, Q                                 The country origin is free from:
material (only                                                   a) Crinipellis perniciosa.
vegetative                                                       b) Moniliophora roreri.
propagation material)                                            The consignment is free from:
                                                                 a) Ceratocystis fimbriata.
                                                                 b) Phytophthora palmivora.
                                                                 c) Cacao swollen shoot virus.

3. Seeds                P, PC, Q                                 The country of origin is free from:
                                                                 a) Crinipellis perniciosa.
                                                                 b) Moniliophora roreri.


                                                                                                                                               57
                                                        Trifolium spp. (Clover)

Type of Material       Condition                                            Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests                 Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Fodder              Pr

2. Plants with roots   Pr

3. Seeds               P, PC                                    The consignment is free from:
                                                                a) Sclerotinia spp.

                                   The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the ISTA
                                   (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and practically
                                   free from other harmful organisms.

                       TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated on
                                   the Phytosanitary Import Licence




                                                                                                                                               58
                                              Triticum spp. and Triticale (Triticale)

Type of Material        Condition                                         Additional declaration
                        of entry    Animal Pests                          Diseases                            Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr
2. Dry foliage and
packing material         Pr
3. Seeds a)          For            The consignment is free from:         The consignment is free from:       The consignment is free
             sowing      P, PC      a) Chilo polychrysus                  a) Tilletia indica                  from:
                                    b) Cnaphalocrocis medinalis           b) Tilletia controversa             a) Anguina tritici.
                                    c) Laodelphax striatellus             c) Cephalosporium gramineum.
                                    d) Dicladispa armigera                d) Claviceps purpurea.
                                    e) Holotrichia serrata                e) Neovossia indica.
                                    f) Sesamia cretica                    f) Ustilago nuda.
                                                                          g) Urocystis agropyri.
                                    g) Sesamia inferens
                                    h) Zabrus tenebrioides

                                    The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                    ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                    practically free from other harmful organisms.

                        TR          It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                    on the Phytosanitary Import Licence
          b)For       P, PC         PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
          consumption               organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment




                                                                                                                                             59
                                              Vicia faba and other Vicia spp. (Broad bean)

Type of Material       Condition                                            Additional declaration
                       of entry      Animal Pests               Diseases                                 Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr
2. Seeds               P, PC         PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
                                     organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment


                                                     Vignia unguiculata (Cowpea)

Type of Material         Condition                                             Additional declaration
                         of entry      Animal Pests                 Diseases                                Nematodes
1. Plants with roots     Pr
2. Seeds a)          For                                             The mother plants were officially
             sowing      P, PC                                      inspected at appropriate times during
                                                                    the growing season and found free
                                                                    from:
                                                                    a) Cowpea yellow mosaic virus.
                                                                    b) Southern bean mosaic virus
                                                                    c) Curtobacterium flaccumfaciens
                                                                    f.sp.
                                                                    d) Urd bean leaf crinkle virus
                                                                    e) Peanut stripe virus

                                       The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                                       ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                                       practically free from other harmful organisms.

                         TR            It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions stated
                                       on the Phytosanitary Import Licence
            b)For       P, PC          PC stating that the consignmemt has been thoroughly inspected and found free from harmful
            consumption                organisms, and has received appropriate treatment prior to shipment



                                                                                                                                                60
                                                          Vitis vinifera (Grape)

Type of Material        Condition                                          Additional declaration
                        of entry
                                      Animal Pests              Diseases                            Nematodes
1. Plants with roots    Pr

2. Propagation          P, PC, Q      The material is free from The material is free from:          The material is free from
material (only                        insects and mites.        a) Xanthomonas ampelina.            nematodes and other harmful
vegetative                                                      b) Physopella ampelopsides.         organisms.
propagation material)
                                                                The mother plants have been
                                                                indexed in connection with an
                                                                official certification scheme and
                                                                found virus and phytoplasma.
3. Fresh fruit          See FRESH
                        FRUIT.



                                                                 WEED

Type of Material             Condition of entry                                    Additional declaration
                                                      Animal Pests                 Diseases                          Nematodes
1. Plants and seeds          Pr




                                                                                                                                  61
                                                               WOOD, TIMBER

Type of Material         Condition                                          Additional declaration
                         of entry       Animal Pests            Diseases                             Nematodes
1. With bark             Pr

2. Without bark          P, PC          The material is free
                                        from boring insects



                                                               Zea mays (Maize)

Type of Material            Condition                                         Additional declaration
                            of entry       Animal Pests                    Diseases                            Nematodes
1. Plants with roots        Pr

2.Dried plants and dry      Pr
plant parts

3.   Seeds a) For           P, PC          The country of production is    The country of production is free
           sowing                          free from:                      from:
                                           a) Prostephanus truncantus.     a) Cochliobolus heterostrophus
                                           b) Blissus leucopterus          b)              Peronosclerospora
                                           c) Chilo orichalcociliellus     phillipinensis.
                                           d) Corcyra cephalonica          c) Cephalosporium maydis
                                           e) Dalbulus maidis              d) Peronosclerospora sacchari
                                           f) Spodoptera eridania          e) Sclerophthora rayssiae.
                                           g) Spodoptera frugiperda
                                           h) Ostrinia nubilalis
                                           i) Sesamia cretica
                                           j) Sesamia nonagrioides
                                           l) Diatraea grandiosella
                                           m) Dicladispa armigera
                                                                           The parent plants were officially
                                                                                                                           62
                                                      inspected at appropriate stages of
                                                      growth and found to be free from:
                                                      a) Maize dwarf mosaic.
                                                      b) Erwinia stewartii.
                                                      c) Kabatiella zeae.
                    The consignment is free from:     The consignment is free from:
                    a)Prostephanus truncantus         a) Claviceps gigantea.

                    The seed has been seed health tested at an official laboratory using methods recommended by the
                    ISTA (International Seed Testing Association) and is declared free from quarantine objects and
                    practically free from other harmful organisms.

            TR      It is obligatory that the applied seed treatments, are in strict accordance with the conditions
                    stated on the Phytosanitary Import Licence
b)For               The country of origin is free
consumption P, PC   from:
                    a) Prostephanus truncantus.




                                                                                                                      63
                                                  Zingibar spp. (Ginger)

Type of Material       Condition                                   Additional declaration
                       of entry    Animal Pests         Diseases                               Nematodes
1. Plants with roots   Pr

2. Rhizomes            P, PC, Q                         The mother plants have been officially The material is free from:
                                                        inspected at appropriate intervals and a) Rhadopholus similis and
                                                        found free from:                       other nematodes.
                                                        a) Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. zingiberi.
                                                        b) Pseudomonas solanacearum.
                                                        c) Pythium myriotylum.
                                                                                               The        consignment     is
                                                                                               practically free of soil.




                                                                                                                               64
IV. Notes on the Tables

1
    Type of organism: I=insect; M=Mite; R=rodents; O=others; F=Fungi; B=Bacteria; V=Virus; Fi= Fitoplasm; N=Nematode
2
Part of plant affected: L=leaves; F=flowers; Fr=fruits; S=Stem; Se = Seed; Rt= roots/tubercles; A= All plant
3
    Distribution: 1=all over the country; 2=south; 3=centre; 4=north (based on literature)
4
    Economic importance based on literature: ***=very important; **=moderately important; *=Low
5
    Distribution (provinces where the pest was detected): 1=Maputo; 2=Gaza; 3=Inhambane; 4=Manica; 5=Sofala; 6=Tete; 7=Zambézia
8=Nampula; 9=Cabo Delgado; 10=Niassa
6
    Economic importance based on survey observations: ***=very important; **=moderately important; *=Low
PC -         Phytosanitary Certificate

TR -         Treatment

Pr      -    Prohibited

P       -    Permit

Q       -    Quarantine




                                                                                                                                  65
V. References


1. Plumb-Dhindsa, P. and Mondjana, A. M. 1984. Index of Plant Disease and Associated Organisms of
Mozambique. Tropical Pest Management. : 30 (4): 407 - 429


2. Galli, F., DE Carvalho, P.T., Tokeshi, H., Balmer, E., Kimati, H., Cardoso, C.O.N., Salgado, C.L.,
Krugner, T.L., Cardoso, E.J.B.N., Filho, A.B. 1980. Manual de Fitopatologia. Doenças de plantas
cultivadas. Editora Agronómica Ceres; Vol II


3. Oever van den, R. e Mangana, S.E. 1991. Prospecção da dispersão de Nemátodos em algumas
culturas e zonas de Moçambique e métodos de seu controle.


4. UNDP e FAO 1983. Programa de acção para o progresso da protecção das plantas. Relatório do
Inquérito sobre protecção das plantas.


5. Carvalho, T., e Mendes, O. 1958. Doenças de plantas em Moçambique. Tip. Minerva Central. 84 pp.


6. Zacarias, A.M., Cuambe, C.E., e Maleia, M.P. 2004. Relatório sobre Avaliação de perdas causadas
pela Podridão Radicular da Mandioca (Listrado Castanho da Mandioca) nas províncias de Cabo-
Delgado, Nampula e Zambézia. Rockefeller Foundation e Natural Resource Institute (NRI).


7. Oever, H.A.M., and Mangana, S.E. 1992. A Survey of Nematodes on various Crops in Mozambique.
Afro-Asian Journal of Nematology. Vol.2 No. 1 & 2, pp. 74-79.


8. Oever van den, R., Berg van den, E. and Chirruco, J.A. 1997. Plant Parasitic Nematodes Associated
with Crops Grown by Smallholders in Mozambique. Fundam. Appl. Nematol., 1998, 21(6), 645-654.


9. Segeren, P., Oever van den, R. and Compton, J. 1994. Pragas, Doenças e Ervas Daninhas nas
Culturas Alimentares em Moçambique. P. A. Segeren


10. Olmi, M. 1995. Apontamentos de3 Entomologia Agrícola. Parte: I e II.Faculdade de Agronomia e
Engenharia Florestal, UEM.


                                                                                                        66
11. Valley Y March, R.G.1968. Importância Agrícola de Algumas Espécies Entomológicas de
Mocambique. Instituto de Investigacao Agronómica de Mocambique N. 16.


12.Hill, D.S. 1983. Agricultural Insect Pests of Tropics and their Control. Second edition. Cambridge
University Press. London. 746 pp.


13. Cugala , D., Santos, L., Botao, M., Solomone, A., and Sidumo, A. 2005. Assessment of status and
distribuition of groundnut leaf miner, Aproaerema modicella Deventer (Lepidoptera: Gelechiidae) in
Mozambique. African Crop Science Journal (in Press)


14. António, S. B. 2004. Ocorrência da mancha cinzenta (Cercospora zeae maydis) do milho (Zea mays
L.) na província de Niassa.


15. CAB, Crop Protection Compendium, 2006 edition.


16. Instituto do Cajú


17. D. R. Seal, M. Ciomperlik e W. Klassen, 2006. Chilli Thrips (castor thrips, Assam thrips, yellow
tea thrips, strawberry thrips), Scirtothrips dorsalis Hood, Provisional Management Guidelines


18. Olmi, M. 2006. Apontamentos de Entomologia Agrícola. Parte: Volume 3, Faculdade de
Agricultura, UCM, Cuamba.


19. Sobrinho, R.B., Cardoso, J.E. e Freire, F. C. 1998. Pragas de fruteiras tropicais de importância
agroindustrial, Embrapa, Serviços de Produção de informação. Brasília, 209 Pp.


20. Moor, D.P. 2005. Pest and disease Hand Book. Maragra Sugar States, Maputo, 25 Pp.


21. Colong, D.E. and Goebel, F.R. 2002. Biological control of Chilo sacchariphagus (Lepidoptera:
Crambidae) in Moçambique: The first steps. Proceedings of the South African Sugar Technologists
Association 76: 710-720.

22. Rodrigues, N. 2002. Manual da cultura de algodoeiro.


                                                                                                       67
23. IAM, Instituto de Algodão de Moçambique


24. SADC Pest List for Seed Trade




                                              68
ANNEXE 2. SCIENTIFIC NAMES OF QUARANTINE ORGANISMS


    1. ANIMAL PESTS
Aceria guerreronis
Aceria litchi
Aceria mangiferae
Aceria tulipae
Acherontia styx
Acrolepia spp.
Adraspidiotus pernciosus
Aeneolamia contigua
Aleurocanthus spiniferus
Aleurodicus spp.
Alphitobius laevigatus
Amauromyza maculosa
Amrasca biguttula biguttula
Amsacta moorei
Anarsia lineatella.
Anastrepha spp.
Anthonomus spp.
Anticarsia gemmatalis
Aphis glycines
Aproaerema modicella
Ascotis selenaria
Bactrocera spp.
Bissetia steniella
Blissus leucopterus
Brevennia rehi
Bruchus pisorum
Cacoecimorpha pronumbana
Caliothrips indicus
Callosobruchus analis
Ceratitis quinaria
                                                     72
Ceroplastes rusci
Cerotoma trifurcata
Chaetocnema confinis
Chilo auricilius
Chilo infuscatellus
Chilo orichalcociliellus
Chilo polychrysus
Chilo sacchariphagus
Chilo suppressalis
Chilo tumidicostalis
Chilo zacconius
Chilozela trapeziana
Chromatomyia horticola
Clanis bilineata
Cnaphalocrocis medinalis
Corcyra cephalonica
Crocidosema plebejana
Cryptoblabes gnidiella
Cryptophlebia ombrodelta
Cydia spp.
Dacus tryoni.
Dalbulus maidis
Delia platura
Deporaus marginatus
Diabrotica speciosa
Dialeurodes spp.
Diaphorina citri
Diaspidiotus perniciosus
Diatraea grandiosella
Dicladispa armigera
Didymella chrysanthemi
Dysdercus cingulatus
Dysmicoccus cocotis
                           73
Dyspessa ulula
Earias vittella
Elaeidobius kamerunicus
Eotetranychus sexmaculatus
Epitrix tuberis
Erinnyis alope
Erinnyis ello
Erosomyia mangiferae
Helicoverpa zea
Heliothis virescens
Helopeltis antonii Signoret
Hercinothrips bicinctus
Holotrichia serrata
Hydraecia micacea
Laodelphax striatellus
Leptinotarsa decemlineata
Leptocorisa acuta
Leptocorisa oratorius
Leucopholis coneophora
Liriomysa spp.
Lissorhoptrus oryzophilus
Listroderes costirostris
Maconellicoccus hirsutus
Macrosiphoniella sanborni
Melanagromyza sojae
Melanaspis glomerata
Naupactus leucoloma
Nectria galligena.
Nemorimyza maculosa
Nilaparvata lugens
Oligonychus gossypii
Omiodes diemenalis
Omiodes indicata
                              74
Opogona sacchari
Opogona sacchari Bojer
Orosius orientalis
Ostrinia nubilalis
Oxycarenus laetus
Panonychus ulmi
Phenacoccus gossypii
Phenacoccus herreni
Phlyctinus callosus
Phycita infusella
Phyllotreta striolata
Physopella ampelopsides.
Pieris brassicae
Prays citri
Premnotrypes spp.
Prostephanus truncantus.
Pseudaulacaspis pentagona
Pseudococcus calceolariae
Psylla pyricola
Quadraspidiotus perniciosos
Rastrococcus iceryoides
Rastrococcus invadens
Rhagoletis cerasi.
Rhagoletis pomonella
Scirpophaga incertulas
Scirpophaga nivella
Scirtothrips dorsalis
Scyphophorus acupunctatus
Sesamia cretica
Sesamia inferens
Sesamia nonagrioides
Spodoptera eridania
Spodoptera frugiperda
                              75
Spodoptera latifascia
Sternochetus spp.
Tessaratoma papillosa
Tetranychus cinnabarinus
Toxoptera odinae
Vatiga illudens
Zabrotes subfasciatus
Zabrus tenebrioides
Zonocerus variegatus


   2. DISEASE


2.1. Bacteria
Clavibacter michiganensis
Clavibacter xyli subsp. Xyli
Corynebacterium flaccumfaciens pv. Betae
Corynebacterium flaccumfaciens pv. flaccumfaciens
Corynebacterium michiganense
Corynebacterium michiganense pv. insidiosum
Corynebacterium michiganense pv. michiganense
Corynebacterium michiganense pv. Sepedonicum
Curtobacterium flaccumfaciens f.sp.
Erwinia amylovora
Erwinia chrysanthemi pv. Chrysanthemi
Erwinia chrysanthemi pv. diathicola.
Erwinia stewartii
Grassy shoot
Pseudomonas caryphylii.
Pseudomonas solanacearum
Pseudomonas syringae pv. Apii
Pseudomonas syringae pv. Aptata
Pseudomonas syringae pv. lachrymans.
Pseudomonas syringae pv. pisi.
                                                    76
Ralstonia solanacearum
Streptomyces ipomoea
Xanthomonas ampelina.
Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria.
Xanthomonas campestris pv. celebensis.
Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryza.
Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzicola
Xanthomonas campestris pv. vasculorum.
Xanthomonas campestris pv.carotae
Xanthomonas campestris pv.citri


2.2. Fungi
Angiosorus solani
Ascochyta gossypii.
Ascochyta rabiei
Balansia oryza sativae
Cephalosporium gramineum
Cephalosporium maydis
Ceratocystis fimbriata
Ceratocytis fagacearum
Cercospora elaeidis.
Cercospora purpures.
Claviceps spp.
Cochliobolus heterostrophus
Colletotrichum trucantum.
Crinipellis perniciosa
Diaporthe phaseolorum var caulivora.
Didymella chrysanthemi.
Didymella lycopersici
Endothia parasitica
Exobasidium vexans
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp dianthi.
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp elaedis.
                                          77
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. albedinis.
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersisi race 3.
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. zingiberi.
Globerella cingulata
Kabatiella zeae.
Leaf scotch
Mauginiella scaettae
Microcyclus ulei.
Moniliophora roreri.
Monilochaetes infuscans
Mycosphaerella fijiensis
Nectria galligena.
Neovossia indica.
Peronosclerospora phillipinensis.
Peronosclerospora sacchari
Peronospora farinosa.
Peronospora hyoscyami f.sp. Tabacina
Phialophora cinerescens.
Phoma medicaginis.
Phoma pinodella
Phomopsis theae
Phomopsis vexans.
Phymatotrichum omnivorum
Phytophthora fragariae
Phytophthora palmivora.
Plasmopara halstedii.
Puccinia horiana.
Pythium myriotylum.
Sclerophthora rayssiae.
Sclerophtora macrospora
Sclerotinia spp.
Sclerotium spp.
Septoria glycines
                                               78
Sphaceloma manihoticola.
Synchytrium endobioticum
Tilletia barclayana
Tilletia controversa
Tilletia indica
Urocystis agropyri.
Urocystis cepulae
Uromyces spp.
Ustilago nuda
Verticillium albo-atrum
Verticillium dahliae.


2.3. Virus
Abaca mosaic virus
Alfalfa mosaic virus
American cassava mosaic
Andean potato latent virus
Andean potato mottle virus
Apple proliferation mycoplasm
Asparagus latent virus
Barley stripe mosaic virus.
Bristle top disease
Bronze leaf wilt
Bunchy top virus
Cacao swollen shoot virus
Carnation etched virus
Carnation necrotic fleck.
Carnation streak virus
Cassava brown streak agent
Cassava witches, broom agent
Cherry rasp leaf virus
Chlorotic streak virus
Chrysanthemum stunt viroid
                                79
Cocos lethal yellowing
Coffea ringspot virus
Cowpea severe mosaic virus
Cowpea yellow mosaic virus
Dioscorea mosaic virus


Eggplant mosaic virus
Fiji disease virus
Maize dwarf mosaic virus
Malaysian wilt
Mango bunchy top mycoplasm
Onion yellow dwarf virus
Papaya bunchy-top virus.
Papaya ring spot virus.
Pea early browning virus
Pea seed-borne mosaic virus
Peach mosaic virus
Peanut clump virus
Peanut mottle virus
Peanut stripe virus
Peanut stunt virus
Pear decline mycoplasm.
Potato spindle tuber viroid
Root wilt
Ryegrass toxicity syndrome
Sereh disease virus
Sharka disease (Plum pox)
Southern bean mosaic virus
Sunblotch virus
Tobacco rattle virus
Tobacco ringspot virus
Tomato black ring virus
Tomato ringspot virus
                              80
Urd bean leaf crinkle virus

    3. NEMATODE
Anguina agrostis
Anguina tritici.
Aphelenchoides arachidis
Aphelenchoides besseyi
Aphelenchoides fragariae
Aphelenchoides ritzemabosi
Ditylenchus destructor
Ditylenchus dipsaci
Globodera rostochiensis
Heterodera spp.
Meloidogyne hapla
Nacobbus spp.
Rhadinaphelnchus cocophilus
Rhyncophorus palmarum.




                              81
6. CONDIÇÕES DE ENTRADA NO TERRITÓRIO NACIONAL

A importação de vegetais, produtos vegetais, meios apícolas e meios de cultura, está sujeita
às condições impostas no anexo 1 do Regulamento de Inspecção Fitossanitária e de
Quarentena Vegetal.
The importation of vegetables, vegetable products, bees and growing mediums is subject to
the conditions stated on the annex 1 of the Phytosanitary Inspection and Quarantine
Regulation.




                            Maputo, ........de................................de ........



                               O INSPECTOR FITOSSANITÁRIO
                                  The Plant Quarantine Inspector




Autoridade Nacional Fitossaniária
National Phytosanitary Authority                                                            Page 2
                                            REPÚBLICA DE MOÇAMBIQUE
                                                    ________


             MINISTÉRIO DA AGRICULTURA E SEGURANÇA ALIMENTAR
                     DIRECÇÃO NACIONAL DE AGRICULTURA E SIVICULTURA
                     DEPARTAMENTO DE SANIDADE VEGETAL


LICENÇA FITOSSANITÁRIA DE IMPORTAÇÃO                                                         N° ------
Phytosanitary Import Permit


1. De acordo com o artigo 13 do Regulamento de Inspecção Fitossanitária e de
Quarentena Vegetal, Diploma Ministerial 5/2009 de 1 de Junho,
According to the article 13 of the Act 5/2009, Juny 1st:




2. Está autorizado a importar d(o/a)
Is authorized to import from:



3. a)Quantidade:           b)Nome Vulgar:                  c)Nome Científico:          d)Finalidade:
Quantity:                  Comon name:                       Scientific name:            Purpose:




4. Nome e endereço do fornecedor:
Name and adress of foreign supplie:r




5. a)Ponto de entrada:                        b)Data prevista:                             c)Destino:
Point of entry:                                Foreseen date:                                 Destination:


6. Emitido em...../...../,,,,,                                    Válidade:..../....... /........
Issuance date:                                                          Expiry date:




Autoridade Nacional Fitossaniária
National Phytosanitary Authority                                                                         Page 1
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
             1. DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV2.DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV            CERTIFICADO          FITOSSANITÁRIO
                                                                                                                           DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV             PHITOSANITARY             CERTIFICATE
                                                                                                                           DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSVREPÚBLICA
                                       DSV DSV DSV  DE    MOÇAMBIQUE
                                                       DSV DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                 ORIGINAL        Nº.___________
                                                                                                                           DSV DSV DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                             MINISTÉRIO
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV        DSV DSV DSV  DA    AGRICULTURA
                                                       DSV DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV
              DIRECÇÃO                 DSV DSV DSV DOS
                                  NACIONAL             DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV AGRARIOS
                                                              SERVICOS          DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
             3. De   Departamento      de   Sanidade   Vegetal    para:
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                4. Nome
                                                                                                       DSV DSV e endereço  do exportador
                                                                                                                  DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV ToDSV  DSVProtection
                    Plant   DSV DSV DSV      DSV DSV DSV(s)
                                          Organization     DSVof :DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSVName  DSV DSVand DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                   address      DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                            of exporter
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV 5 . Nome
            DSV   DSV DSVe DSV
                           endereço
                                  DSV do    consignatário
                                       DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV         LugarDSV
                                                                                                   6. DSV      de DSV
                                                                                                                  origem
                                                                                                                      DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                NameDSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV      andDSV
                              address
                                  DSV DSVof DSV
                                             consignee
                                                  DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV     PlaceDSVof DSV
                                                                                                                  origin
                                                                                                                       DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                7. Meio
                                                                                                       DSV de    transporte
                                                                                                             DSV DSV  DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                      Means    of conveyance
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                8. Ponto
                                                                                                       DSV DSVde DSV
                                                                                                                  entrada
                                                                                                                       DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSVPoint               DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                             of entry
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
             9. Marcas,
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSVnúmeros
                            DSV DSV dosDSVvolumes,
                                             DSV DSV DSVnatureza
                                                           DSV DSV da DSV
                                                                      mercadoria,   nome
                                                                            DSV DSV DSV    científico
                                                                                         DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV     10.DSV
                                                                                                                                 Quantidade    (peso)
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV DSV   DSVdos
                                                                                                                                                        DSVvolumes
                                                                                                                                                            DSV DSV DSV DSV
                Marks,
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV    DSVnumber
                            DSV DSV andDSV DSV
                                          description   of DSV
                                                  DSV DSV  packages,    name
                                                                  DSV DSV   DSVof produce,
                                                                                DSV DSV     botanical
                                                                                         DSV DSV       nameDSV
                                                                                                  DSV DSV      of DSV
                                                                                                                  plants         Quantity
                                                                                                                       DSV DSV DSV             package
                                                                                                                                           of DSV
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV       DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                  EsteDSV
             11. DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV         serve
                            DSVpara   certificar
                                  DSV DSV         que os
                                             DSV DSV      vegetais
                                                       DSV DSV    DSV ou  productos
                                                                      DSV DSV        vegetais
                                                                                DSV DSV       acima
                                                                                         DSV DSV      referidos;
                                                                                                  DSV DSV          Foram
                                                                                                             DSV DSV       cuidadosamente
                                                                                                                       DSV DSV DSV            inspeccionados
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV DSV DSV    DSV DSVdeDSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV com
             acordo    DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV
                             os procedimentos          DSV DSV DSV
                                                    adequados,        DSV
                                                                   pelo     DSV DSV______________________________________________________
                                                                         Inspector  DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV          e DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
             são   considerados     isentos   de doenças   e pragas    de quarentena  e praticamente    livres  de  outros inimigos,
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSVe que: são considerados    nasDSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV
             condições            DSV DSV
                           exigidas   pelosDSV DSV     DSV DSV DSV
                                              regulamentos            DSV DSV DSV
                                                               fitossanitários   em DSV
                                                                                    vigorDSV
                                                                                          noDSV
                                                                                              paísDSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                   importador.
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
             ThisDSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV     is to
                       DSVcertify
                            DSV DSVthatDSV
                                         theDSV
                                              plants,
                                                  DSVplant   products
                                                       DSV DSV    DSV DSVor DSV
                                                                            other regulated
                                                                                DSV DSV DSVarticles,
                                                                                             DSV DSVdescribed
                                                                                                       DSV DSV DSV     DSVhave
                                                                                                                   herein                 DSV DSVand/or
                                                                                                                                       inspected
                                                                                                                                 beenDSV
                                                                                                                           DSV DSV                 DSV DSVtested
                                                                                                                                                            DSV DSV DSV DSV
                  DSV DSVtoDSV DSV
             according
DSV DSV DSV DSV               appropriate
                                       DSV DSVofficial procedures
                                                  DSV DSV  DSV DSVand DSVare  considered
                                                                            DSV DSV       to be
                                                                                    DSV DSV  DSVfree
                                                                                                  DSVfrom    the DSV
                                                                                                       DSV DSV    quarantine
                                                                                                                       DSV DSVpests  specified
                                                                                                                                DSV DSV         by the
                                                                                                                                          DSV DSV      importing
                                                                                                                                                   DSV DSV  DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
             contracting
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV         partyDSV
                       DSV DSV      andDSVto DSV
                                             conform
                                                  DSV to
                                                       DSVthe  current
                                                           DSV DSV       phytosanitary
                                                                      DSV DSV           requirements
                                                                                DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV of
                                                                                                       DSVthe   importing
                                                                                                             DSV DSV        contracting
                                                                                                                      DSV DSV DSV         party,
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV     including
                                                                                                                                              DSV DSV       those
                                                                                                                                                       DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV
             for DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV   regulated   non-quarantine
                       DSV DSV DSV     DSV DSV DSV pests.
                                                       DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV
             12. DSV   DSV DSV DSV
                 Declaração            DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                adicional
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                 Additional
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV             declaration
                       DSV DSV DSV     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Fumigação
             13. DSV   DSV DSVou    desinfecção
                                  DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV              Local
                                                                                                          20.DSV  DSVde
                                                                                                                      DSVEmissão
                                                                                                                           DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                 Fumigation      or  disinfections                                                            Place  of issue
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Tratamento
             14. DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                   Data
                                                                                                             DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                 Treatment
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                      DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                          Date
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Produto
             15. DSV        químico
                       DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV 16.      Duração
                                                           DSV DSV    DSVeDSV DSV
                                                                             Temperatura
                                                                                    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                 Chemical     product                          Duration    and  temperature
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                   Nome    do funcionário
                                                                                                             DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSVautorizado
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                   Name    of authorized
                                                                                                             DSV DSV  DSV DSV DSV officer
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Concentração
             17. DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV             DataDSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                        18. DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV Concentration
                  DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV           DateDSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                       DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                          Assinatura                               DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                                Selo
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Informação
             19. DSV            adicional
                       DSV DSV DSV     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV        Signature
                                                                                                                  DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV   Stamp.
                                                                                                                                                   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSVAdditional
                  DSV DSV DSV  information
                                  DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
              1. DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV 2.                     DSV  DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                  CERTIFICADO             DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                        FITOSSANITÁRIO           DEDSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                    REEXPORTAÇÃO
                                                                                                                                          DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                             REPÚBLICA
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV       DSV DSV DSV DEDSV DSV DSV
                                                       MOÇAMBIQUE                                     PHITOSANITARY
                                                                     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                          CERTIFICATE
                                                                                                                    DSV DSV DSV DSV       DSV DSV DSV FOR   RE-EXPORT
                                                                                                                                                         DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSVDA
               MINISTÉRIO        DSVAGRICULTURA
                                      DSV DSV DSV DSVE    DSV   DSV DSV DSVALIMENTAR
                                                            SEGURANÇA           DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                          DSV    DSV  DSV  DSV
                                                                                                                      ORIGINAL Nº _____________DSV   DSV DSV  DSV  DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DIRECÇÃO
                  DSV DSV DSV  NACIONAL
                                 DSV DSV DSVDE    AGRICULTURA
                                                DSV  DSV DSV DSV DSV     EDSV
                                                                            SIVICULTURA
                                                                                DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV 3.
            DSV DeDSV DSV   DSV DSV de
                    Departamento      DSV DSV   DSV DSV
                                         Sanidade         DSV DSV
                                                     Vegetal    para:DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV     4. Nome
                                                                                                         DSV DSV e endereço
                                                                                                                    DSV DSV DSV do exportador
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSVName                  DSV DSV andDSV  DSV DSV
                                                                                                                      address        DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                 of exporter
DSV DSV DSV DSV ToDSV
                    Plant  Protection
                      DSV DSV          Organization(s)
                                 DSV DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV of: DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                  DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV 5.
            DSV Nome
                  DSV e   endereço
                      DSV DSV    DSV do  consignatário
                                      DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV             LugarDSV
                                                                                                     6. DSV      de DSV
                                                                                                                    origem
                                                                                                                         DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV Name    andDSV
                  DSV DSV    address
                                 DSV of   consignee
                                      DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSVPlace         DSV DSVof DSV
                                                                                                                   originDSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                  7. Meio
                                                                                                         DSV DSVde transporte
                                                                                                                    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                        Means     of convenience
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                     PontoDSV
                                                                                                     8. DSV     de DSV
                                                                                                                    entrada
                                                                                                                         DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSVPoint                 DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                of entry
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
              Marcas,
DSV DSV DSV9.DSV        números
                  DSV DSV   DSV DSVdos  volumes,
                                      DSV  DSV DSVnatureza
                                                     DSV DSV da DSVmercadoria,
                                                                     DSV DSV DSVnome       científico
                                                                                     DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV            Quantidade
                                                                                                                                  10.DSV  DSV DSV DSV(peso)
                                                                                                                                                         DSVdos
                                                                                                                                                              DSVvolumes
                                                                                                                                                                   DSV DSV DSV DSV
              Marks,
DSV DSV DSV DSV        number
                  DSV DSV        and DSV
                            DSV DSV   description
                                           DSV DSVof    packages,
                                                     DSV DSV         nameDSV
                                                                DSV DSV      of DSV
                                                                                 produce,  botanical
                                                                                     DSV DSV   DSV DSV name
                                                                                                         DSV ofDSVplants
                                                                                                                    DSV DSV DSV DSV   Quantity
                                                                                                                                          DSV DSV    package
                                                                                                                                                  of DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                  EsteDSV
              11. DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV         serve
                            DSVpara  certificar
                                 DSV DSV         que os
                                           DSV DSV       vegetais
                                                     DSV DSV    DSV ou   productos
                                                                     DSV DSV          acima
                                                                                DSV DSV       descritos
                                                                                          DSV DSV        foram
                                                                                                    DSV DSV       importados
                                                                                                               DSV DSV   DSV DSV  através  de DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV   ____________________
                                                                                                                                                             DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
              provenientes
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSV de DSV DSV DSV
                                  ______________________
                                                DSV DSV DSV DSVaDSV   coberto    do DSV
                                                                           DSV DSV  Certificado   Fitossanitário
                                                                                          DSV DSV DSV                nº_________________
                                                                                                         DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV         DSV DSV DSV*DSV  original ,DSV
                                                                                                                                                         DSV DSV    cópia
                                                                                                                                                                       DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
              autenticada   do  Certificado  Fitossanitário        , que   se encontra   anexado   a este   certificado.    Que   foram   *  embalados
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV            ,  re-
                  DSV DSV ,
              embalados
DSV DSV DSV DSV             DSVnas
                                 DSVembalagens
                                      DSV DSV DSVoriginais
                                                     DSV DSV DSV, novas
                                                                     DSV DSV  embalagens
                                                                                DSV DSV DSV ,DSVsãoDSV
                                                                                                     considerados
                                                                                                         DSV DSV DSV    em
                                                                                                                         DSV conformidade
                                                                                                                                DSV DSV DSV com      as condições
                                                                                                                                               DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
              exigidas  pelos   regulamentos    Fitossanitários     em  vigor   no  país importador,    e que   durante    o  armazenamento
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV   em
              _______________________
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV      DSV DSV DSV o     consignamento
                                                DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV  nãoDSVcorreu  riscoDSV
                                                                                DSV DSV     de DSV
                                                                                               infestação
                                                                                                    DSV DSV  ouDSV DSV
                                                                                                                 infecção.
                                                                                                                         DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSV   DSV  DSV  DSV  DSV  DSV  DSV  DSV   DSV  DSV   DSV  DSV
              This is to certify that the plants or plant products or other regulated articles described aboveDSV
                                                                                     DSV  DSV  DSV  DSV  DSV   DSV  DSV  DSV         DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                 imported      DSV
                                                                                                                                             into    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                                  _________________
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
              (country
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSVof DSV
                            re-export)
                                 DSV DSVfrom  ___________(country
                                           DSV DSV DSV DSV      DSV DSV DSV  of DSV
                                                                                origine)  covered
                                                                                     DSV DSV   DSV by   phytosanitary
                                                                                                    DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSVcertificate
                                                                                                                                DSV DSV     ____________*
                                                                                                                                        nºDSV DSV              original
                                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV DSV        DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                                                   DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSV
              certified trueDSV  DSV
                              copy    DSV
                                        of DSV
                                            wichDSV
                                                  is DSV  DSV DSV
                                                     attached    to  DSVcertificate,
                                                                    this   DSV DSV DSV    DSV
                                                                                       that    DSV DSV
                                                                                             based  on   DSV
                                                                                                        the    DSV DSV
                                                                                                             original    DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                        phytosanitary          DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                          certificate   DSV
                                                                                                                                                           andDSV  DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                                                additional
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                  DSV DSV
              inspection
DSV DSV DSV DSV             DSVthey
                                 DSVare  considered
                                      DSV DSV   DSV DSVto DSV
                                                          conform     the DSV
                                                                DSV DSV    current  phytosanitary
                                                                                DSV DSV DSV          requirements
                                                                                               DSV DSV DSV     DSV DSV ofDSV
                                                                                                                           the DSV
                                                                                                                                importing    country,
                                                                                                                                     DSV DSV DSV         DSVthat
                                                                                                                                                     DSVand      during
                                                                                                                                                              DSV DSV  DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV   DSV DSV
              storage  in   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                          _____________________,           the  DSV  DSV DSV DSV
                                                                consignment       hasDSV
                                                                                      not DSV
                                                                                           beenDSV  DSV DSVto
                                                                                                 subjected     DSV
                                                                                                                 theDSV  DSV
                                                                                                                      risk  of  DSV  DSV DSVorDSV
                                                                                                                                infestation          DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                                 infection.
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV
              12. DSV DSV DSV DSV
                 Declaração           DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                adicional
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                  Additional
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV            declaration
                      DSV DSV DSV     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Fumigação
              13. DSV DSV DSVou    desinfecção
                                 DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                  Local
                                                                                                            20.DSV  DSVdeDSV Emissão
                                                                                                                                DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                  Fumigation    or disinfection                                                                 Place   of  issue
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Tratamento
              14. DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                     Data
                                                                                                               DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                  Treatment
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                        DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                            Date
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Produto
              15. DSV       químico
                      DSV DSV    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV 16.     Duração
                                                          DSV DSV    DSVeDSV DSV
                                                                            Temperatura
                                                                                     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                  Chemical    product                        Duration      and  temperature
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                     Nome     do funcionário
                                                                                                               DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSVautorizado
                                                                                                                                          DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                     Name
                                                                                                               DSV of   authorized
                                                                                                                    DSV DSV     DSV DSVofficer
                                                                                                                                          DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Concentração
              17. DSV DSV   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV            DataDSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                       18. DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV Concentration
                  DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV          DateDSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV                         DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                            Assinatura                                   DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
                                                                                                                                                       Selo
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV  Informação
              19. DSV           adicional
                      DSV DSV DSV     DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV           Signature
                                                                                                                    DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV        Stamp
                                                                                                                                                         DSV .DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSVAdditional
                  DSV DSV DSV information
                                 DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV DSV
Annexes

                    ANNEXE 1. COMMON AND SCIENTIFIC NAMES OF HOSTS
..1222

Scientific Name           English               Portuguese         Page

Actinidia chinensis       Kiwi                  Kiwi               54
Agave spp.                Sisal                 Sisal              54
Allium spp.               Garlic and Onion      Alho e Cebola      55
Anacardium occidentale    Cashew                Cajueiro           56
Ananas comosus            Pineaple              Ananazeiro         57
Annona spp.               Custard apple         Anoneira           57
Annona spp.               Sugar apple           Ateira             57
Apis spp.                 Bee                   Abelha             57
Apium graveolens          Celery                Aipo               58
Arachis hypogea           Groundnut             Amendoim           59
Asparagus spp.            Asparagus             Espargo            60
Beta vulgaris             Beetroot              Beterraba          60
                          Boxes, Cartons        Embalagens         61
                          Bulbs                 Bolbos             61
Cactaceaen                Cactus family         Cactos             62
Camelia sinensis          Tea                   Chazeiro           62
Capsicum frutescens       Chilli                Piri-piri          63
Carica papaya             Pawpaw                Papaeira           63
Carya spp.                Pecan nut             Pecana             64
                          Corms                 Cormos,            61
                          Bark                  Casca              64
Castanea spp.             Chestnut              Castanheiro        64
Chrysanthemum
morifolium                Chrysanthemum         Crisântemo         65
Cicer arietinum           Chickpea              Grão de bico       66
Cichorium spp.            Chicory               Chicoria           66
Citrus spp.               Citrus                Citrinos           67
Cocos nucifera            Coconut               Coqueiro           69
Coffee arabica            Coffee                Cafezeiro          70
Coniferae                 Conifers              Coniferas          70
Cruciferae                Different Crucifers   Couves diversas    71
Cucurbitaceae             Watermelon            Melancia           72
Daucus carota             Carrot                Cenoura            73
Dianthus spp.             Carnation, Pinks      Craveiro           74
Dioscorea spp.            Yam                   Inhame             75
Diospyros spp.            Persimmom             Diospireiro        75
Dolichos lablab           lab-lab               Feijão cutelinho   75
Elaeis guineensis         Oil palm              Palmeira de óleo   76
Eucalyptus spp.           Eucalyptus            Eucaliptos         77

                                                                          69
Fresh Flowers           Fresh Flowers                  Flores fresca           77
Fragaria spp.           Strawberry                     Morangueiro             78
Fresh Fruit             Fresh Fruit                    Fruta fresca            78
Glycine max             Soyabean                       Soja                    79
Gossypium spp.          Cotton                         Algodão                 80
Graminae                Graminae family (Except        Gramineas(Except        81
                        Hordeum spp., Triticum spp.,   Hordeum spp.,
                        Triticale, Oryza spp. and      Triticum spp.,
                        Zea spp. )                     Triticale, Oryza spp.
                                                       and Zea spp. )
                        Growing Media                  Meios de cultura        82
Helianthus annus        Sunflower                      Girassol                82
Hevea brasiliensis      Rubber tree                    Arvore de borracha      83
Hordeum spp.            Barley                         Cevada                  83
Ipomoea batata          Sweet potato                   Batata doce             84
Lactuca sativa          Lettuce                        Alface                  85
Litchi chinensis        Litchi                         Litchi                  86
Lycopersicum            Tomato                         Tomateiro               87
esculentum
Malus sylvestris        Apple                          Maca                    88
Mangifera indica        Mango                          Mangueira               89
Manihot esculenta       Cassava                        Mandioqueira            90
Medicago sativa         Lucerne                        Luzerna (Alfalfa)       91
Musa spp.               Banana                         Bananeira               92
Nicotiana tabacum       Tobacco                        Tabaco                  93
Oryza sativa            Rice                           Arroz                   94
Palmaceae               Palmaceae family (Except       Familia das Palmaceas   95
                        Cocos spp., Elaeis spp.,       (Excepto Cocos spp.,
                        Phoenix dactylifera)           Elaeis spp., Phoenix
                                                       dactylifera)
Persea gratissima       Avocado                        Abacateiro              95
Phaseolus vulgaris      Phaseolus bean                 Feijãovulgar            96
Phoenix dactylifera     Date palm                      Tamareira               97
Piper nigrum            Pepper                         Pimenteiro              97
Pisum sativum           Pea                            Ervilha                 98
Populus spp.            Poplar                         Choupo                  98
Prunus spp.             Damask                         Damasqueiro             99
Pyrus communis          Pear                           Pereira                 100
Quercus spp.            Oak                            Carvalho                101
                        Rhizomes                       Rizomas                 61
Rosa spp.               Rose                           Roseira                 101
Rosaceae                Rose family                    Rosáceas                102
Saccharum officinarum   Sugarcane                      Cana sacarina           103
Sesamum indicum         Sesame                         Gergelim                103
Solanum melanogena      Aubergine                      Beringela               104
Solanum tuberosum       Potato                         Batateira               105
Sorghum spp.            Sorghum                        Mapira (Sorgo)          108

                                                                                     70
Spinacia oleracea    Spinach        Espinafre              110
Theobroma cacao      Cocao          Cacaueiro              110
Trifolium spp.       Clover         Trevo                  111
Triticale            Triticale      Tritical               112
Triticum spp.        Wheat          Trigo                  112
                     Tubers         Tuberculos             61
Vicia spp.           Broad bean     Favereira              113
Vignia unguiculata   Cowpea         Feijao nhemba          113
Vitis vinifera       Grape          Videira                114
Weed                 Weed           Ervas                  114
                                    daninhas/infestantes
Wood, Timber         Wood, Timber   Madeira                115
Zea mays             Maize          Milho                  115
Zingibar spp.        Ginger         Gengibre               117




                                                                 71
