Papua New Guinea Biosecurity Authority – PNG Trade Facilitation
Trade Facilitation Agencies & Information Centre
Wednesday, September 30, 2026
help-desk@nto.gov.pg
Trade Facilitation
PNG Commodities
Back to Main Portal
Contact
Complaints
Papua New Guinea Biosecurity Authority
About PNGBA
The Papua New Guinea Biosecurity Authority (PNGBA) formerly known as the National Agriculture & Quarantine Inspection Authority (NAQIA) is a government agency responsible for regulating the import and export of agricultural products in Papua New Guinea. The NAQIA was established in 1994, following the adoption of the Quarantine Act 1994.
The PNGBA plays a number of key roles in the agriculture sector, including:
Administering the Quarantine Act 1994 and other relevant legislation
Inspecting and testing agricultural products to ensure that they meet quarantine and health standards
Regulating the import and export of agricultural products to and from Papua New Guinea
Providing technical advice and assistance to the government and industry stakeholders
Collaborating with other agencies and organizations to support the sustainable development of the agriculture sector in Papua New Guinea.
The PNGBA works to ensure that the import and export of agricultural products in Papua New Guinea is carried out in a safe and responsible manner, to protect the health of humans, animals, and plants. The PNGBA also plays a key role in supporting the development of the agriculture sector in Papua New Guinea.
Previous
Next
PNGBA Fact Sheet
The Papua New Guinea Biosecurity Authority (PNGBA) formerly known as the National Agriculture & Quarantine Inspection Authority (NAQIA) is a government agency that regulates the import and export of agricultural products in Papua New Guinea.
Established in 1994, following the adoption of the Quarantine Act 1994.
PNGBA is headquartered in Port Moresby and plays key roles in the agriculture sector such as inspecting, testing and regulating import and export of agricultural products, providing technical advice and assistance
PNGBA ensures import and export of agricultural products in PNG is done safely and responsibly to protect health of humans, animals and plants.
PNGBA supports the development of agriculture sector in PNG and collaborates with other agencies and organizations for sustainable development of the sector.
Agriculture sector is a significant contributor to the economy of PNG, and PNGBA plays a key role in regulating and promoting its growth.
Policy & Regulation
The Quarantine Act 1994
This act establishes the National Agriculture & Quarantine Inspection Authority (NAQIA) and sets out the powers and responsibilities of the agency. It also sets out the rules and regulations related to the import and export of agricultural products in Papua New Guinea.
National Agriculture Quarantine and Inspection Authority Act 1997
1 file(s)
254.64 KB
Download
The Plant Protection Act 1997
This act establishes the Plant Protection Committee and sets out the rules and regulations related to the import and export of plant products in Papua New Guinea. It also provides for the inspection, testing, and certification of plant products to ensure that they meet quarantine and health standards.
The Animal Health and Production Act 2002
This act establishes the Animal Health and Production Committee and sets out the rules and regulations related to the import and export of animal products in Papua New Guinea. It also provides for the inspection, testing, and certification of animal products to ensure that they meet quarantine and health standards.
The Food Safety Act 2013
This act establishes the Food Safety Authority of Papua New Guinea and sets out the rules and regulations related to the safety and quality of food products in Papua New Guinea. It also provides for the inspection, testing, and certification of food products to ensure that they meet health and safety standards.
The Trade and Industry Development Act 2015
This act establishes the Trade and Industry Development Authority of Papua New Guinea and sets out the rules and regulations related to the trade and industry sectors in Papua New Guinea. It also provides for the regulation of the import and export of goods and services in the country.
Visit NAQIA Website
When & How to Contact PNGBA
The Papua New Guinea Biosecurity Authority (PNGBA) formerly known as the National Agriculture & Quarantine Inspection Authority (NAQIA) is a trade facilitation agency in Papua New Guinea that provides information and assistance related to quarantine and health standards, import and export regulations, and other issues related to the agriculture sector.
They provide support for farmers, businesses, government and industry stakeholders, and members of the public who have questions or concerns related to the import or export of agricultural products.
They can be contacted by visiting their website, emailing them at
info@naqia.gov.pg
, or calling them at +675 303 5888.
Contact Info
Visit The Office
National Trade Office
Enchi Haus, Level 1
Hohola, NCD
Phone
(675) 301-6600
Email
help-desk@nto.gov.pg
Phone Numbers
Executive Division
(675) 301-6600 / 301-6602
Corporate Services Division
(675) 301-6600 / 301-6645
Trade Policy Coordination & Facilitation Division
(675) 301-6600 / 301-6608
Trade Development & Compliance Division
(675) 301-6600 / 301-6618
Market Access & Trade Agreements Division
(675) 301-6600 / 301-6625
Newsletter
Join our newsletter to instantly receive news about our National Trade Portal.
Copyright © 2025 National Trade Office. All rights reserved.
Complaints
