Public Health Directorate   ‫ادارة الصحة العامة‬




                                           Ff




                2022
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




                              Food Im porters Guide to the

                                    Kingdom of Bahrain

                                              Prepared by :

                                       Nujood Khalifa Almuqahwi

                                        Head imported food unit.




                                     S uperv is ed and rev iew ed by :

                                             Faisal Ali Alsari

                                      Chief of Food control section




                                             Approv ed by :

                                  Dr.Mohammed Abdulmajid AL-Awadhi

                                        Director of Public Health




                                                1
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




                                                          Contents




        Introduction: ................................................................................. 3

          ❖ Aim: ................................................................................................................. 4


        PHASE 1: Pre- import...................................................................... 4

          ❖ Classification:.................................................................................................... 5

          ❖    Licensing: ........................................................................................................ 6

          ❖    Awareness:...................................................................................................... 6

          ❖    specifications for general requirements .............................................................. 6


        PHASE 2: After import .................................................................. 14

          ❖ Required Documents:....................................................................................... 15

          ❖    Inspection procedures: .................................................................................... 16

          ❖    Food imported for non-commercial purposes ( personal use): ............................. 17

          ❖ HANDLING OF REJECTED FOOD SHIPMENTS: ...................................................... 18

          ❖ HEALTH CERTIFICATE FORMS……………………………………………………………..….20




                                                                    2
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




        Introduction:
        Since God created human and gave him the ability to seek and spread, he has been working
        diligently to obtain the food with which he can live and maintain himself, which has made
        the quest to satisfy the body's desires and meet its food needs innate and instinctive and the
        availability of food has become a prerequisite for the stability of human life everywhere.
        and the increasing population and what it requires to increase food production to reduce
        the food gap, foodborne damage and diseases have increased.
        With the development of human life and increasing of population numbers, food production
        is required to reduce the food gap, which is tried to be filled by imports of food commodities,
        food-borne diseases have increased, so the Food Control Section of the Department of Public
        Health has been established.
        Food control section plays an active role in implementing health policies in all matters of food
        safety under public health law No. 34 of 2018 which covers all public health services for
        individuals, precautionary measures to maintain infrastructure, water monitoring, and waste
        management. It also includes precautionary measures for communicable and non-
        communicable diseases.
        Due to the kingdom of Bahrain's reliance on importing a high percentage of food from
        outside the Kingdom, the role of the imported food safety group has emerged to inspect all
        food received through land, sea, and airports to ensure its safety, validity and conformity to
        specifications and standards by applying risk-based systems and global best practices.




                                                       3
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




        Aim:

        This guideline was prepared to educate food importers about all the requirements and

        specifications required in imported foods within the risk management framework of the

        Kingdom of Bahrain on all incoming food shipments, with the aim of facilitating

        procedures and avoiding the rejection or delay of shipments that may result from lack of

        knowledge of these requirements and procedures. This guideline is divided into two

        phases, addressing the pre-import phase and the second post-

        import phase.




        PHASE 1: Pre- import
        This stage deals with the most important items of specifications and standards for food
        labelling, shelf life and food additives, to achieve the concept of food safety from farm to
        fork .Therefore, before you import any food item, you must make sure to fulfill the following:



                                                                       Classification


                                                                         Licensing


                                                                        Awareness




                                                      4
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




        ❖ Classification:

           As an importer, its crucial to specify what food commodity you will import

           to help you know the procedures required for each product before

           importing it in terms of:

           1. Determining the HS-code of the product:


               It is a number that includes names of Goods, their description and distinction, and

              the categories of customs duties to which they are subject. It is used to classify

              goods and determine their customs tariffs. For more information, click here to

              access the website of the Customs Affairs in the Kingdom of Bahrain.


           2. Determining the accurate type of activity required in:

                 a. commercial registration certificate (CR)

                 b. certificate to practice commercial activities under health surveillance.

           3. Some products need prior registration or other procedures from different

              regulatory authorities such as:

                 a. In the event that you import functional foods such as baby food, energy

                     drinks and athletes’ food, it is necessary to register your products before

                     importing them. You can view the guideline for special foods Licensing from

                     here.

                 b. Other food (regular), does not require prior registration or authorization

                     before importing, but it is required to be in accordance with Gulf

                     specifications and standards. However, if you wish to have any advice from



                                                     5
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




                     our specialists prior to import please don’t hesitate to contacts as and you

                     can fill out the form for pre-approval of food products which can be found

                     through this link.

        ❖ Licensing:
              1. Obtaining a license from the Ministry of Industry and Commerce by submitting an

                 application to issue a commercial registration certificate with the required

                 activities (sale/trade of food and beverages, or sale/trade of food and beverages-

                 health food). You can apply through electronic system (Sijilat) website.

              2. Obtaining a certificate to practice commercial activities under health surveillance,

                 with the required activities such as (food stores, import, export and sale of

                 foodstuffs) through the Public Health directorate, Licensing Department, by filling

                 the form available here.

       ❖ Awareness :


          As an importer, you are encouraged to familiarize yourself and your suppliers with any

          applicable requirements related to GSO standards and regulations used in the Kingdom

          of Bahrain before importing to avoid rejection of shipments. In this section we will

          address the most important GSO standards for foodstuffs. Where the GSO standards

          are divided into two parts, one is concerned with general requirements and the other

          for each food product separately.




                                                     6
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




        ❖ The specifications for general requirements are as follows:


                                  Labeling of prepackaged food stuff




                                               GSO
                                                9



                                      GSO                 GSO
                                      2500                150



                                                                   GSO 150:
        Additives permitted for use
                                                                   Expiration dates
               in food stuff.
                                                                   for food products:

                                                                   Part 1: Mandatory
                                                                   expiration dates

                                                                   Part 2: voluntary
                                                                   expiration dates




                                                7
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




         standards                                   Main clauses
            GSO 9     MANDATORY LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS
                          1. The Name of the Food
                          2. List of Ingredients
                                  a. Artificial sweeteners or nutrients are not allowed in all baby
                                     foods.
                                  b. To declare the source of animal if the food item or one of its
                                     components contain animal component.
                          3. Nutritional Information
                          4. NET CONTENTS
                          5. NAME AND ADRESS
                          6. COUNTRY OF ORIGIN:
                          7. DATE MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND
                             USE:
                                  a. (2.4) the production date: and expiration date shall be
                                     declared as follows: -
                                              I. For food products with a minimum
                                                   durability less than three months (i.e. Day -
                                                   Month -Year).
                                               II.  For food products with a minimum
                                                    durability of more than three months (i.e.,
                                                    Month –Year). Shelf-life period calculated
                                                    until the end of month recorded its
                                                    expiration.
                                  b. Dates shall be engraved or in relief, printed or stamped by
                                     irremovable ink directly on all packages or on their
                                     original label by the producer only.
                                  c. Statements intended to appear on the label shall be marked
                                     in a clearly visible and easily legible manner to the
                                     consumer, it shall not obscure any information required on
                                     the label.
                                  d. Adding stickers for production and expiry dates is not
                                     permissible. There shall be not more than one date of
                                     production or of expiry on the same package, both dates
                                     shall not be subject to deletion, change or deceit.




                                                     8
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




                              8. LANGUAGE: Labelling and adjoining explanatory statements
                                 shall be in Arabic and, where another language is used, it shall be
                                 alongside Arabic. All the information provided in another
                                 language shall be identical with that written in Arabic.
                              9. Declared names of foods and ingredients which cause
                                 hypersensitivity by written contain of:
                                     a. Cereals containing gluten substance, i.e., wheat, barley, oats,
                                          rye, spelt as such or their hybridized strains and their
                                          products.
                                     b. Crustacea and their products.
                                     c. Eggs and egg products.
                                     d. Fish and fish products.
                                     e. Peanuts, soybeans, and their products.
                                     f. Walnuts and their products.
                                     g. Milk and milk products (lactose included).
                                     h. sulphite in concentration of 10 ppm or more.
                                     i. Celery and their products.
                                     j. Mustard and their products
                                     k. Sesame seeds and their products.
                                     l.   Clams and their products.
                                     m. Lubin and their products.




        Regarding GSO 2500, this Gulf Standard is concerned with Food additives permitted for

        use in food stuffs.


           •   Food Additives Included in This Standard:
               Only the food additives listed herein are recognized as suitable for use in foods in
               conformance with the provisions of this Standard. Only food additives that have been
               assigned an Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) or determined, based on other criteria, to
               be safe by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) and an
               International Numbering System (INS) designation by Codex will be considered for




                                                         9
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




               inclusion in this Standard. The use of additives in conformance with this Standard is
               considered to be technologically justified.
           •   Foods in Which Additives May Be Used:

               This standard specifies the conditions for the use of food additives in all foods,

               whether or not they have previously been standardized. The use of additives in foods

               for which specifications have been set is subject to the conditions of use set by the

               food standards committees in the Gulf Standardization Organization.




            NOTE: You can obtain GSO2500 through MOIC
         website standards Store by clicking on this link.




                                                      10
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




                  Permitted food sweeteners except in infant and children’s foods as
                                             prescribed by GSO 995

          INS          sweeteners                   Warning should be mentioned on the label

         E954      Saccharin and its salts                                  -

         E951           Aspartame                Not to be used by persons who have phenylketonuria

         E950      Acesulfam potassium                                      -

         E955            Sucralose                          Temperature should not exceed 25C

         E957           Thaumatin                                           -
         E420       Sorbitol and sorbitol      Excess of consumed quantity 40 g per day could be cause
                           syrup                                     laxative effects
         E421            mannitol              Excess of consumed quantity 20 g per day could be cause
                                                                     laxative effects
         E953       Isomaltitol(isomalt)                                    -

         E965       Maltitol and maltitol                                   -
                           syrup
         E966              lactitol              Excess of consumed quantity could be causing laxative
                                                                         effects

         E967              xylitol             Excess of consumed quantity 40 g per day could be cause
                                                                     laxative effects
         E968            erythritol              Excess of consumed quantity could be causing laxative
                                                                         effects

         E961            neotame                                            -

         E956             alitame                                           -
         E960        Steviol glycosides                                     -

         E962      Aspartame-acesulfame                                     -
                            salt




                                                       11
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




        Regarding validity periods, the validity of food products is divided into two parts according
        to Gulf standards: Part 1: Mandatory expiration dates (GSO 150-1) and Part 2: voluntary
        expiration dates (GSO 150-2).

        Mandatory periods of validity include perishable foods that contain, in whole or in part, milk
        or milk products, eggs, meat, chicken, fish, crustaceans or ingredients that help growing of
        micro- organisms and cause food spoilage , poisoning or food disease and that keep chilled
        at a temperature of (0 - 5) oC, in addition to children's food, also food products that by their
        nature require a certain temperature for preservation such as fresh eggs (table eggs), fresh
        food and ready-to-eat foods.

        Voluntary validity periods include frozen food products that are kept at a temperature not

        exceeding -18 oC, some non-perishable chilled food products that are kept at a

        temperature from 0 oC to 5 oC, and food products that are kept at an appropriate

        temperature in well-ventilated stores (not greater than 25 oC).


        It should be noted that products which are not included among this standard “expiration
        dates of food products - Part II: voluntary expiration dates" shall be specified by consultation
        with the authority side depending on scientific bases for determining the expiry periods and
        obtaining its permission, so that the manufacturer guarantees the validity and safety of the
        product for consumption during the prescribed period.
        Moreover, the expiry period for processed or repackaged products from materials of limited
        expiry period without being subjected to any thermal procession shall not exceed the
        remaining expiry period of the materials from which they are prepared.




                                                      12
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




         Additional explanatory notes for labelling of food products:

           ❖ You should declare common name or E number for food additives.

           ❖ In case of gelatin, lecithin’s and mono- di- glycerides the source shall be
              mentioned.
           ❖ All food items accompanied by children's toys must have
              the Gulf Conformity mark. Further to the Ministerial Resolution
              issued by the Ministry of Industry &commerce, No. 1 of 2014
              regarding the adoption of the Gulf Regulations for Children's toys.


           ❖ Please refer to the specifications of each food product where these are just
              general items and you can obtain specifications and regulations through the
              link of the standards store at the Ministry of Industry& Commerce.




                                   Resolution No. (89) for 2022
                    On the import and trading of gelatin candy for children


       ▪ It is prohibited to import and trade gelatin candy for children containing conjak
          (E425) or other names such as (Klakumanan, Konyako, Konjonak, tarot powder,
          yam flour) or any other names that may exist.




                                                   13
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




        PHASE 2: After import
           The Imported Food Safety Group follows the Food Control section, which falls under the

           umbrella of the Public Health Directorate. There are three ports of entry in the kingdom

           of Bahrain (seaport, air cargo, and causeway). Public health specialists are distributed

           over 3 ports of entry. The responsibility of this group is to inspect all the food received

           through the ports and to ensure its safety and compliance with specifications and

           standards.




                                                                                  Khalifa bin




             Public Health Directorate
                                                                                 Salman Port

                                         Food Control   Imported Food
                                                                                   Air cargo
                                           Section           Group

                                                                                  King fahad
                                                                                   Causeway




                                                        14
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




                1. Required Documents:

        When the food shipment arrives at the port of entry, the importing company’s representative

        fills in the imported food inspection form and attaches all the required documents. You can

        obtain the form from here or through our offices in the ports.


           a.   A copy of the customs declaration

           b.   Packing list /a list of all types of foodstuffs and details of the size, number, and weight

                of the packages for each item separately, in addition to the total weight of each item.

           c.   A copy of the delivery order or bill of lading

           d.   Health certificates, and for their acceptance, the following requirements are required:

                   •   All consignments must be accompanied by an original health certificate issued

                       by the competent authority in the country of origin or an officially recognized

                       body. The health certificate should attest to compliance with the GCC

                       requirements countries and, where relevant, animal and plant health

                       requirements.

                   •   The name and address of the exporting company

                   •   Brief description of the exported foodstuffs, their quantity and origin.

                   •   An attached list, authorized by the officially recognized body, of the types of

                       exported foods and the details of the package size of each item separately (in

                       the case of multiple items).

                   •   Container number or bill of lading.
                   •   The date of issuance of the certificate.
                   •   stamp and signature of the health authority issuing the certificate.




                                                        15
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




                   •   Halal slaughtering certificate for meat and poultry /halal certificate for food
                       items that contain ingredients of animal origin Issued by any Islamic
                       association accredited in the Kingdom of Bahrain.
                   •   Any additional documentation as requested by the competent authorities, in
                       case of incidents and emergency management.




              2.   Inspection procedures:

              ❖ Checking the suitability of the Conveyance / Vehicle / container / Packs and make

                   sure it’s free from chemical pollutants, insects, rodents or other substances that

                   have an impact on the safety of the food in the container.

              ❖ Physical check includes:

                       o   Labeling of food products:

                           ▪   Ensure that it comply with their specifications and regulations,
                               particularly with the prepackaged food labeling, including:
                                  •   Brand name
                                  •   Name of the food
                                  •   List of ingredients in descending order of ingoing
                                      weight.
                                  •   Net contents
                                  •   Production and expiry dates
                                  •   Name and address of manufacturer.
                                  •   Country of origin
                                  •   Instruction for storage and use


              ❖ Sensory attributes, such as appearance, odor, flavor, taste, and texture of foods
                   detectable by human senses, are often used to evaluate food quality.


                                                       16
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




               ❖ Make sure there is no rust, corrosion, dents, or leak in the cans.

               ❖ check for abnormal changes and any defrosting signs for frozen and chilled foods

                     as well as the container temperature recording statement during the flight.


        If a physical examination shows the safety of the food shipment alongside its compliance

        with GSO standards, and samples are not required for laboratory analysis, the shipment is

        released.


        If laboratory samples are required to be withdrawn according to our sampling policy which

        is based on risk, the shipment will be under detention until the results reveals according to

        following:


           ❖ release note will be issued if the laboratory results is satisfactory.

           ❖ rejection notes for unsatisfactory results.


        The importer can raise a dispute regarding its unsatisfactory results by submitting an official

        letter to the head of the group or to the supervisor of the port of entry in order to raise the

        matter to the re- test committee, please provide any evidence from the company if its

        available.


           3. Food imported for non-commercial purposes (personal use):

               ❖ The person must ensure in writing to use them for personal purposes only and

                     not to be sold, distributed, or advertised to the public.

               ❖ The amount should be within the allowance.

               ❖ Labelling and adjoining explanatory statements shall be either in Arabic or English,
                     if another language is used, sticker must be attached from the person concerned
                     from an approved translation office.



                                                       17
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




               ❖ They are not prohibited locally or internationally or contain components that are
                  prohibited domestically or internationally. These foods may be sampled for
                  laboratory examination to confirm fitness for purpose if deemed necessary by the
                  competent authority.


        HANDLING OF REJECTED FOOD SHIPMENTS:

        After rejection of the shipment the importer in this case has to take decision either to re-

        export the shipment to country of origin or to destroy it under food control supervision

        based on the Public Health Law No. 34 of 2018.


        Re-export procedure:

           o submit a request letter to the health office at the concerned port of entry with the

               following attachments (custom declaration port from which the shipment was

               submitted with the following attached (copy of customs declaration of re-export,

               copy of rejection notice)

           o Once the application is received, you will be contacted by the food control specialist

               before re-export.

               To get an official certificate for re-export , importer must fill the form (here). o

        Destruction procedures:
           o Submit a request letter to the health office at the concerned port of entry.
           o Food control specialists will coordinate with you regarding destruction as soon as
               you determine the date for destruction.
           o Asker landfill for waste management procedures from (here)
           o To get an official certificate for destruction , importer must fill the form (here).




                                                     18
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




           o HEALTH CERTIFICATES FORMS:

           The exporting countries shall abide by the health certificates according to the following

           forms as much as possible, with the possibility of accepting the forms of the exporting

           countries while adhering to the data and statements contained in the following

           certificate forms. Arabic or English or both are the main languages in issuing health

           certificates, provided that a health certificate is issued for each mission.


           In addition to these certificates, the Food Control Section may request any additional

           special health declarations or documents, if required, such as in cases of emergencies

           and various food accidents, or when needed to ensure that the requirements of the

           Animal Health Organization (OIE) or the halal requirements for feed provided to animals,

           fish and marine farmed organisms are met, or for other reasons.




                                                      19
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




             1. HEALTH CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF PROCESSED FOOD:

                                                                                                Logo



            Health Certificate for Export of Processed Food Products                                                      ‫الشهادة الصحية لتصدير األغذية المصنعة‬
                             from ---------- to ---------                                                                         ------- ‫ إلى‬------ ‫من‬
      1.              Consignor (Exporter)                                 )‫المرسل (المصدر‬        2.        Certificate Reference No.                                 ‫الرقم المرجعي للشهادة الصحية‬
                      Name                                                           ‫االسم‬                  Place of Issue                                                            ‫مكان اإلصدار‬
                      Address                                                       ‫العنوان‬                 Date of Issue                                                            ‫تاريخ اإلصدار‬
      3.              Consignee (importer)                          )‫المرسل إليه (المستورد‬        4.        Competent/Certifying Authority                                     ‫الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬
                      Name                                                           ‫االسم‬                  Address                                                                           ‫العنوان‬
                      Address                                                        ‫العنوان‬      5.        Country of origin                    ‫بلد المنشأ‬     ISO code                      ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                                                                (optional)                    )‫(اختياري‬

                                                                                                  6.        Country of                         ‫بلد الوصول‬       ISO code                      ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                            Destination                                         (optional)                    )‫(اختياري‬

      7.              Producer.                                              ‫الشركة الصانعة‬       8.        Packing Est. (if applicable)                                      )‫الشركة المعبأة (إن وجد‬
                      Name                                                             ‫االسم‬                Name                                                                                 ‫االسم‬
                      Address                                                        ‫العنوان‬                Address                                                                            ‫العنوان‬
      9.              Border of Entry/Country of                    ‫منفذ الدخول‬/ ‫بلد الوصول‬       10.       Border of Loading/Country of                                     ‫موقع التحميل‬/‫بلد المغادرة‬
                      Destination                                                                           Dispatch

      11.             Means of transport/conveyance               ‫وسيلة النقل‬                     12.       Conveyance Identification No.                            ‫هوية وسيلة النقل‬/‫الرقم التعريفي‬
                      By Air                                              ‫جوي‬
                      By Sea                                              ‫بحري‬                   13.       Temperature of Food product                               ‫درجة حرارة حفظ المادة الغذائية‬
                      By Road                                             ‫بري‬                              Ambient                                                                 ‫درجة حرارة الغرفة‬
                                                                                                            Chilled                                                                               ‫مبرد‬
                                                                                                            Frozen                                                                               ‫مجمد‬
      14.        Commodities Certified for:                                                                                    :‫تم ترخيص البضائع الستخدامها في‬
                    Other ‫أخرى‬        After Further Process     ‫بعد معالجة إضافية‬                                        Human Consumption Directly ‫االستهالك اآلدمي مباشرة‬
      15.                     Identification of the Food Products                                                                   ‫توصيف وتصنيف األغذية‬
                                                               Treatment Type
            Name & Description of Food          HS-Code                             Brand Name          Production Date       Expiry Date        No Packages        Batch/Lot No.          Total Weight
                                                                  (optional)
                                                ‫بند التعرفة‬      ‫نوع المعالجة‬                                                                                               ‫رقم‬
              ‫اسم ووصف المادة الغذائية‬                                              ‫العالمة التجارية‬      ‫تاريخ اإلنتاج‬       ‫تاريخ االنتهاء‬       ‫عدد الطرود‬                               ‫الوزن الكلي‬
                                                 ‫الجمركية‬         )‫(اختياري‬                                                                                           ‫الدفعة‬/‫التشغيلة‬
      16. Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                             ‫اإلفادات الصحية‬
      16.1 General Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                  ‫إفادات صحية عامة‬

      The food product(s) is safe and fit for human consumption                                                                                            ‫إن الغذاء سليم (آمن) وصالح لالستهالك اآلدمي‬

      The food product(s) was handled at an establishment that has been subjected to
                                                                                                             ‫تم إجراء عمليات تداول للمنتجات الغذائية في منشأه غذائية خاضعة للرقابة من قبل الجهة الرقابية‬
      inspections by the competent authority and/or officially recognized body and
                                                                                                        ‫ وتطبق نظام إدارة سالمة الغذاء استنادا إلى مبادئ نظام الهاسب‬،‫ أو الجهة المخولة رسميا‬/‫المختصة و‬
      implements a food safety management system based on HACCP principles or an
                                                                                                        ‫ وحاصلة على شهادات بذلك من جهات معتمدة من الجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬،‫أو ما يماثل ه‬
      equivalent system, and they are certified by nationally accredited certification bodies

      16.2 Additional Health Attestations (if deemed necessary)                                                                                                 )‫إفادات صحية خاصة (إذا تطلب األمر ذلك‬

      Authorized Officer Name & Position                                                                                                                                   ‫اسم ووظيفة الشخص المختص‬
      Name of the Responsible Department                                                                                                                                          ‫اسم اإلدارة التي يتبع لها‬
      Official Stamp                                                                                                                                                                        ‫الختم الرسمي‬
      Date                                                                                                                                                                                         ‫التاريخ‬




                                                                                                20
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




            2. HEALTH CERTIFCIATE FOR EXPORT OF MEAT AND MEAT

                  PRODUCTS:

                                                                                              Logo



           Health Certificate for Export of Meat and Meat’s Products                                                     ‫الشهادة الصحية لتصدير اللحوم ومنتجاتها‬
                             from ---------- to ---------                                                                         ------- ‫ إلى‬------ ‫من‬
      1.              Consignor (Exporter)                               )‫المرسل (المصدر‬         2.       Certificate Reference No.                                ‫الرقم المرجعي للشهادة الصحية‬
                      Name                                                         ‫االسم‬                  Place of Issue                                                           ‫مكان اإلصدار‬
                      Address                                                     ‫العنوان‬                 Date of Issue                                                           ‫تاريخ اإلصدار‬
      3.              Consignee (importer)                         )‫المرسل إليه (المستورد‬        4.       Competent/Certifying Authority                                    ‫الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬
                      Name                                                          ‫االسم‬                 Address                                                                          ‫العنوان‬
                      Address                                                       ‫العنوان‬      5.       Country of origin                    ‫بلد المنشأ‬     ISO code                     ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                                                              (optional)                   )‫(اختياري‬

                                                                                                 6.       Country of                          ‫بلد الوصول‬      ISO code                     ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                          Destination                                         (optional)                   )‫(اختياري‬

      7.              Producer.                                            ‫الشركة الصانعة‬        8.       Packing Est. (if applicable)                                     )‫الشركة المعبأة (إن وجد‬
                      Name                                                           ‫االسم‬                Name                                                                                ‫االسم‬
                      Address                                                      ‫العنوان‬                Address                                                                           ‫العنوان‬
      9.              Border of Entry/Country of                  ‫منفذ الدخول‬/ ‫بلد الوصول‬        10.      Border of Loading/Country of                                    ‫موقع التحميل‬/‫بلد المغادرة‬
                      Destination                                                                         Dispatch

      11.             Means of transport/conveyance              ‫وسيلة النقل‬                     12.      Conveyance Identification No.                           ‫هوية وسيلة النقل‬/‫الرقم التعريفي‬
                      By Air                                             ‫جوي‬
                      By Sea                                            ‫بحري‬                    13.      Temperature of Food product                              ‫درجة حرارة حفظ المادة الغذائية‬
                      By Road                                           ‫بري‬                              Ambient                                                                ‫درجة حرارة الغرفة‬
                                                                                                          Chilled                                                                              ‫مبرد‬
                                                                                                          Frozen                                                                              ‫مجمد‬
      14.        Commodities Certified for:                                                                                   :‫تم ترخيص البضائع الستخدامها في‬
                    Other ‫أخرى‬        After Further Process                   ‫بعد معالجة إضافية‬                         Human Consumption Directly ‫االستهالك اآلدمي مباشرة‬
      15.                            Identification of the Food Products                                                                 ‫توصيف وتصنيف األغذية‬
                                                             Treatment Type
            Name & Description of Food         HS-Code                              Brand Name         Production Date       Expiry Date        No Packages      Batch/Lot No.          Total Weight
                                                                (optional)
                                               ‫بند التعرفة‬     ‫نوع المعالجة‬                                                                                              ‫رقم‬
              ‫اسم ووصف المادة الغذائية‬                                             ‫العالمة التجارية‬      ‫تاريخ اإلنتاج‬       ‫تاريخ االنتهاء‬      ‫عدد الطرود‬                              ‫الوزن الكلي‬
                                                ‫الجمركية‬        )‫(اختياري‬                                                                                          ‫الدفعة‬/‫التشغيلة‬
      16. Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                          ‫اإلفادات الصحية‬
      16.1 General Health Attestations                                                                                                                                               ‫إفادات صحية عامة‬

      The meat and/or meat products are safe and fit for human consumption                                                              ‫أو منتجاتها سليمة (آمنة) وصالحة لالستهالك اآلدمي‬/‫أن اللحوم و‬


      Animals/birds have been slaughtered in a slaughterhouse approved and under the                     ‫الطيور في مسلخ مرخص ومعتمد من قبل الجهات المختصة في بلد المنشأ وموافق‬/‫تم ذبح الحيوانات‬
      supervision of the competent authority of the exporting country, and is approved by the             ‫عليه من قبل دول مجلس التعاون لدول الخليج العربية ويعمل تحت إشراف الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬
      GCC authorities                                                                                                                                                                   ‫بالدولة المصدرة‬

      The meat and/or meat product from animals/birds that have been subjected to ante-
                                                                                                        ‫ طيور خضعت للفحص قبل الذبح وبعده من قبل أطباء بيطريين‬/‫أو منتجاتها من حيوانات‬/‫أن اللحوم و‬
      mortem and post- mortem inspection by veterinarians assigned by the Competent
                                                                                                         ‫تابعين للجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ ولم تظهر عليه أعراض لألمراض المعدية وفقا لمعايير‬
      Authority of the country of origin & have shown no sign of any of infectious diseases
                                                                                                                                                                     ‫المنظمة العالمية للصحة الحيوانية‬
      (as per OIE guidelines).




                                                                                               21
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom



      The meat and/or meat product was handled at an establishment that has been
                                                                                                        ‫أو منتجاتها في منشأه خاضعة للرقابة من قبل الجهة الرقابية‬/‫تم إجراء عمليات تداول اللحوم و‬
      subjected to inspections by the competent authority and implements a food safety
                                                                                                ‫ وحاصلة على‬،‫ وتطبق نظام إدارة سالمة الغذاء استنادا إلى مبادئ نظام الهاسب أو ما يماثله‬،‫المختصة‬
      management system based on HACCP principles or an equivalent system and they are
                                                                                                                         ‫شهادات بذلك من جهات معتمدة من الجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬
      certified by nationally accredited certification bodies

      Good veterinary practices have been applied in the use of veterinary medicines                       )‫تم تطبيق الممارسات البيطرية الجيدة في استخدام األدوية البيطرية )بما فيها محفزات النمو‬
      (including growth promoters) and agriculture chemicals in live animals/birds, and any        ‫أو منتجاتها متوافقة‬/‫ وأن أي متبقيات في اللحوم و‬،‫الطيور‬/‫والكيماويات الزراعية في الحيوانات الحية‬
      residues in meat and/or meat product comply with relevant GCC requirements                                                                               ‫مع المتطلبات الخليجية ذات العالقة‬


      The meat and/or meat product originates from animals/birds that have not been                  ‫ طيور لم يتم ذبحها بقصد القضاء على األمراض أو‬/ ‫أو منتجاتها من حيوانات‬/‫أن مصدر اللحوم و‬
      slaughtered for the purpose of disease eradication or disease control                                                                                                            ‫التحكم فيها‬


      The meat is derived from animals not fed on meat and bone meal and greaves from                  ‫أن اللحوم ناتجة من حيوانات لم تتغذى على اعالف تتضمن مساحيق اللحم والعظم وأية مخلفات‬
      ruminant origin (attestation for ruminant meat only)                                                                             )‫بروتينية من اصل مجترات (افادة خاصة بلحوم المجترات فقط‬


      The meat is derived from animals not fed on waste, dirt or non halal feed in line with    ‫أن اللحوم ناتجة من حيوانات لم تتغذى على القاذورات أو المخلفات أو األعالف غير الحالل وبما يتوافق‬
      relevant GCC requirements                                                                                                                                ‫مع المتطلبات الخليجية ذات العالقة‬


      Carcasses were submitted to maturation at a temperature above 2°C for a minimum           ‫ ساعة بعد الذبح‬24 ‫ درجة مئوية لمدة ال تقل عن‬2 ‫أن الذبائح قد تم حفظها في درجة حرارة ال تزيد عن‬
      period of 24 hours following slaughter (attestation for ruminant meat only)                                                                               )‫(افادة خاصة بلحوم المجترات فقط‬


      16.2 Additional Health Attestations (if deemed necessary)                                                                                         )‫إفادات صحية خاصة (إذا تطلب األمر ذلك‬


      Authorized Officer Name & Position                                                                                                                            ‫اسم ووظيفة الشخص المختص‬
      Name of the Responsible Department                                                                                                                                  ‫اسم اإلدارة التي يتبع لها‬
      Official Stamp                                                                                                                                                                ‫الختم الرسمي‬
      Date                                                                                                                                                                                 ‫التاريخ‬




                                                                                           22
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




            3. HEALTH CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF (MILK AND MILK

                  PRODUCTS:

                                                                                                    Logo



             Health Certificate for Export of Milk and its Products                                                            ‫الشهادة الصحية لتصدير الحليب ومنتجاته‬
                            from ---------- to ---------                                                                                ------- ‫ إلى‬------ ‫من‬
      1.              Consignor (Exporter)                                     )‫المرسل (المصدر‬         2.       Certificate Reference No.                                   ‫الرقم المرجعي للشهادة الصحية‬
                      Name                                                               ‫االسم‬                  Place of Issue                                                              ‫مكان اإلصدار‬
                      Address                                                           ‫العنوان‬                 Date of Issue                                                              ‫تاريخ اإلصدار‬
      3.              Consignee (importer)                               )‫المرسل إليه (المستورد‬        4.       Competent/Certifying Authority                                      ‫الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬
                      Name                                                                ‫االسم‬                 Address                                                                            ‫العنوان‬
                      Address                                                             ‫العنوان‬      5.       Country of origin                      ‫بلد المنشأ‬     ISO code                    ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                                                                      (optional)                  )‫(اختياري‬

                                                                                                       6.       Country of                           ‫بلد الوصول‬       ISO code                    ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                Destination                                           (optional)                  )‫(اختياري‬

      7.              Producer.                                                   ‫الشركة الصانعة‬       8.       Packing Est. (if applicable)                                       )‫الشركة المعبأة (إن وجد‬
                      Name                                                                  ‫االسم‬               Name                                                                                  ‫االسم‬
                      Address                                                             ‫العنوان‬               Address                                                                             ‫العنوان‬
      9.              Border of Entry/Country of                         ‫منفذ الدخول‬/ ‫بلد الوصول‬       10.      Border of Loading/Country of                                      ‫موقع التحميل‬/‫بلد المغادرة‬
                      Destination                                                                               Dispatch

      11.             Means of transport/conveyance                  ‫وسيلة النقل‬                       12.      Conveyance Identification No.                              ‫هوية وسيلة النقل‬/‫الرقم التعريفي‬
                      By Air                                                 ‫جوي‬
                      By Sea                                                   ‫بحري‬                   13.      Temperature of Food product                                ‫درجة حرارة حفظ المادة الغذائية‬
                      By Road                                                  ‫بري‬                             Ambient                                                                   ‫درجة حرارة الغرفة‬
                                                                                                                Chilled                                                                                 ‫مبرد‬
                                                                                                                Frozen                                                                                 ‫مجمد‬
      14.        Commodities Certified for:                                                                                         :‫تم ترخيص البضائع الستخدامها في‬
                    Other ‫أخرى‬        After Further Process                         ‫بعد معالجة إضافية‬                         Human Consumption Directly ‫االستهالك اآلدمي مباشرة‬
      15.                            Identification of the Food Products                                                                       ‫توصيف وتصنيف األغذية‬
                                                                 Treatment Type
            Name & Description of Food             HS-Code                                Brand Name         Production Date       Expiry Date          No Packages       Batch/Lot No.         Total Weight
                                                                    (optional)
                                                   ‫بند التعرفة‬     ‫نوع المعالجة‬                                                                                                  ‫رقم‬
              ‫اسم ووصف المادة الغذائية‬                                                   ‫العالمة التجارية‬      ‫تاريخ اإلنتاج‬       ‫تاريخ االنتهاء‬        ‫عدد الطرود‬                              ‫الوزن الكلي‬
                                                    ‫الجمركية‬        )‫(اختياري‬                                                                                              ‫الدفعة‬/‫التشغيلة‬
      16. Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                                  ‫اإلفادات الصحية‬
      16.1 General Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                       ‫إفادات صحية عامة‬

      The milk/milk products are safe and fit for human consumption                                                                                 ‫أو منتجاته سليم (آمن) وصالح لالستهالك اآلدمي‬/‫إن الحليب و‬


      The milk /milk products has been derived from healthy animals that are subject to the                       ‫أو منتجاته حيوانات سليمة وخاضعة للفحص البيطري من قبل الجهة الرقابية‬/‫إن مصدر الحليب و‬
      official veterinary service inspections in the country of origin                                                                                                                 ‫المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬

      The milk/milk products were handled in an establishment that has been subjected to
                                                                                                                     ‫أو منتجاته في منشأه خاضعة للرقابة من قبل الجهة الرقابية‬/‫تم إجراء عمليات تداول الحليب و‬
      inspections by the competent authority and implements a food safety management
                                                                                                             ،‫المختصة في بلد المنشأ وتطبق نظام إدارة سالمة الغذاء استنادا إلى مبادئ نظام الهاسب أو ما يماثله‬
      system based on HACCP principles or an equivalent system, and they are certified by
                                                                                                                         ‫وحاصلة على شهادات بذلك من جهات معتمدة من الجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬
      nationally accredited certification bodies




                                                                                                     23
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




      Good veterinary practices have been applied in the use of veterinary medicines                              )‫تم تطبيق الممارسات البيطرية الجيدة في استخدام األدوية البيطرية )بما فيها محفزات النمو‬
      (including growth promoters) and agriculture chemicals in live animals and any residues                ‫أو منتجاته متوافقة مع‬/‫ وإن أية متبقيات في الحليب و‬،‫والكيماويات الزراعية في الحيوانات الحية‬
      in milk or milk products comply with GCC requirements                                                                                                                             ‫المتطلبات الخليجية‬


      16.2 Additional Health Attestations                                                                                                                                              ‫إفادات صحية إضافية‬

      Authorized Officer Name & Position                                                                                                                                   ‫اسم ووظيفة الشخص المختص‬
      Name of the Responsible Department                                                                                                                                         ‫اسم اإلدارة التي يتبع لها‬
      Official Stamp                                                                                                                                                                         ‫الختم الرسمي‬
      Date                                                                                                                                                                                         ‫التاريخ‬


             4. HEALTH CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF TABLE EGGS AND

                  EGG PRODUCTS:

                                                                                              Logo



           Health Certificate for Export of Table Eggs and its Products                                            ‫الشهادة الصحية لتصدير بيض المائدة ومنتجاته‬
                              from ---------- to ---------                                                                     ------- ‫ إلى‬------ ‫من‬
      1.              Consignor (Exporter)                                )‫المرسل (المصدر‬        2.       Certificate Reference No.                                   ‫الرقم المرجعي للشهادة الصحية‬
                      Name                                                          ‫االسم‬                 Place of Issue                                                              ‫مكان اإلصدار‬
                      Address                                                      ‫العنوان‬                Date of Issue                                                              ‫تاريخ اإلصدار‬
      3.              Consignee (importer)                         )‫المرسل إليه (المستورد‬        4.       Competent/Certifying Authority                                      ‫الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬
                      Name                                                          ‫االسم‬                 Address                                                                            ‫العنوان‬
                      Address                                                       ‫العنوان‬      5.       Country of origin                     ‫بلد المنشأ‬     ISO code                       ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                                                               (optional)                     )‫(اختياري‬

                                                                                                 6.       Country of                          ‫بلد الوصول‬       ISO code                       ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                          Destination                                          (optional)                     )‫(اختياري‬

      7.              Producer.                                            ‫الشركة الصانعة‬        8.       Packing Est. (if applicable)                                       )‫الشركة المعبأة (إن وجد‬
                      Name                                                           ‫االسم‬                Name                                                                                  ‫االسم‬
                      Address                                                      ‫العنوان‬                Address                                                                             ‫العنوان‬
      9.              Border of Entry/Country of                  ‫منفذ الدخول‬/ ‫بلد الوصول‬        10.      Border of Loading/Country of                                      ‫موقع التحميل‬/‫بلد المغادرة‬
                      Destination                                                                         Dispatch

      11.             Means of transport/conveyance              ‫وسيلة النقل‬                     12.      Conveyance Identification No.                              ‫هوية وسيلة النقل‬/‫الرقم التعريفي‬
                      By Air                                             ‫جوي‬
                      By Sea                                             ‫بحري‬                   13.      Temperature of Food product                                ‫درجة حرارة حفظ المادة الغذائية‬
                      By Road                                            ‫بري‬                             Ambient                                                                   ‫درجة حرارة الغرفة‬
                                                                                                          Chilled                                                                                 ‫مبرد‬
                                                                                                          Frozen                                                                                 ‫مجمد‬
      14.        Commodities Certified for:                                                                                  :‫تم ترخيص البضائع الستخدامها في‬
                    Other ‫أخرى‬        After Further Process                   ‫بعد معالجة إضافية‬                        Human Consumption Directly ‫االستهالك اآلدمي مباشرة‬
      15.                            Identification of the Food Products                                                                 ‫توصيف وتصنيف األغذية‬
                                                              Treatment Type
            Name & Description of Food         HS-Code                              Brand Name         Production Date       Expiry Date        No Packages         Batch/Lot No.           Total Weight
                                                                 (optional)
                                               ‫بند التعرفة‬      ‫نوع المعالجة‬                                                                                               ‫رقم‬
              ‫اسم ووصف المادة الغذائية‬                                             ‫العالمة التجارية‬      ‫تاريخ اإلنتاج‬       ‫تاريخ االنتهاء‬       ‫عدد الطرود‬                                 ‫الوزن الكلي‬
                                                ‫الجمركية‬         )‫(اختياري‬                                                                                           ‫الدفعة‬/‫التشغيلة‬
      16. Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                              ‫اإلفادات الصحية‬
      16.1 General Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                  ‫إفادات صحية عامة‬
      The eggs/ egg products are safe and fit for human consumption.                                                                          ‫أو منتجاته سليم (آمن) وصالح لالستهالك اآلدمي‬/‫إن البيض و‬
                                                                                                         ‫أو منتجاته في منشأه خاضعة للرقابة من قبل الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬/‫تم إجراء عمليات تداول البيض و‬
      The eggs/egg products were handled at an establishment that has been subjected to
                                                                                                          ‫ وحاصلة‬،‫ وتطبق نظام إدارة سالمة الغذاء استنادا إلى مبادئ نظام الهاسب أو ما يماثله‬،‫في بلد المنشأ‬
      inspections by the competent authority in the country of origin and implements a food
                                                                                                                                        ‫على شهادات بذلك معتمدة من الجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬




                                                                                               24
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom



      safety management system based on HACCP principles or an equivalent system, and
      they are certified by nationally accredited certification bodies
      Good veterinary practice has been applied in the use of veterinary drugs (including
                                                                                                              ‫تم تطبيق الممارسات البيطرية الجيدة في استخدام األدوية البيطرية )بما فيها محفزات النمو) والكيماويات‬
      growth promoters) and agriculture chemicals in poultry, and any residues in egg/egg
                                                                                                                      ‫أو منتجاته متوافقة مع المتطلبات الخليجية‬/‫ وإن أية متبقيات في البيض و‬،‫الزراعية في الدواجن‬
      products comply with GCC requirements

      16.2 Additional Health Attestations/Declarations (if deemed necessary)                                                                                          )‫إفادات صحية خاصة (إذا تطلب األمر ذلك‬

      Authorized Officer Name & Position                                                                                                                                         ‫اسم ووظيفة الشخص المختص‬
      Name of the Responsible Department                                                                                                                                                ‫اسم اإلدارة التي يتبع لها‬
      Official Stamp                                                                                                                                                                              ‫الختم الرسمي‬
      Date                                                                                                                                                                                               ‫التاريخ‬



             5. HEALTH CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF PRODUCTS OF
                  AQATIC ANIMAL ORIGIN (FISH AND FISH PRODUCTS,
                  INCLUDING MOLLUSCS, CRUSACEANS, AND
                  ECHINODERMS)

                                                                                                  Logo



      Health Certificate for Export of Marine and River Animals from
                                                                                                          ‫الشهادة الصحية لتصدير األحياء البحرية والنهرية ذات األصل الحيواني‬
       Animal Origin (Fish, Mollusca, Crustacean, Echinoderm and
                                                                                                         ‫(األسماك والرخويات والقشريات وشوكيات الجلد والمستزرعة) ومنتجاتها‬
                          Framed) and its Products
                                                                                                                                ------- ‫ إلى‬------ ‫من‬
                           from ---------- to ---------
      1.             Consignor (Exporter)                                     )‫المرسل (المصدر‬      2.          Certificate Reference No.                                    ‫الرقم المرجعي للشهادة الصحية‬
                     Name                                                               ‫االسم‬                  Place of Issue                                                               ‫مكان اإلصدار‬
                     Address                                                           ‫العنوان‬                 Date of Issue                                                               ‫تاريخ اإلصدار‬
      3.             Consignee (importer)                                )‫المرسل إليه (المستورد‬    4.          Competent/Certifying Authority                                        ‫الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬
                     Name                                                                 ‫االسم‬                Address                                                                              ‫العنوان‬
                     Address                                                            ‫العنوان‬    5.          Country of origin                     ‫بلد المنشأ‬      ISO code                       ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                                                                     (optional)                     )‫(اختياري‬

                                                                                                   6.          Country of                          ‫بلد الوصول‬        ISO code                       ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                               Destination                                           (optional)                     )‫(اختياري‬

      7.             Producer.                                                ‫الشركة الصانعة‬       8.          Packing Est. (if applicable)                                        )‫الشركة المعبأة (إن وجد‬
                     Name                                                               ‫االسم‬                  Name                                                                                   ‫االسم‬
                     Address                                                          ‫العنوان‬                  Address                                                                              ‫العنوان‬
      9.             Border of Entry/Country of                      ‫منفذ الدخول‬/ ‫بلد الوصول‬       10.         Border of Loading/Country of                                       ‫موقع التحميل‬/‫بلد المغادرة‬
                     Destination                                                                               Dispatch

      11.            Means of transport/conveyance                  ‫وسيلة النقل‬                    12.         Conveyance Identification No.                               ‫هوية وسيلة النقل‬/‫الرقم التعريفي‬
                     By Air                                                 ‫جوي‬
                     By Sea                                                  ‫بحري‬                 13.         Temperature of Food product                                  ‫درجة حرارة حفظ المادة الغذائية‬
                     By Road                                                 ‫بري‬                              Ambient                                                                    ‫درجة حرارة الغرفة‬
                                                                                                               Chilled                                                                                  ‫مبرد‬
                                                                                                               Frozen                                                                                  ‫مجمد‬
      14.        Commodities Certified for:                                                                                       :‫تم ترخيص البضائع الستخدامها في‬
                    Other ‫أخرى‬        After Further Process                       ‫بعد معالجة إضافية‬                         Human Consumption Directly ‫االستهالك اآلدمي مباشرة‬
      15.                          Identification of the Food Products                                                                        ‫توصيف وتصنيف األغذية‬
                                                                Treatment Type
            Name & Description of Food           HS-Code                                Brand Name          Production Date       Expiry Date         No Packages         Batch/Lot No.          Total Weight
                                                                   (optional)




                                                                                                  25
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom



                                                ‫بند التعرفة‬      ‫نوع المعالجة‬                                                                                              ‫رقم‬
             ‫اسم ووصف المادة الغذائية‬                                              ‫العالمة التجارية‬   ‫تاريخ اإلنتاج‬        ‫تاريخ االنتهاء‬        ‫عدد الطرود‬                                 ‫الوزن الكلي‬
                                                 ‫الجمركية‬         )‫(اختياري‬                                                                                          ‫الدفعة‬/‫التشغيلة‬
      16. Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                            ‫اإلفادات الصحية‬
      16.1 General Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                 ‫إفادات صحية عامة‬
      The products are safe and fit for human consumption                                                                                            ‫إن المنتجات سليمة (آمنة) وصالحة لالستهالك اآلدمي‬
      The products are derived from non-toxic species that do not cause any sign of disease                                       ‫إن مصدر المنتجات من فصائل غير سامة وال تُسبب أي عالمات مرضية‬
      Where aquatculture of animal origin are grown in farms or aquaculture production                  ‫ فان‬،‫في حال تربية األحياء المائية ذات األصل الحيواني ضمن مزارع أو مناطق إنتاج بحرية أو نهرية‬
      areas, the competent authority has monitored the compliance to sanitary requirements               ‫هذه المناطق خاضعة للرقابة على المتطلبات الصحية من قبل الجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬
      The aquatculture of animal origin have been fed from feed that is produced in                   ‫تم تغذية األحياء المائية ذات األصل الحيواني على أعالف صنعت وفقا لمتطلبات التصنيع الجيد ونظام‬
      compliance with GMP & HACCP principles or its equivalent and is free from any                         ‫تحليل المخاطر والتحكم بالنقاط الحرجة او ما يماثله وخالية من أية ملوثات فيزيائية او كيميائية أو‬
      physical, chemical or biological contaminants that are prohibited internationally                                                                                             ‫بيولوجية محظورة دوليا‬
      The products of aquatic animal origin were handled in an establishment that has been
                                                                                                      ‫تم إجراء عمليات تداول المنتجات البحرية ذات األصل الحيواني في منشأه خاضعة للرقابة من قبل الجهة‬
      subjected to inspection by the competent authority of the country of origin and
                                                                                                      ‫ وتطبق نظام إدارة سالمة الغذاء استنادا إلى مبادئ نظام الهاسب أو ما‬،‫الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬
      implements a food safety management system based on HACCP principles or an
                                                                                                             ‫يماثله وحاصلة على شهادات بذلك من جهات معتمدة من الجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬
      equivalent system, and they are certified by nationally accredited certification bodies

      16.2 Additional Health Attestations/Declarations (if deemed necessary)                                                                                    )‫إفادات صحية خاصة (إذا تطلب األمر ذلك‬

      Authorized Officer Name & Position                                                                                                                                   ‫اسم ووظيفة الشخص المختص‬
      Name of the Responsible Department                                                                                                                                         ‫اسم اإلدارة التي يتبع لها‬
      Official Stamp                                                                                                                                                                        ‫الختم الرسمي‬
      Date                                                                                                                                                                                         ‫التاريخ‬




                                                                                                26
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




             6. HEALTH CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF HONEY AND BEES

                   PRODUCTS:

                                                                                                         Logo



            Health Certificate for Export of Honey and Bee’s Products                                                 ‫الشهادة الصحية لتصدير لتصدير عسل النحل ومنتجات النحل‬
                              from ---------- to ---------                                                                            ------- ‫ إلى‬------ ‫من‬
      1.              Consignor (Exporter)                                          )‫المرسل (المصدر‬         2.        Certificate Reference No.                                             ‫الرقم المرجعي للشهادة الصحية‬
                      Name                                                                    ‫االسم‬                   Place of Issue                                                                        ‫مكان اإلصدار‬
                      Address                                                                ‫العنوان‬                  Date of Issue                                                                        ‫تاريخ اإلصدار‬
      3.              Consignee (importer)                                   )‫المرسل إليه (المستورد‬         4.        Competent/Certifying Authority                                                  ‫الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬
                      Name                                                                    ‫االسم‬                   Address                                                                                        ‫العنوان‬
                      Address                                                                  ‫العنوان‬      5.        Country of origin                           ‫بلد المنشأ‬        ISO code                           ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                                                                                    (optional)                         )‫(اختياري‬

                                                                                                            6.        Country of                                 ‫بلد الوصول‬         ISO code                           ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                      Destination                                                   (optional)                         )‫(اختياري‬

      7.              Producer.                                                      ‫الشركة الصانعة‬         8.        Packing Est. (if applicable)                                                   )‫الشركة المعبأة (إن وجد‬
                      Name                                                                     ‫االسم‬                  Name                                                                                              ‫االسم‬
                      Address                                                                ‫العنوان‬                  Address                                                                                         ‫العنوان‬
      9.              Border of Entry/Country of                            ‫منفذ الدخول‬/ ‫بلد الوصول‬         10.       Border of Loading/Country of                                                  ‫موقع التحميل‬/‫بلد المغادرة‬
                      Destination                                                                                     Dispatch

      11.             Means of transport/conveyance                        ‫وسيلة النقل‬                      12.       Conveyance Identification No.                                        ‫هوية وسيلة النقل‬/‫الرقم التعريفي‬
                      By Air                                                       ‫جوي‬
                      By Sea                                                       ‫بحري‬                    13.       Temperature of Food product                                           ‫درجة حرارة حفظ المادة الغذائية‬
                      By Road                                                      ‫بري‬                               Ambient                                                                               ‫درجة حرارة الغرفة‬
                                                                                                                      Chilled                                                                                             ‫مبرد‬
                                                                                                                      Frozen                                                                                             ‫مجمد‬
      14.        Commodities Certified for:                                                                                                 :‫تم ترخيص البضائع الستخدامها في‬
                    Other ‫أخرى‬        After Further Process                             ‫بعد معالجة إضافية‬                             Human Consumption Directly ‫االستهالك اآلدمي مباشرة‬
      15.                              Identification of the Food Products                                                                                ‫توصيف وتصنيف األغذية‬
                                                                      Treatment Type
            Name & Description of Food               HS-Code                                   Brand Name         Production Date            Expiry Date           No Packages            Batch/Lot No.            Total Weight
                                                                         (optional)
                                                     ‫بند التعرفة‬         ‫نوع المعالجة‬                                                                                                             ‫رقم‬
              ‫اسم ووصف المادة الغذائية‬                                                        ‫العالمة التجارية‬      ‫تاريخ اإلنتاج‬            ‫تاريخ االنتهاء‬          ‫عدد الطرود‬                                      ‫الوزن الكلي‬
                                                      ‫الجمركية‬            )‫(اختياري‬                                                                                                         ‫الدفعة‬/‫التشغيلة‬
      16. Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                                                     ‫اإلفادات الصحية‬
      16.1 General Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                                         ‫إفادات صحية عامة‬
      Honey Bee and its products intended for human consumption is safe for human
                                                                                                                                                              ‫إن عسل النحل ومنتجاته سليمة (أمنة) وصالحة لالستهالك االدمي‬
      consumption
      Honey Bee and its products come from a collecting establishment implementing a program based on                  ‫مصدر العسل ومنتجاته من منشآت تطبق برنامج قائم على مبادئ نظام تحليل المخاطر وفقا لنظام دول الخليج العربية‬
      the HACCP principles in accordance with the Food Hygiene provision of GCC (General principles of               "‫ "القواعد العامة لصحة الغذاء‬1694 ‫وحاصلة على شهادات بذلك من لسالمة األغذية والمواصفة القياسية الخليجية رقم‬
      food hygiene, GSO 1694), and they are certified by nationally accredited certification bodies                                                                             ‫جهات معتمدة من الجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬
      Have been handled¸ prepared, packaged and stored in a hygienic manner in accordance with the                ‫ وتعبئتها وتخزينها بطريقة صحية وفقا لنظام سالمة الغذاء بدول الخليج العربية وكذلك‬،‫ وإعدادها وتحضيرها‬،‫تم التعامل معها‬
      Food Hygiene provision of GCC (General principles of food hygiene, GSO 1694)                                                                          "‫ "القواعد العامة لصحة الغذاء‬1694 ‫متطلبات المواصفة القياسية الخليجية رقم‬
      Honey and bee products shall comply with maximum residue limits for residues of                                ‫بلد المنشأ يتبع خطة رصد للمتبقيات وفقا للمعايير الدولية والضمانات التي تغطي عسل النحل ومنتجاته‬
      pesticides and veterinary drugs for honey established by Codex Alimentarius                                     STANDARD 12-( ‫المقدمة من قبل خطة الرصد مستوفية لالشتراطات الواردة في الدستور الغذائي‬
      Commission (STANDARD 12-1981)                                                                                                                                                                                         )1981

      16.2 Additional Health Attestations/Declarations (if deemed necessary)                                                                                                          )‫إفادات صحية خاصة (إذا تطلب األمر ذلك‬

      Authorized Officer Name & Position                                                                                                                                                          ‫اسم ووظيفة الشخص المختص‬




                                                                                                          27
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom



      Name of the Responsible Department                                                                                                                                          ‫اسم اإلدارة التي يتبع لها‬
      Official Stamp                                                                                                                                                                        ‫الختم الرسمي‬
      Date                                                                                                                                                                                         ‫التاريخ‬




             7. HEALTH CERTITICATE FOR EXPORT OF ASSORTED FOOD

                  PRODUCTS:

                                                                                                Logo



             Health Certificate for Export of Assorted Food Products                                                      ‫الشهادة الصحية لتصدير األغذية المنوعه‬
                              from ---------- to ---------                                                                        ------- ‫ إلى‬------ ‫من‬
      1.              Consignor (Exporter)                                 )‫المرسل (المصدر‬        2.        Certificate Reference No.                                  ‫الرقم المرجعي للشهادة الصحية‬
                      Name                                                           ‫االسم‬                  Place of Issue                                                             ‫مكان اإلصدار‬
                      Address                                                       ‫العنوان‬                 Date of Issue                                                             ‫تاريخ اإلصدار‬
      3.              Consignee (importer)                          )‫المرسل إليه (المستورد‬        4.        Competent/Certifying Authority                                     ‫الجهة الرقابية المختصة‬
                      Name                                                           ‫االسم‬                  Address                                                                           ‫العنوان‬
                      Address                                                        ‫العنوان‬      5.        Country of origin                     ‫بلد المنشأ‬     ISO code                     ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                                                                                 (optional)                   )‫(اختياري‬

                                                                                                  6.        Country of                          ‫بلد الوصول‬       ISO code                     ‫رمز األيزو‬
                                                                                                            Destination                                          (optional)                   )‫(اختياري‬

      7.              Producer.                                              ‫الشركة الصانعة‬       8.        Packing Est. (if applicable)                                      )‫الشركة المعبأة (إن وجد‬
                      Name                                                             ‫االسم‬                Name                                                                                 ‫االسم‬
                      Address                                                        ‫العنوان‬                Address                                                                            ‫العنوان‬
      9.              Border of Entry/Country of                    ‫منفذ الدخول‬/ ‫بلد الوصول‬       10.       Border of Loading/Country of                                     ‫موقع التحميل‬/‫بلد المغادرة‬
                      Destination                                                                           Dispatch

      11.             Means of transport/conveyance               ‫وسيلة النقل‬                     12.       Conveyance Identification No.                             ‫هوية وسيلة النقل‬/‫الرقم التعريفي‬
                      By Air                                              ‫جوي‬
                      By Sea                                              ‫بحري‬                   13.       Temperature of Food product                               ‫درجة حرارة حفظ المادة الغذائية‬
                      By Road                                             ‫بري‬                              Ambient                                                                  ‫درجة حرارة الغرفة‬
                                                                                                            Chilled                                                                                ‫مبرد‬
                                                                                                            Frozen                                                                                ‫مجمد‬
      14.        Commodities Certified for:                                                                                    :‫تم ترخيص البضائع الستخدامها في‬
                    Other ‫أخرى‬        After Further Process                    ‫بعد معالجة إضافية‬                         Human Consumption Directly ‫االستهالك اآلدمي مباشرة‬
      15.                            Identification of the Food Products                                                                  ‫توصيف وتصنيف األغذية‬
                                                               Treatment Type
            Name & Description of Food          HS-Code                              Brand Name         Production Date       Expiry Date          No Packages       Batch/Lot No.         Total Weight
                                                                  (optional)
                                                ‫بند التعرفة‬      ‫نوع المعالجة‬                                                                                               ‫رقم‬
              ‫اسم ووصف المادة الغذائية‬                                              ‫العالمة التجارية‬      ‫تاريخ اإلنتاج‬       ‫تاريخ االنتهاء‬        ‫عدد الطرود‬                              ‫الوزن الكلي‬
                                                 ‫الجمركية‬         )‫(اختياري‬                                                                                           ‫الدفعة‬/‫التشغيلة‬
      16. Health Attestations                                                                                                                                                           ‫اإلفادات الصحية‬
      16.1 General Health Attestations                                                                                                                                              ‫إفادات صحية عامة‬

      Food products are safe and fit for human consumption                                                                                     ‫إن المنتجات الغذائية سليمة (آمنة) وصالحة لالستهالك اآلدمي‬

      The food product(s) was handled at an establishment that has been subjected to
                                                                                                             ‫تم إجراء عمليات تداول للمنتجات الغذائية في منشأه غذائية خاضعة للرقابة من قبل الجهة الرقابية‬
      inspections by the competent authority and/or officially recognized body and
                                                                                                        ‫ وتطبق نظام إدارة سالمة الغذاء استنادا إلى مبادئ نظام الهاسب‬،‫ أو الجهة المخولة رسميا‬/‫المختصة و‬
      implements a food safety management system based on HACCP principles or an
                                                                                                        ‫ وحاصلة على شهادات بذلك من جهات معتمدة من الجهة الرقابية المختصة في بلد المنشأ‬،‫أو ما يماثل ه‬
      equivalent system, and they are certified by nationally accredited certification bodies

      16.2 Additional Health Attestations/Declarations (if deemed necessary)                                                                                     )‫إفادات صحية خاصة (إذا تطلب األمر ذلك‬




                                                                                                28
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom



      Authorized Officer Name & Position                                                                                                                        ‫اسم ووظيفة الشخص المختص‬

      Name of the Responsible Department                                                                                                                             ‫اسم اإلدارة التي يتبع لها‬

      Official Stamp                                                                                                                                                           ‫الختم الرسمي‬

      Date                                                                                                                                                                            ‫التاريخ‬




             8. PHYTOSDSANITSRY CERTIFICATE :

                                                                                           Logo




                            Phytosanitary Certificate                                                                        ‫شهادة الصحة النباتية‬
                       for Export from ---------- to ---------                                                          ------- ‫ إلى‬------ ‫للتصدير من‬

     Place of Issue:                                                     :‫مكان اإلصدار‬            Certificate No                                                                 ‫رقم الشهادة‬


                                      ‫من الجهة الرسمية لوقاية النبات في بلد المصدر‬                                              ‫إلى الجهة الرسمية لوقاية النبات في البلد المستورد‬
     From: Plant Protection Organization Name                                                To: Plant Protection Organization Name




      Name & Address of Consignee                               ‫إسم وعنوان المستورد‬               Name & Address of Exporter                                        ‫جهة التصدير وعنوانها‬




      Point of Entry                                                      ‫نقطة الدخول‬             Mean of Transportation                                                         ‫وسيلة النقل‬



      Description of Consignment                                                                                                                                             ‫وصف الشحنة‬
                                                                 ‫العالمات المميزة‬               ‫عدد الطرود ووصفها‬                   ‫األسماء العلمية للنبات‬
         )‫الكمية المعلنة (كجم‬            ‫جهة المنشأ‬                                                                                                                   ‫إسم المنتج‬
                                                                Distinguishing                Number & Description                Botanical Names of the
      Quantity Declared (kg)          Place of Origin                                                                                                              Name of Product
                                                                    Marks                         of Packages                                Plant




        Disinfestations and/or Disinfection Treatment                                                                                  ‫أو اإلصابة‬/‫المعاملة للتطهير من التلوث و‬
      Chemical (active ingredient)                           )‫الكيماويات (المادة الفعالة‬     Treatment                                                                              ‫المعالجة‬
     Temperature                                                         ‫درجة الحرارة‬        Concentration                                                                            ‫التركيز‬

     Date                                                                       ‫التاريخ‬      Additional Information                                                         ‫معلومات أخرى‬

     Health Attestation                                                                                                                                                      ‫اإلفادة الصحية‬
     This is to certify that the plants, plant products or other regulated articles
     described herein have been inspected and/or tested according to                         ‫تصادق هذه الشهادة على أن النباتات والمنتجات النباتية أو المواد األخرى المذكورة هنا قد تم فحصها‬
     appropriate official procedures and are considered to be free from the                  ‫أو اختبارها وفقا لإلجراءات المعتمدة المناسبة ووجدت خالية من آفات الحجر الزراعي التي حددها‬/‫و‬
     quarantine pests specified by the importing country and to conform with                 ،‫ وتتفق مع الوضع الحالي لمتطلبات الصحة النباتية لدى دول مجلس التعاون الخليجي‬،‫البلد المستورد‬
     the current phytosanitary requirements of the GCC countries, including                                                             .‫بما في ذلك تلك اآلفات غير الحجرية الخاضعة للوائح‬
     those for regulated non-quarantine pests.

     Additional Health Attestations (if deemed necessary)                                                                                 )‫إفادات صحية إضافية خاصة (إذا تطلب األمر ذلك‬




                                                                                           29
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom



     Authorized officer Name & Position                                      ‫إسم ووظيفة الشخص المختص‬


     Name of the Responsible Department                                           ‫إسم اإلدارة التي يتبع لها‬


     Official Stamp                                                                         ‫الختم الرسمي‬


     Date:                                                                                        :‫التاريخ‬




         IMPORTANT WEBSITES LINKS :

                      ❖ MINISTRY OF HEALTH
                      ❖    OFOQ BAHRAIN
                      ❖ LEAGAL AFFAIRES-
                      ❖ STANDARDS STORE




         FINALLY:
         We hope that we have succeeded in clarifying all the necessary information to
         facilitate import procedures to the Kingdom of Bahrain.
         For more information, please do not hesitate to contact us through the
         following communication numbers for each port of entry:




                                              30
Food Importers Guide to Kingdom




              Port:         office no.   Fax no           Email
             ‫المنفذ‬         ‫رقم الهاتف‬   ‫الفاكس‬      ‫البريد االلكتروني‬

           Khalifa port     17162217     17162040   MK@health.gov.bh
           ‫منفذ ميناء‬
              ‫خليفة‬

            Air cargo       17324547     17339164   AC@health.gov.bh
           ‫منفذ الشحن‬
              ‫الجوي‬

           King Fahad       17699876     17697841   CW@health.gov.bh
           causeway
            ‫منفذ جسر‬
           ‫الملك فهد‬




                                           31
