   Laws


                               Official Gazette of Iraq
                                                 Al-Waqai’ Al-Iraqiyya

                                                    ‫اﻟﻮﻗﺎﺋـﻊ اﻟﻌﺮاﻗيـﺔ‬




                                                                           Legislation

                                                                             No. 29




                                                Food Regulation
                                                 With its Amendments

                                                      No (29) 1982

                                                  ‫ﻧﻈﺎﻡ ﺍﻷﻏﺬﻳﺔ ﻣﻊ ﺗﻌﺪﻳﻼﺗﻪ‬


Translated in

Ministry Of Justice

Iraqi Official Gazette Department

Translation Section
   Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                     Date: 27/05/1985
                                                            0
2020
Laws



In The Name of people
Presidency of Republic


In accordance with the provisions of Paragraph (a) of Article (57) of the Provisional
Constitution and Article (105) of the Public Health law No.(89) of 1981;

The following regulation has been promulgated:



                                              No (29) 1982
                                             Food regulation
                                              Chapter One


        Article 1


The following expressions have the meanings indicated next to them:

First: The Minister: Minister of Health.

Second: The Competent Health Authority: The Minister or whomever he/ she authorizes.

Third: The laboratory: Central Public Health Laboratory, nutrition research institute or any
                        laboratory determined by competent health authority.



Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                 Date: 27/05/1985
                                                   1
Laws


Fourth: The authorized employee: The qualified person authorized by the competent authority
                                 for the purpose of taking the samples, sending them to the
                                 laboratory, receiving the results of the examination AND
                                 analysis and taking the procedures stipulated in this
                                 regulation.

Fifth: Food: Each substance is handled for human consumption as food in its solid, semi-solid
             or liquid form, gum, syrup, drinking water, ice or any ingredients used in
             preparing food and this does not include drugs, medicines, cosmetics and food
             additives.

Sixth: Food additives: Substances that make, preserve or improve the taste and flavor or that
                       fix texture, emulsions and other foodstuffs that are intentionally added
                       to food to improve their natural properties or for the purposes of
                       manufacturing, preparing, packaging, transporting or preserving them
                       which is not considered as a nutritional foodstuff in themselves, and
                       not considered as a natural component of any nutritional foodstuff,
                       whether they have a nutritional value or not. In all cases, these
                       additives must not be harmful to public health, and the competent
                       health authority may issue statements specifying these substances and
                       the conditions for their use.

Seventh: Food unfit for human consumption:

   a. If it is harmful to public health, which includes:
   1. Food contaminated with pathogens and their agents, such as microbes and parasites or
      their toxins.

   2. Food contains toxic substances or pesticides that harm human health in a percentage
      exceeding the amounts determined by the competent health authority.

   3. Food whose packaging contains substances harmful to public health.


Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                    Date: 27/05/1985
                                              2
Laws


   4. Food contains additives are not permitted to use or exceed the prescribed limits.

   5. Food resulting from an animal sick with a disease transmitted to humans or from a dead
      animal.

   6. Food mixed with impurities that cannot be purified to the proportions approved by the
      competent health authority.

   7. Food exposed to pollution as a result of handling by a person who is sick with an
      infectious disease that is transmitted to humans through food or drink or is carrying
      their microbes.

    8. Food that contains hormones and drug residues that cause harm to public health.
    9. Genetically modified foods that cause illness and health harm.
    10. Food contaminated with the mad cow disease virus.
    11. Food contaminated with toxic chemical pollutants, such as dioxin, Benzo[e]pyrene,
        melamine and others.
    12. Any foodstuff proven to be harmful based on the international technical
        recommendations of the Codex Alimentarius Commissionor or that reported by the
        World Health Organization or the Food and Agriculture Organization and other the
        internationally recognized organizations.
b. If the food is spoiled, decomposing or damaged, which includes:

۱. Food whose structure or natural properties have changed in terms of taste, smell or
  appearance as a result of chemical or microbial decomposition or physical effects.

۲. Food which contains larvae, worms or insects in any of their life their stages, excreta or
   residues in proportions that exceed the amounts determined for them.

۳. Food that contains animal excreta or waste.

٤. Food that exceeds the period specified for its validity fixed on its packages.

٥. Food that is intended to hide its spoilage or damage in any way.

Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                          Date: 27/05/1985
                                                 3
Laws


٦. Food produced, in whole or in part, from spoiled, decomposing or damaged food elements,
   whether they are natural raw or processed.

Eighth: Food to be considered commercially adulterated includes:

   a. Using covers and packages of internationally, Arab or nationally displayed trademarks in
      promoting foodstuff that is less good and safe than the original foodstuff, with the
      intention of deceiving the consumer and achieving profit.

   b. Use non-sticky and removable labels as food product trademarks.

   c. The use of the local language exclusively without adding one of the international
      languages in listing the ingredients of the product, production and expiration date and
      batch number.

Ninth: Unhealthy conditions: The conditions that lead to contamination of food with physical,
                             chemical or biological pollutants, which make it unfit for
                             human consumption and a danger to public health, or food
                             processing away from the supervision of the competent health
                             authority.

Tenth: Food handling: Any process or more of food's production, preparation, manufacture,
                       packaging, store, transport, sale or provision.

Eleven: Food handling places: Any fixed or non-fixed places with the land on it and adjacent
                              to it used for food handling purposes, based on a license from
                              the competent health authority issued in accordance with the
                              Public Health Law.

Twelfth: Worker in food: Whoever performs any work related to preparing food, drink, ice,
                         drinking water or food handling, whether in a fixed or mobile place,
                         in accordance with the controls and conditions related thereto
                         stipulated in the Public Health Law.


Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                   Date: 27/05/1985
                                              4
Laws


Thirteenth: Preparation: The process of producing, treating or preparing food in accordance
                         with the requirements of the approved specifications for each
                         foodstuff and in accordance with the general rules of food safety
                         affairs.

Fourteenth: Informative label: Every statement, clarification, phrase or form written, printed
                               or affixed to a food packaging or related thereto, and shall be
                               determined by the specifications approved by the competent
                               health authority.

Fifteenth: Package: Any envelope used to completely or partially packing or canning food in
                      any form, whether open or closed.

Sixteenth: Advertising: Any form of display and in any manner aimed at direct and indirect
                        promotion of food.

Seventeenth: Sale: For the purposes of this law, any process of importing, exporting,
                   displaying, advertising, storing, transporting, delivering, packing,
                   exchanging or acquiring food with the intention of selling shall be
                   considered a sale.

Eighteenth: Means of transport: Any way or means of transport that suits the purpose used for
                                it in accordance with the approved health conditions.




Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                   Date: 27/05/1985
                                              5
Laws




                                               Chapter Two
                                             Specifications and
                                              Advisory Body




       Article 2

First: The specifications issued by the Central Organization for Standardization and Quality
        Control on food shall be reliable basis for food control.

Second: When national standards are not available, the competent health authority may adopt
        Arab or international standards issued by Arab or international specialized
        organizations.

Third: When national, Arab or international specifications are not available, the competent
       health authority shall determine the requirements that must be met in food in
       cooperation with the Central Organization for Standardization and Quality Control or
       any other competent authority, and these requirements shall be published in the
       Official Gazette.

        Article 3

First: The minister shall establish a food advisory body to carry out the works he/ she assigns
       to it.

Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                    Date: 27/05/1985
                                                   6
Laws


Second: The advisory body consists of scientific, technological, administrative and economic
         members with experience and specialization in food production, distribution and
         consumption, who shall be nominated from the relevant departments appointed by
         the Minister.

Third: The body may form specialized scientific committees that work under its supervision to
       study specific topics related to food specifications and their suitability for human
       consumption.

Fourth: The body shall submit a report to the minister from time to time, and the minister may
         decide on the publication of these reports in the available media.

Fifth: The departments represented in the Food Advisory Body shall be obligated to
        implement the decisions issued by them after they are approved by the Minister.




Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                   Date: 27/05/1985
                                              7
Laws



                                              Chapter Three
                                             General provisions



       Article 4

First: Sale or handling of food shall be forbidden if it is harmful to public health, spoiled,
       decomposing, damaged, or deceitful.

Second: Sale or handling of food that is provided with unhealthy methods and conditions or
         packaged food that is not carrying the informative label shall be forbidden.

Third: Sale or handling of food in food handling places that are prevented from this by an
       order from the competent authority shall be forbidden.


        Article 5

The competent health authority shall undertake the duties of food control throughout the
country in accordance with the provisions of the Public Health Law, this regulation and the
instructions issued pursuant to them.

        Article 6


First: The authorized employee at any time he/ she deems appropriate may exercise the
       following powers:



Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                   Date: 27/05/1985
                                                    8
Laws


a. Entering any place that he/ she believes that a foodstuff covered by this regulation is
   prepared, preserved, packed, wrapped, stored in it or transported from or to it, and he/ she
   may examine this foodstuff and take samples from it, and may examine anything that he/
   she believes used or can be used for the purposes of preparing, preserving, canning,
   packaging, storing or transporting the foodstuff covered by this regulation.

b. Reviewing the documents and records in the place mentioned in Paragraph (a) of this Item,
   and he/ she may copy this information from them and take a summary of them.

c. Opening and checking any container or package believed to contain foodstuff covered by
   this regulation.

d. Stopping, searching and seizing the means of transport that is believed to carry a foodstuff
   covered by this regulation and he/ she may examine this foodstuff and take samples from it
   for the purpose of implementing its provisions.

e. Seizing any foodstuff believed to violate the requirements of this regulation or waiting for
   the result of laboratory examination or destroying it in accordance with the provisions of the
   Public Health Law.

Secondly: The authorized employee shall show his/ her ID that entitles him/ her to the powers
          stipulated in Item (First) of this Article when exercising them.

Thirdly: It shall be considered contrary to the provisions of this regulation:

a. The owner, occupant, or person responsible for any place or person present in it if he/ she
   refuses to allow the authorized employee to enter this place or to assist him/ her to the
   extent possible or to provide him/ her with the information available.

b. Whoever prevents or impedes the authorized employee in performing his/ her duty or
   attempts to prevent him/ her from implementing it.

c. Whoever intentionally submits wrong or misrepresented information to the authorized
   employee.

Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                       Date: 27/05/1985
                                                9
Laws



       Article 7

 First: When the authorized employee seizes a food item, he/ she shall follow the following:

   a. Referring the suspected food item to the laboratory for the purpose of knowing its
      suitability for human consumption.

   b. Storing the seized food item in the same location in which it has been seized, or
     transferring it to another location that meets the required storage conditions after
     obliging the food item’s owner not to dispose of it until the results of the examination
     and analysis appear in accordance with a regular record.

  c. Submitting any food item or sample taken by him/ her to the laboratory for analysis and
      examination within a period not exceeding (24) twenty-four hours for fast perishable
      foodstuffs, provided that it is transferred by the regular methods.

Second: The authorized employee shall lift the seizure and allow handling any food item that
        is seized in accordance with the provisions of this regulation, after the appearance of
        the laboratory test results that confirm that it does not violate the requirements of its
        provisions within (48) forty eight hours.

Third: Anyone who remove or alters the seized foodstuff or interferes to do so in any way
       without official authorization, he/ she shall be considered as violating the provisions of
       this regulation.


       Article 8

First: In case that the laboratory test results appear that the foodstuff is not fit for human
      consumption, the competent health authority shall take what is necessary to destroy it in
      accordance with the Public Health Law and refer the violator to judiciary.


Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                      Date: 27/05/1985
                                               10
Laws


Secondly: In case that the results of laboratory tests show that the foodstuff is adulterated, it
           shall be forbidden to be handled and the violator shall be referred to the judiciary.
           The foodstuff may be destroyed or disposed of in the manner decided by the court
           based on the experience of the competent health authority.

Third: The authorized employee or laboratory employee may not have any relationship,
       interest or work in handling this foodstuff.


        Article 9

The laboratory shall analyse or examine any sample taken to ensure its suitability for human
consumption or not as soon as possible, and use the scientific measures that ensure this,
whether those measures are national or international to achieve the necessary extent to protect
human health and food safety.

       Article 10

First: Whoever trades any foodstuff used in food handling shall provide the Competent Health
       Authority with the information it requires related to that foodstuff in accordance with
       instructions issued for this purpose.

Second: The competent health authority may not disclose any information supplied based on
         the request stipulated in Item (First) of this Article.


       Article 11

The contents of the package in their original form prepared by the producer shall be in
conformity with the indication of contents shown on the informative label, otherwise, the
product shall not allowed to be entered, and it shall not be granted the health certificate and

Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                      Date: 27/05/1985
                                               11
Laws


health reservation license, those confirm the validity of the product for human health and food
safety.

       Article 12

First: Each package contains a foodstuff covered by the provisions of this system and bears
       the name of the producer or the packer, his/ her address or his/ her registered trademark
       shall be a legal presumption that this foodstuff is produced or packaged by him/ her,
       unless proven otherwise.

Second: Every foodstuff found in the food handling places that is used normally for human
        consumption shall be considered as prepared, displayed or isolated for the purpose of
        selling for human consumption, unless proven otherwise.

Third: Every foodstuff found in food handling places that is included in the composition or
       preparation of a foodstuff that is normally used for human consumption shall be
       considered existing for this purpose.

Fourth: The examination certificate issued by the laboratory or authorized employee shall be
        considered a sufficient legal evidence for the requirements of this regulation.

Fifth: The presence of the health certificate does not prevent the authorized employee from
       carrying out supervision and inspection and taking a sample to examine the product
       upon entering the Iraqi territories, and upon confirmation of the validity of the product,
       it shall be granted a health certificate by the competent health authority.

Sixth: The competent health authority shall publish information about foodstuffs unfit for
       human consumption via various media, in order to warn citizens against their use.




Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                     Date: 27/05/1985
                                               12
Laws



                                              Chapter Four
                                             Final provisions


       Article 13

Instructions may be issued to facilitate the implementation of the provisions of this regulation.


       Article 14

This regulation shall be implemented from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.




Written in Baghdad on the fourteenth day of the month of Rabi` al-Awwal of
1403 AH; Coinciding the twenty-ninth day of December of 1982 AD.




Saddam Hussein
President of the Republic


Official Gazette of Iraqi Issue No. (3047)                                      Date: 27/05/1985
                                                     13
