1938           Cap. 185]                       Agricultural


                                             CHAPTER 185.

                                           AGRICULTURAL.


                                     ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.
               SECTION.
                  1.      Short title and application.
                  2.      Interpretation.
                  3.      Power of the Governor in Council to make rules.
                  4.      Counterfeiting labels, marks, etc., an offence.
                  5.      Offences by Inspectors or Examiners.
                  6.      Obstruction.
                  7.      Penalties.



                                             CHAPTER 185.

                                           AGRICULTURAL.
23 of 1946.    An Ordinance to enable the Governor in Council to make rules
29 of 1949.
                  for the prevention of the introduction or spread of pests
                  destructive to trees and crops; for the control of the growing
                  of agricultural crops and for the preparation, marketing,
                  movement, storage, transport and export of agricultural
                  produce.
                                                              [15TH SEPTEMBER, 1946.]

Short title
and
                 1. This Ordinance may be cited as the Agricultural Ordinance,
application.   and shall apply to the Colony and Protectorate.

Interpreta-      2. In this Ordinance, and in any rules made thereunder,
tion.
               unless the context otherwise requires-
                     " adulterate" means to falsify, deteriorate or increase the
                  apparent bulk or weight or conceal the inferior quality of the
                  produce by combination, admixture or addition therewith
                  or thereto of some foreign, superfluous or inferior substance,
                  matter or thing, whether deleterious or not or by the use of
                  artificial means, and includes abstracting from produce part
                  of it so as injuriously to affect its nature, substance or quality
                  or soaking or manipulating it so as to increase its bulk or
                  weight, and includes in the case of rubber, to admix with
                  rubber the latex or latices of any other tree not yielding
                  rubber or yielding rubber of a different variety;
                        Agricultural                  [Cap. 185     1939

  "approved" where it occurs means approved by the
Director of Agriculture;
  "buy" includes agreeing to buy, and the expressions
" buying " and " bought " shall be construed accordingly;
   " buyer " means the person who himself conducts the
transaction of buying, whether for himself or for another;
  "clean" includes freeing produce from any foreign,
superfluous or inferior matter by picking, or other means,
including boiling in the case of palm oil, and includes freeing
produce from excessive moisture;
  " dealer in produce " includes any person whether as
principal or agent to whom has been granted a licence to sell,
purchase, deal in, possess for the purpose of sale, export or
possess for the purpose of export, agricultural produce, but
does not include the grower or original producer of such
produce;
  "export" with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions means to take or cause to be taken out of Sierra
Leone;
  " Inspection Station " means a place established or
appointed for the inspection and grading of produce, and
notified as such in the Gazette;
  " market " means a market notified as such in the Gazette;
   " pest " includes any insect, vermin, fungus, parasite,
bacterium, virus or disease harmful to produce, and includes
any insect, fungus, bacterium, virus or other pest destructive
to agricultural or horticultural crops or to trees or plants;
  " plant " includes everything in the nature of a plant, and
the fruit, leaves, cuttings, bark or any part thereof whatsoever,
whether living or dead, severed or attached;
   " produce " includes palm oil, palm nuts, palm kernels,
ginger, groundnuts, benniseed, rubber, gum copal, piassava,
maize, rice, chillies, cotton and every other product of the
soil whatsoever, whether raw or partly or wholly manufactured
and shall include beeswax and honey;
  " sale " includes a bargain to sell as well as a sale and
delivery;
  " seller " means a person who sells or agrees to sell goods.
1940           Cap. 185]                 Agricultural

Power of the     3. The Governor i.."'l. Council may make rules for all or any of
Governor in
Council to     the purposes following-
make rules.
                   (I) for preventing the introduction or spread of any insect,
                 fungus, bacterium, virus or other pest destructive to
                 agricultural or horticultural crops or to trees or plants;
                    (2) for prohibiting or regulating the landing in Sierra
                 Leone of any tree or plant or the leaves, branches, stems,
                 roots, seed or fruit of any tree or plant, or any vegetable
                 substance or any soil or other article the landing whereof may
                 appear to be likely to introduce such insect, fungus, bacterium,
                 virus or other pest and for directing or authorising the
                 treatment or destruction of any such article if landed;
                    (3) for directing or authorising the treatment, removal or
                 destruction of any crop, tree, plant or substance on which
                 any insect, fungus, bacterium, virus or other pest in any
                 stage of its existence is found or by means of which it may
                 appear to be likely to spread, and the entry on any lands for
                 the purpose of such treatment, removal or destruction or
                 for the purpose of any examination or inquiry authorised by
                 rules made under this Ordinance, or for any other purpose
                 of such rules;
                   (4) for prohibiting the growing or cultivation of any plant
                 or crop during specific periods of the year;
                   (5) for prohibiting the importation, sowing or use of any
                 particular kind of tree or plant or the leaves, branches, stem,
                 roots, seed or fruit of any particular kind of tree or plant or
                 any other vegetable substance or for specifying any particular
                 kind as the only kind to be imported, sown or used;
                   (6) for prescribing the ports or places at which the
                 importation and entry of any tree or plant or the leaves,
                 branches, stems, roots, seed or fruit of any tree or plant or
                 any vegetable substance shall be lawful;
                   (7) for prescribing the payment of compensation in respect
                 of any crop, tree, plant, or other substance destroyed under
                 the provisions of any rule made under this Ordinance;
                   (8) for regulating the sowing, harvesting, collecting and
                 preparation of agricultural produce;
                   (9) for maintaining or improving the quality of agricultural
                 produce;
                   (10) for providing for the sampling of all agricultural
                 produce;
                        Agricultural                 [Cap. 185    1941


  (11) for prohibiting the adulteration of agricultural produce
by any person and for prohibiting the possession of any such
adulterated agricultural produce;
  (12) for providing for the establishment of markets for
the purchase and sale of agricultural produce; for prescribing
the method of payment for agricultural produce in such
markets, for providing for the prohibition of resale of
agricultural produce in such markets and for providing for
the control of such markets;
  (13) for empowering any specified officer to prescribe
areas within, into or out of which the movement of produce
may be prohibited, regulated or restricted;
  (14) for empowering any specified officer to prescribe areas
within which agricultural produce shall not be bought or sold
except at prescribed markets or places;
   (15) for prescribing the public officers who may grant
licences, the persons or class of persons who shall require
licences, the purposes for which and the conditions un<ler
which licences may be granted, and the form and validity of
licences;
  (16) for prescribing obligations with regard to the pro-
duction of licences, and the public officers to whom licences
shall be produced;
 (17) for providing for the refusal, suspension, cancellation,
modification, restriction or endorsement of licences;
  (18) for prohibiting the movement, buying or selling of
agricultural produce within a prescribed area, market or
place except by persons licensed to buy agricultural produce
within that area, market or place and for prescribing such
area, market or place;
  (19) for prohibiting dealers in produce from operating
under their licence except within such area, market or place
as is specified in the licence;
  (20) for appointing ports and places at which agricultural
produce may be exported and for appointing ports and places
at which any specified kind of produce may be exported;
  (21) for providing for the inspection and grading according
to its quality of agricultural produce; for prohibiting the
export of or the possession by any person other than the
producer of any agricultural produce without such inspection
1942   Cap. 185]                Agricultural

         and grading and for prohibiting the export of or the possession
         by any person other than the producer of any agricultural
         produce of inferior quality;
            (22) for providing for the control of the preparation, ·
         movement, marketing, storage, transport and export of any
         agricultural produce;
            (23) for prescribing the manner in which buildings for
         storing agricultural produce shall be constructed;
            (24) for providing for the establishment of places for the
         inspection and grading of any agricultural produce and for
         the control of such places;
            (25} for prescribing the containers to be used for the
         marketing or export of agricultural produce and for the
         packing, closing, marking and sealing thereof; providing for
         the protection of produce in transit by land or water and
         prescribing the requirements to be complied with in respect
         of any vehicle, vessel, boat or canoe used for the transport
         of produce;
            (26) for providing for the seizure and detention of any
         agricultural produce, the containers thereof and any vehicle,
         vessel, boat or canoe engaged in the transport thereof in
         respect of any or all of which a contravention of any rule is
         suspected and for empowering a court to declare any such
         agricultural produce and containers, vehicle, vessel, boat or
         canoe to be forfeited;
            (27) for providing for powers of entry into any building or
         premises or place in or on which there is or is believed to be
         any produce to which this Ordinance applies and for stopping
         any vehicle, vessel, boat or canoe in or on which agricultural
         produce is being transported or is suspected of being trans-
         ported;
            (28) for prescribing the public officers who may demand
         information from any person suspected of contravening any
         rule;
            (29) for prescribing the manner in which proceedings for a
         breach of any rule made under this Ordinance shall be
         instituted, the person or persons who may institute the same,
         and the person or persons who may conduct any such
         proceedings;
            (30) for prescribing the onus of proof in respect of the
         possession of adulterated produce for sale or export, or the
         possession for export of agricultural produce of inferior
         quality;
                           Agricultural                 [Cap. 185          1943

     (31) for prescribing the fees for licences and the fees to be
  paid for any matter or thing done under any rule made under
  this Ordinance;
     (32) for providing for the appointment of officers to carry
  out the provisions of any rules made under this Ordinance and
  for investing them with powers necessary for the due execution
  of their duties;
     (33) for providing for the appointment of Advisory
  Committees to advise on the carrying out of the provisions
  of any rule made under this Ordinance and for prescribing
  the areas in which they may operate;
    (34) for providing for the exemption of any agricultural
  produce from any rule made under this Ordinance;
    (35) for prescribing forms, documents, and notices to be
  used for the purpose of this Ordinance and for regulating
  the mode of service or delivery of documents and notices;
    (36) for facilitating the prevention and detection of
  contraventions of any rule made under this Ordinance;
    (37) for purposes incidental to any of the foregoing
  purposes:
  Provided that any rules made under this section shall be laid
before the first meeting of the House of Representatives
after the making thereof for approval, amendment or revocation,
but without prejudice to anything previously done under any
rule so amended or revoked.


   4. Any person who shall forge or counterfeit any licence, ~~~ntef"b 1
label, mark, brand or certificate, required, or provided for by ~~;k~, :tc~.s,
any rule made under this Ordinance shall be guilty of an an offence.
offence, and on summary conviction thereof shall be liable to a
fine not exceeding one hundred pounds, or to imprisonment,
with or without hard labour, for a term not exceeding twelve
months, or to both such fine and imprisonment.


  5. Any Inspector or Examiner-                                      Offences by
                                                                     Inspectors or
  . (a) who wilfully and falsely represents to any person            Examiners.
  Interested that any produce in respect of which a standard of
  quality or purity has been prescribed as a condition of being
  exported, offered for sale or delivered in pursuance of an
  agreement to sell, is of such standard; or
1944           Cap. 185]                Agricultural

                   (b) who, when grading any produce in pursuance of any
                 rules made under this Ordinance, wilfully grades such
                 produce falsely;
               shall be guilty of an offence, and shall be liable on summary
               conviction thereof to a fine not exceeding fifty pounds, or
               to imprisonment, with or without hard labour, for a term not
               exceeding six months, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
Obstruction.      6. Any person who shall wilfully obstruct or hinder a public
               officer in the exercise of his powers under this Ordinance shall
               be guilty of an offence.

Penalties.       7. Any person who commits an offence under this Ordinance
               or any rule made thereunder, for which no penalty is prescribed,
               and any person who attempts to commit such an offence, shall,
               on summary conviction, be liable in respect of a first offence
               to a fine not exceeding fifty pounds, and in respect of a second
               or subsequent offence to a fine not exceeding one hundred
               pounds, or to imprisonment, with or without hard labour, for a
               term not exceeding twelve months, or to both such fine and
               imprisonment.
